Oh, my sons, as you have completed this book, which is the last of medical science, through the fulfillment of its author, and due to its expositions, and its declarations, it seems to me that you have achieved great proficiency in this treatise, which is a part of the most important operation, namely surgery.
The most important operation, surgery, is scorned in our region and in our time as being entirely useless, since the science of it has fallen into decline; and there are only a few small descriptions of it found in the books of the Ancients, which have led to greater confusion and error, as the understanding of it is closed and its power extended.
And it has been observed by me that this treatise should be revived according to the second way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that the forms of cautery tools and other surgical instruments are added to the explanations, and in preparation for the operation, which is necessary.
The cause for which our skilled artisans are not as effective in this our time is because the art of medicine is complex, and requires expertise in the science of anatomy to understand the youth of the members and their forms, the conjunction and separation of them; knowledge of bones, nerves, and ligaments, and the names of these, and the extraction of them; as well as the pulsing veins and those that are tranquil, and the locations of the emission of them.
And for this reason, Hippocrates says that the name is fitting, but in practice, it is small, especially in the art of healing.
We have already mentioned this at the beginning of this book; for whoever is not aware of what we have said about anatomy, will not be exempt from falling into errors that lead to the death of men, as you have seen many such people who are formed in this science but lack knowledge and experience.
Why do you see a foolish doctor who has incurred a scrofulous abscess in the thigh of a woman, and cut some arteries in her thigh so that much blood flowed until the woman died between his hands.
And you saw another doctor who prescribed a stone from a man who had suffered in his state; the stone was large, and it came to him and tore that stone with part of his bladder, so that man died on the third day.
And you have already called for help to extract it, and you saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, he knew that he would die.
And you saw another doctor who was paid handsomely by a duke from our land for surgery, and he took a black crust that was badly broken in the patient's thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he extracted the fracture above the wound, with pincers and clamps with strong tension, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And then, according to the patient's desires, remove the bandages, rest, and apply poultices for some days, and order that we loosen the ligature; and thus, too, if it concerns the foot or any other part, we must act carefully to avoid harm.
And you, who have been called to loosen the ligature, achieve peace and thus ameliorate their pain.
However, if the corruption is already confirmed in the member, it cannot be restrained, and the corruption does not cease to spread throughout the member until the danger of the illness passes.
And there is another physician who perforates a cancerous abscess, and it becomes inflamed for some days, until the evil of it grows stronger under his control.
Which causes the pain to be pure from melancholic humors, so it does not cover that it will reach him entirely, but rather affects the member where he suffers most intensely.
And for this, my sons, it is necessary that the operation be divided into two parts: one is an operation associated with health, and another is a work that poses danger to the most important dispositions.
And you have already encountered this throughout all parts of this book where various operations are discussed, which involve error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to guard against this and set aside those things so that the foolish people do not take them as grounds for speaking against you and slandering you.
And therefore, take up your tools with diligence and the protection of God, and your patients with ease and firmness.
And use the best method for the grace of God, leading to salvation and glorious success, set aside the terrible illnesses that are difficult to cure, and abandon those things that make you afraid, so that your courage in your faith and in your name does not desert you: for there is more remaining for your glory, both now and forever after, in the world and behind your sanctity.
They already dissected in some of their own signs: Do not treat bad ailments poorly, so that bad doctors do not become renowned.
And you have already divided this book according to three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter organized within the feet, concerning the forms of instruments and the tools of cautery, and anything necessary for the operation.
Division of the second part. The second chapter concerns incision and puncture, and the use of suckers, plasters, and the extraction of arrows and similar objects, all chapters organized according to the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and realignment, and on the treatment of twists and similar conditions; a chapter organized on internal foot structures and the shapes of instruments.
Understand what I have said about the quality of the youth of that cautery and the documents of it, and in what circumstances cautery is prohibited.
Therefore, it is said that the discourse on the quality of cautery youth and the documents of it is a long and prolix speech, subtle for knowledge, and secrets hidden; and much has been spoken about it by wise men, and there are disagreements among them, and I will content myself with a small part of their speeches, fearing prolongation.
And therefore it is said that cautery will apply to every universal connection, which is of matter or by matter, except for two connections, which are connections with their own matter.
In the connection that is dry and lacks matter, opinions differ; some say that cautery is beneficial for such conditions, while others claim the opposite, stating that cautery is not suitable for ailments characterized by dryness and scarcity, as the nature of fire is qualities and dryness, and it would be inappropriate to treat a condition that is dry and lacking in moisture with heat and dryness.
And those who claim the opposite state that cautery is beneficial for all dry and scurvy ailments in the bodies of men, as when you compare the body of man and its humidity to the connection of fire, you find the body of man hard.
And they say through the words of that one, that they have already experimented with this several times to discover.
However, it is not advisable for this to be performed by someone who has never been trained and practiced in the art of cauterization, as he/she must know the diversity of human body structures and the disposition of ailments within them, their causes, and the circumstances surrounding their occurrence, and the passage of time.
In other cases, there is no cause for fear, especially in dry and humid ailments, as all doctors agree on these, and they are consistent in the use of cauterization to treat them.
And know, my sons, that the secret of healing by fire and the goodness of this method, which is called cauterization, lie in the fact that fire is simple; its action affects only the member that is being cauterized, without harming other members or causing great pain.
The action of the medicinal fire reaches those members where it is applied and strongly drives away the pain from difficult-to-heal parts of the body.
Kindle the fire, for its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not cause harm, but rather serves. It has long been known through experience and the long service of studying the art over the truth of causes; therefore, you are excused from the length of this speech. If it were not that I keep secret in this brief moment the fire's power and quality of its operation on bodies and its expulsion of ailments, demonstrated by philosophical discourse, which would sharpen your minds.
And know this, my sons, that the times when it is most suitable to perform cauterization and make bandages are in the springtime.
And you say that cauterization is suitable at all times, so that the damage caused by time is overshadowed by the healing power of cauterization, especially when cauterization is for pain or necessary pains, severe and sharp, which do not suffer from delay, for it is feared those that come with ill will, who are better off asking for small harm to enter at a later time.
And therefore do not sit on your feet, my children, for it is only the common people and foolish doctors who consider this illness, which is healed by cautery, never truly cured, leaving behind that consequence.
And the cause is not thus as they believe, for cautery is but a place of medicine that alters the composition and dries up the humidity, which are the causes why pains come.
Yet physicians may use cautery excessively for the sake of their skill, virtue, and the greatness of their lord.
And it is possible that their illness may return at some time in the future, according to the condition of the illness and the location of the pain, and the virtue of the treatment, and what has been prepared within them from the addition of excesses and humors, and what has come to them through food and similar causes; for the illness on which cautery is performed is a subtle illness in a few members with excessive humors and moisture, so with teeth cautery for pain and similar, it is possible that that pain may not return, but this is done in small doses.
And it is often said in popular speech that the cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and although it seems the most effective, I do not believe it to be a cure that benefits from medicine or any other cause, except through cauterization.
But the truth is otherwise; and I understand that the statement "cautery is the last remedy of medicine" only holds when the methods of treatment in certain illnesses are ineffective, and those medicines do not help, so at the end of the cause, one administers cauterization and takes advantage of it. From here it follows that cautery is considered the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding of popular opinion and many foolish doctors.
And they said that the gold cautery is better than the iron cautery, and they did not say this except for the equality of the metal and the subtlety of its substance.
And they say that the place of cautery does not burn unless it is absolutely necessary, which is not always true, because one already knows and has experienced that cautery with fire works only in certain bodies for others; but nevertheless when you make cautery with gold fire, it is not declared to be yours, because the gold is consumed according to the amount you want for its brightness, and because it prepares to receive friction; and if you place it over the fire, the gold melts into the fire, and sometimes certain sheets fall into the fire so that the craftsman can catch them due to his occupation.
And for this, cautery with iron must be performed more lightly and precisely to ensure the correctness of the operation.
And you have already organized this chapter on cautery according to other chapters, and you have ordered those within the feet first, so that I will now ask him what he wants from it.
The first chapter.
This cautery confers humidity and coldness upon the afflicted part, which are two causes of sudden and multiple rheumatic flux, called rigor, from the head to the extremities of the limbs and of the auricles, numerous sleeping disorders, and pains in teeth and throat, and generally all ill health resulting from cold, as well as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar conditions in those maladies.
The method of this cautery is that first, you command the patient to evacuate the malady using lacrimal medicines for three or four nights, depending on the nature of the malady, the age of the patient, and their usual condition.
And then command them to shave their head, and arrange that tool between your fingers on a clean bench, and place your hands on their feet.
And then place your palm's edge near the sole between his toes. However, if the affected area of the middle part of the body has been identified, press it with your hand to test, and then apply the olive-shaped cautery, which is like this:
And then place it over the healthy area without pressing, in a way that descends, so that your hand is constrained little by little, and you lift it up.
Then slowly lift your hand and examine the area, and if you see that any bones are exposed, along with an amount of blood, raise your hand again, and if it doesn't return to that position, or another part of the cautery, as it is cooled, it is seen that the bone about which I spoke above.
And then take a little salt, dissolve it over the area, and leave it for three days.
And then place your hand over the affected area near the edge, leaving the inner part to be destroyed by the fire. And then apply the remedy for the pain using a four-ingredient mixture until it is healed.
And it is said that when the Roman plague opens up, the better the bran (or perhaps 'arm') gets, making it more robust and rejuvenated.
They also say that the bone should be cauterized within the bone, and the cautery should be held until some part of the bone's specific nature is hardened.
And then remove what is attached to the bone, and then cure it.
They also say that with the cautery, the back should be protected until the bone completely hardens, and this is the method of achieving small bones: They believe that from that place vapours of the head escape.
And if the wound is kept open for a long time, it should be treated until it is healed and consolidated.
I do not recommend these two types of cautery to everyone, but only in certain cases out of fear; leave that to me, for what is best for health when it is present, as we have witnessed with the other members, and especially when the head of the malady is of a heated nature.
And the specific type of cautery that is first mentioned is indeed more safe and better for me; from that comes health and success to the work.
Second chapter.
On cautery of the head.
When chronic pain occurs throughout the head and this prolongs the illness, and treatment is with drugs, poultices, cauterization, and other remedies, and especially if a cautery has already been applied that does not alleviate or benefit from any of those causes, then consider whether the nature of the disease is strong; and if there is no great inflammation or severe pain, then apply another cautery to it a little. And then cauterize that area on the side of their head with an iron cautery, as long as the skull is cracked. Cut the skull and expose the amount we have found, then cauterize that with an iron cautery on the rear part of the head at a place called the 'vat',— which is the area where the wind is stopped. Then place your hand over it and do not expose the bone, because this disease causes great pain unlike any other cautery on the head.
And you should apply this cautery in its proper place, for this cautery with which the horns of the head and the occipital are cauterized is a subtler cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is its form.
It appears that your message got cut off or there was a typo. "Capitol ters" does not provide enough context for me to guess the intended meaning. Please provide more details or clarify what you need assistance with. I'm here to help!
**On the treatment of old migraines.**
When a severe headache occurs at the base of the skull or pain is felt in the eye, the head should be treated with medicines that clear it, and other treatment as mentioned for various ailments; if it does not improve, cauterization is performed in two ways: either with acute medicinal fire, or with iron.
Cauterization with burning medicines involves taking a hot iron, cutting off the affected part, and ablating the ends of it from both sides. Then cut the area of pain in the temple with a lancet, making a small incision until the cord is exposed.
Then apply pressure over it tightly by constriction, and leave it for three hours; then remove the bandage, lay open the wound, and leave it uncovered for two or three days, and then apply a cold compress until the pain subsides.
And then apply that ointment within which it shall heal.
And if you wish, make use of some of the medicines that I have written about in the two treatises on burning medicines.
The cauterization may be performed in this manner: take a fire of the cautery whose form is as follows:
and it is called a keyhole because its head is shaped like a claw with no curvature, and at its middle location there is a slight prominence.
And then apply pressure to the site of pain, holding your hand—to prevent the wound from becoming infected—and slowly turning the iron at a controlled speed.
And if the quantity of blood that is congealed due to the specific nature of the wound is such that it equals or exceeds the capacity of the vessel, raise your hand so that the artery below is not congealed, preventing the flow of pus.
And then immerse the affected area in salt water, place a compress over it, and leave it for three days; then apply a lot of hot compression, and treat with ointment until it heals.
And if you see, cauterize the edge of the knife with fire according to the cautery, and be careful not to make an arterial incision in this migraine specifically ancient.
Capital quarter.
Of ancient migraine cauterization.
When treating ancient migraine as we have described in the previous treatment and divisions of illnesses, and if the treatment does not work and the illness persists, you should perform a cutaneous cauterization with a knife until it is albified (whitened), indicating that the pain has been alleviated along the line of length from which the greatest part of the said migraine originates or that point; then place your hand over the area once and press strongly to pierce through the arteria and reach within the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to prevent the continuation of the mandible, which is damaged and impairs chewing, that the tear is not aggravated and the nerves, which cause pain in it, are not affected, and that no spasms occur.
And if it is regarding the care and caution of the flow of blood from an artery that is ruptured, as in the case of a rupture, there is fear, especially for those who do not understand what they are doing and lack study and patience; and let the operation on him begin at the beginning.
And bring to mind the treatment of the flow of blood from an artery accident according to their method in their place within this book.
And if you see that this malady does not respond to the cautery and the patient's condition is tolerable, cauterize in the middle part of the head as we have mentioned earlier, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you wish, apply the cautery as we have said in the chapter on the narrowing of archery with a cautery that has two points, this is the better and more effective cauterization.
It appears that the text is organized into chapters, indicated by "capitols." The term "v." might be short for "versus" or "concerning," suggesting that this particular chapter deals with a specific medical topic. Without additional context or the full text, it's challenging to provide a more precise translation of "Capitol v." but it could be interpreted as "Chapter concerning..." or "Medical Treatment: The Chapter on...
On the Cauterization of Ear Pain.
When there is pain in the ear caused by cold and it is treated with lacrimal and other remedies as I have mentioned in the previous section, and if the pain persists, then apply fire with a cautery, and this is called the "pointed" cautery, of which this is the form:
Then apply the pointed cautery close to the fire, and it should be moved around the entire ear as if it were being turned, or in any way necessary if the pain is in any part of it. Apply the cautery to the edge of the auricle little by little until you have cleaned the area thoroughly.
And if you make points with the cautery on the whole auricle, cut those off, and then care for the areas until they heal.
**Chapter VI**
**On the Cauterization of Torturous Growths**
The torturous growths that are cured and the cauterization thereof are merely of the kinds that come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of ill-health.
Avoid cauterization of the kind that should be treated by drying or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that specific type of torture with pullings and stretchings and gurglings, and you do not confirm your treatment, then know that you cauterize the malady in three places: the first is the root of the auricle, the second a small opening on their temple, and the third the conjunction of two lips.
And stop your cautery when the opposite of the affected area is treated, for relaxation will only occur where the problem is resolved.
The method of cauterization is that you apply the cautery to the right of the tip of the auricle, then place a small amount on the crown of the head, and another on the temple, the length of which corresponds to the length of the finger, and hold your hand as a cautery until the quantity of the essence of the cord is consumed.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is specific to the cutlerie, the shape of which is placed on the table. However, it is a subtle matter that one should observe with careful attention; it requires that you remove any excessive roughness from it.
And then carefully care for the area that has been treated until it heals.
**Chapter VII**
**Ancient Cauterization for Apoplexy**
When apoplexy is ancient and its treatment has not been effective, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize with four cautery burns: first on all corners of the head; second, apply cautery to the middle part of the head, as mentioned earlier; third, cauterize the nape (back of the neck). And the method of applying the cautery is done as mentioned above.
And it has already been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and is more painful; and then it should be treated with what you have prepared.
**Chapter VIII**
On the cauterization of oblivion done with flame.
Understand that small grains and pills should be given to the patient at the beginning, gradually increasing their dose, as the serving physicians understand best.
Then shave the entire head of the patient and place your hands on their crown, applying the plaster as described in the treatise on plasters.
And do this at certain intervals, as it is the manner of cauterization. And do it according to that doctor's order which I have already mentioned.
And so it is for those who are healthy; but if not, make three cuts on the back of their head, descending from the higher part of the head to the lower part behind the neck. And after each cut, apply pressure to stop the bleeding, and then carefully tend to the cut with the appropriate remedies.
If you can add to it and the patient tolerates it, make a cut in the middle of the affected area; and if you need even more help, cauterize over both heels.
Tend to the inside until it is healed; and make the olive cuts according to the shape as previously shown.
**Capital IX.**
**On the Treatment of Parasites and the Softening of the Entire Body.**
**As you have described the process of softening, proceed to treat the head; remove the patient's hair, apply a pointed cautery at the exact location, cauterize all parts of the head, and cauterize the lower part, as well as three times on the spine, on the back.**
**And if, in the case of severe softening of the body, and the patient endures great pain, apply four cauteries on the spine, then later apply another cautery until the intense pain subsides, and raise the patient's hand.** **And take care that it heals properly; this is the olive cautery.**
Chapter X.
**On the treatment of epilepsy.**
Epileptics should not be cauterized, but rather those seizures caused by phlegm.
And therefore, it is important to cleanse the brain of the patient at the beginning, as we have spoken, and also other cures which we have mentioned in the previous division when the disease is severe and resistant to medication.
If it is a child who does not suffer from medications, then administer purgatives and mild laxatives to cleanse the bowels, doing this every few days, for the benefit of the diet.
Then shave the head of the patient, and apply a cautery to that area with a hot iron as per the previous method, and another cautery on the occipital region of their head, and over any other part of their scalp where you have cauterized. And if the illness is severe and tolerable, one should apply cautery with cautery tools as mentioned above, having paralyzed and softened the body over the cervical spines and the spinal spines of the back.
And apply the olive cautery as mentioned above.
If the illness is in a child, then apply a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Chapter XI.
On the cautery of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and thick fluid, then apply cautery with the cautery tools mentioned above, having paralyzed them.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess that descends into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then it is necessary to drink something that purifies his mind according to what has preceded in the division.
Then shave the head of the patient, make a cut gently around the wound on the scalp, and then place a bandage over it in the middle part of the head.
And when the patient feels a sudden shiver, they should be held from all sides.
Then apply the ointment, for it is more worthy of consideration than shearing sheep. And heat that over the fire with a tempered heat for a measured time, which causes them to suffer less when placed in it. And then I want to hold him in the middle of his head in a circular manner and cool it down inside.
And this should be done to the patient once a week, following a strict diet until he is cured; or, if you prefer, make small punctures with a carefully arranged cautery. This type of cautery moistens the brain equally.
Then I will place that swollen part in hot water or in a bath of laurel.
**Chapter XII**
Concerning the treatment of water-related conditions in the foot.
When you have determined the onset of water in the foot through the signs I mentioned in the previous section, then begin and cause the patient to drink a liquid that purges his head, and keep him from all moisture.
And make that immersion in a bath with some herbs for several days.
Then command the patient to shave their head, and use a cautery on that exact spot; and cauterize with two cauteries over the two temples if it is the beginning of water retention in both eyes, or with one cautery if it is the beginning of water retention in one eye.
Incise with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are leaving the lock; and the cauteries should be at that length in the latitude of the temples.
And be mindful of any bleeding when cauterizing; and if you see any bleeding, cease the use of any medicine that is within your reach.
And you should have knowledge derived from arteries, amputation of those, and the prevention of bleeding.
And sometimes, certain parts of the spine are cauterized between two bones using two cauterizing tools, thus producing relief.
**Chapter XIII**
**On the Cauterization of Ancient Tears.**
When the tears of the eyes are ancient and frequently occurring, affecting the veins and arteries in the area where they manifest on the head outside, and it is found that this causes excessive fluid discharge, then cauterize that part with a cautery as described at the beginning of this treatise regarding the application of hot water to the eyes, and cauterize the middle part of the head, and use two cauteries at the base of the skull, and two cauteries at the base of each temple, and two cauteries between two bones in the spine. And if there is additional need, cauterize that entire area of the eye's coat over the upper eyelid with a small cautery.
Chapter .xiiii.
On the cauterization of nasal fistulas.
When treating the condition we discussed in the previous section and your medication does not prove effective, prepare a mixture for the patient to drink three times a night; then shave their head and cauterize the affected area with a hot iron. And then cauterize the affected area with a pinhead-sized hot iron, leaving the hairs intact.
And be careful not to burn yourself while performing this procedure.
This is the method for using the pinhead-sized hot iron.
**Capitulo 15.**
For the softening of the eyelids with a cautery.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened due to disease or moisture, it is treated with a cautery using this lunar-shaped cautery.
And if you, with a cautery, treat those above the eyebrows, use two small cauteries across, and they should be elongated from the temples. And the length of each cautery should be according to the amount of eyelid.
And do not press too hard with the cautery, but according to the amount that the third part of the eyelid is adhering.
Chapter XVI.
With a cautery on the eyelid of the eye when the hairs turn inside out and insert the cautery into the eye.
When the hairs of the eye are turned inside out so that it stings, cauterization is performed in two ways: either by making a cut or by using a medicinal flame.
If the cautery is done with fire, instruct the patient to pull their hairs out, making them long and thin; and if you need to, tie their eyes with a bandage to prevent them from blinking so that the hairs can grow back.
Once the hairs have grown back and become thin, place your hand on the patient's eye, close to the eyelid, using a touch that resembles a dead leaf, and start from where the sign begins, near the hairs.
And then apply a cold compress or a mud paste of honey and wheat flour to the affected area.
And then light the cautery, which is shaped like this.
And then cauterize along the marked figure, gradually and in small movements, until the surface of the wound is completely sealed, appearing as if it were covered with a layer of myrrh.
A sign of the body's healing process is when you notice the eyelid of the affected eye becoming contracted and the skin around the puncture site rising up.
And so raise your hand and keep it there for three days, and then apply a warm compress to the area until the swelling has subsided. And then apply a cure that will heal it.
If it returns through the skin for any reason and the eyelid becomes softened, then do the cautery again over the entire area as you had done originally.
If the hair is in the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural position, sealed, and the hair does not grow back.
The cautery with burning medicine is what you order for the patient to remove the hair so that it does not grow back, and then make a paper-like bandage in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
And then take some known soap and a live flame, mix these causes together, and make this into a feast so that it is not cooled; expand this from the soap onto the paper made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, place it on one or both eyelids; leave the moistened edge on the eye, and let the patient keep their head in the proper position.
And he places this over the medicine and gently presses it, so that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is like fire within.
And so, as long as the patient feels the bite of the treatment, he should not remove the medicine but apply more with a gentle touch; and when the bite ceases, he should then remove the medicine and wash it with water; and consider whether several times the eyelid has been raised as it is washed, either by heat or incision, for this is the right way; and if it does not return to the application of the medicine on the area where the treatment was not absorbed, do not be discouraged, as your operation will succeed and the wound will close.
Then apply pressure around the edge until the adhesion of the hernia is eliminated, and then treat it with a suitable poultice or other remedy until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you, after your operation, to be vigilant and careful that no part of the medicine falls from the wound, and if several days later the eyelid becomes inflamed due to hair roots in the wound, then apply your medicine again to that area where the eyelid has become softened, and just as you did at the beginning, and surround it until it is healed.
And this is the method of extracting the stone.
And you should know that the size and shape of a man's heels vary, and therefore your treatment must be tailored accordingly.
And it is not hidden the path of treatment from those who study this art.
Chapter XVII.
On cauterization of the fistula in the tear duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula using the method we have discussed in the sections on ailments and do not confer with your treatment, then know that you cauterize it as follows: command the patient to hold their head in a certain position, and place some instrument between their teeth so that they do not move or agitate their head.
And then apply a cold compress or a paste of goose fat or bird down to the patient's chest.
And then shape the cautery as follows:
which should be curved, either in the shape of a cane or a quill, from one end where the cautery is made.
And if you see, it penetrates into the other end. And if you wish to withdraw, do so with care.
However, those who are experienced may find the cold method better for their work.
And if the hernia is open, press it shut and clean and dry the area. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the hernia from within.
Then place the hot cautery on it, but first take your hand away from the cold part of the nose, so that neither your hand nor the patient is disturbed, and apply the cautery to the roots of the hair and burn them.
And thus, if at the beginning of the hot cautery it penetrates into the bone, that is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery once or twice, as necessary, and leave it in that way for three days, then apply a compress and surround it with an anti-inflammatory ointment until it heals.
If after passing ten days it does not heal, then apply a sharp, corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and cut as appropriate according to its chapter.
And there is another way of cauterizing a fistula which some first mentioned: enter the place of the fistula and burn it, then return your hand to that gentle fissure whose form it has; and pour on it as much molten lead as necessary; hold your hand firmly in good restraint, so that the patient's pain is not increased, so that the molten lead does not reach the smell of the wound; and be sure to place over the patient's wound a cloth soaked in honey or water, for the lead will adhere to the place of the fistula and heal it by miraculous means.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, it is good; otherwise, it will be necessary to administer a nasal draught and reduce the fistula into the body according to its proper place.
**Chapter XVIII**
**On the Cauterization of the Gouty Ulcer**
Motas visible cause cracks in the lips, especially in the lips of children.
If you treat those cracks as we have described in the previous sections but do not benefit from your treatment, then apply a small piece of hot cautery or a knife according to this form that I will show:
And the cavity of it according to the thickness of the knife.
Then carefully press that instrument into the cracks until the cautery reaches the depth of the cracks.
And then cover that with a poultice until it is healed.
Chapter XIX
On the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When examining the uvula, palate, or gaps between teeth, if an abscess forms and it breaks open, becomes old, and creates a fistula, and you attempt to treat it but do not achieve healing, then you should ignite a cautery according to the size of the fistula, and insert that burning iron into the opening of the fistula, allowing your hand to guide the hot iron to its target, doing this once or twice; and subsequently apply the treatment methods we have discussed for healing.
And if the health is completely lost and healing occurs, then it is good; otherwise, it becomes necessary to expose the location and remove the corrupted bone as discussed in its respective chapter.
**Chapter XX.**
On the treatment of teeth and the softening of arteries.
When arteries are softened by moisture and teeth are weakened, and these conditions do not improve with medication, then place the patient's head in a low position, and apply a cautery in the shape that will most closely fit the tooth, so that when you place your finger on the tooth and insert the ignited cautery swiftly, it holds the tooth just slightly longer than necessary for the patient to feel the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth, thus achieving its removal.
And then lift your hand, and repeat the application of the cautery several times as desired.
Then make the patient gargle with a solution of salt water for an hour, after which he should spit it out, as the weakened tooth is now firm, the softened gum tissue is tightened, and the corrupted moisture is dried.
Chapter .xxi.
On the treatment of tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to coldness, or there is a frostbite or swelling, and the treatment with medicine does not help, then cauterization should be performed in two manners: either with cow's dung cautery, or with fire cautery.
Cautery with cow's dung involves taking the dung and forming it into a ball, then placing it over the heated end of a metal instrument, and applying this to the affected tooth while gently pressing until it is numbed by the cold.
And repeat this several times until the heat from the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you see, dip a cloth or something similar in the hot water on that side, place it over the aching tooth, and keep it there until the heat reaches the bottom of the tooth's cavity.
However, the use of fire for cauterization should only be done with care in case of erysipelas or an open wound, and it should not be too harsh so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth.
Then shape the cautery as necessary, place it over the tooth and hold your hand over it until the cautery cools down; do this several times because the pain might return either on that day or the next.
And ensure that the patient opens their mouth widely and holds the cautery for about an hour, then spit it out; this is the form of the cautery.
And apply the cautery as you have seen fit according to your ability.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter XXII.
On cauterization of extrophules.
When extrophules are filled with fluid and humors that are not obedient to digestion due to medicines, and you want to digest them slightly, then apply the cautery directly following its shape, having two open ends so that smoke comes out from one end while you apply heat to the other, over and over again, until it reaches the depth of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then apply the cautery according to its size, and leave it for three days, applying heat over the wound edge until the affected area is healed by the fire.
And then attend to that wound with ointment and bandages until it heals.
**Chapter XXIII**
On cauterization of veins and constriction of arteries.
When humidity appears on the pleural membrane of the lung, especially when it is caused by a cold chills, one must evacuate that illness at the onset with medicinal emollients, and then cauterize that place with a pointed instrument in the affected area.
And be careful not to burn the pleura with the cautery or to inflame the patient's chest, but only slightly.
And cauterize that joint or other joints with a hot iron over the collar of the spine in its last vertebra. The hot iron should be clamped in the manner described above.
Then carefully tend to that, as described above, until it heals.
Chapter XXIII
On the cauterization of lung and chest ailments.
When cough and lung ailments are caused by excessive moisture, and the patient has no fever or phlegm, and the ailment is long-standing, then cauterize as follows: make two incisions with hot irons over the furcula (the area between the shoulder blades) where the lungs tremble and rise; and another at the midsection of the foot, between the two mammillary regions. The iron should be clamped in the manner described above.
And if you wish, your puncturing cautery can be the one called a point, the shape of which precedes in the puncturing of ear pain.
And make punctures within these; and then take care of that as it is preceded to be healed.
And now the cautery has three prongs, for cauterization is done to that in this way: at one time you can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Chapter XXV.
On the cauterization of titlic, which is the head of the assistant.
When the head of the assistant is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and does not stop during its return, you must reduce its dislocation until it is in its usual place, and with a slight movement, it should be placed back as we have testified; at first, reduce the dislocation, and then place the patient on their back or side; and raise the leg that was initially affected inside the titlic to above the level of the heart, if the joint is dislocated inside.
And then apply the cautery, which has two ends; and this is its shape:
And then cauterize the wound where that one penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cauterization will appear when using two-ended cautery.
And in some cases, it is adjusted according to this rule, and these are the cauterizations (eight).
Then place the entire cautery on the wound with salt, and make the patient lie in a quiet position, and do not move the limb for any duration until it is healed.
And if the dislocation is in the joints above and it persists, then cauterization is done over the muscle with a hot iron cautery or with pointed metal cauteries, because the joint is stabilized, the swelling is reduced, and the pain is healed.
Chapter .xxvi.
On the Cauterization of the Stomach.
When there is an inflammation in the stomach and it fills with fluid that protrudes from its opening, and if the treatment methods are not changed, the patient will feel the illness on their back, extending their hands and legs, and cauterize that area with three cautery marks: one leaving a mark on the foot the size of a finger, and two others on either side of the back cost, forming a triangular cautery figure; and between those that are not properly aligned, they will cause putrefaction.
And if the depth of the cautery is the amount of two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And the shape of the cautery should be according to this form. If you wish, cauterize with a larger cautery in the middle area of the stomach, forming this shape; and this should be a circular cautery, following this form.
And the stomach should be cauterized by puncturing it at the point that causes fear: and you know the depth of the puncture in the stomach according to the amount you want to try, and then cauterize that with a cautery on the points; and then treat that with care according to the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter 27.
On the cauterization of varicose veins.
When pain in the vein is caused by cold, or moisture, or strong wind, and it deviates from its normal course due to excessive outflow, then treat the illness with what we have mentioned, but do not apply pressure, because the illness must be lifted over its base; and know at once three cauterizations according to this form and this quantity: make incisions on the vein below the hipbone, which brings about a man's reclining position.
And the space between each cautery should be according to its thickness, and the cauteries should be according to the length of the body on the right side.
And do not be impatient with the cautery.
And if the amount of liquid that is absorbed corresponds to the degree of specificity of the condition of the vein, and it is not sufficiently adjusted; and if the malady stands on the patient's feet; or if it does not stand there, then it should be sitting, which has already spread out its parts and raised its arms.
And with your skill and caution in the art, you can cauterize these cauteries with a cutting cautery.
And be careful not to burn excessively during cauterization, and fix the gaze of your whole body so that all the body is tightened and reaches within the hernias, because here the hernia is subtle; and know this.
Chapter 28.
On the incision of an abscess in the leg with cautery.
When an abscess forms in the leg and you wish to know whether it is within the muscle or around it, if it is within the muscle, the patient experiences greater gravity of the illness and intensification of pain.
And if it is around the muscle, because the pain is severe and often exhausts the doctors in treating it.
Therefore, position the patient so that their neck is towards you; then identify the location of the affected area; and apply the pointed cautery, which resembles a comb, whose shape was previously described on the previous page. And cauterize with these cauteries until the entire wound is healed, so that it reaches the bone, and until the inflammation subsides.
And likewise, take care of that one for the healing of the other apoplexes until they are cured.
And know that among these forms of cautery, only those which are taught in the art of medicine and most of which have been proven to alleviate ailments should be used; however, on some occasions, this may be daring for this operation, but it is better to follow those methods which have been tested over time.
Chapter XXIX.
On cauterization of pleurisy.
Ancient cautery techniques for pleurisy, according to this method, involve taking the long, thin cut end of an aristology tool and inserting it into a dry, narrow opening, corresponding to the size of the said tool.
Then immerse that in oil and heat it, and cauterize with a cautery tool at the location between the continuation of the furcula and the collarbone; place two small cauteries beneath guiding them slightly downwards towards the armpit, and two cauteries sloping down between the fifth rib and the kidney, slightly downwards towards the back; another cautery in the middle part of the foot; and one over the stomach, and three cauteries at the back parts; and another cautery at the location between the two shoulders, and two cauteries on both sides of the foot, leaving the cautery between the two shoulders.
And do not cover your hand with the cautery, but hold it over the affected area while the procedure is in progress.
And they also speak of other ancient practices where certain men use a hot iron cautery like a ray and ignite it, then apply that to the area between the ribs, in order to achieve that place, so that health may be restored, as we have said regarding the hernia of the foot.
One should not fear this cautery procedure, as accidents may happen in the fisted area where there is no healing.
Chapter XXX.
On cauterization of the melisa (a term that could refer to various parts of the body, context is needed for precision).
When treating the illness of the leg with what we have said about treatment in division and you do not apply your cure, use cautery on it according to three methods, all of which are correct; one is that you make three or four punctures along the length of the leg according to the pattern of the cauterization marks on the foot.
And between each cautery, the thickness of a finger or slightly less, and the manner of cauterization is the same manner we have said in the cauterization marks on the foot overall.
And do not apply your hand with the cautery; and the illness should be on its side.
And there is another method of cauterization; this is that you ignite the cautery having two directions, which we have mentioned in the chapter on the dislocation of the muscle, and raise the cord which is at the end of the leg where the patient's pain lies to its correct position.
And let your elevation, by which you raise the spine according to the length of the body, be such that cauterization is done according to the extent of the body.
Then insert the two instruments, hot and sharp, into that opening where they penetrate the spine from the other side.
Then extract the cautery; and thus four cauterizations are made.
And if you see, cauterize with a cautery having three instruments.
Then attend to the cauterizations so that they do not become gangrenous for too many days, as it is more advantageous than other preceding causes in treatment.
Chapter .xxxI.
On the cauterization of dropsical conditions.
Cauterization should not be applied to dropsical conditions but directly to the infected area.
When treating a dropsical condition using the methods described above and your treatment is ineffective, it is necessary to apply four cauterizations in the region around the affected area, as well as one cauterization on the stomach, another on the thigh, another on the anus, two cauterizations between the spinal columns of the back, and a cauterization directly on the right side of the foot, and yet another cauterization over the stomach. And the depth of the cauterization should be determined according to the severity of the condition.
And it is appropriate to apply the cauterization gently, so that it does not burn for a long time.
And do not evacuate the hernia from treatment until after applying the cautery which covers it so that two intentions are added to it and it is celebrated with the aid of healing.
The shape of the cautery which is used to cauterize the abdomen should be in the form of a key according to the shape of that one which is used to cauterize the back, and it is this one which is used to cauterize the thorax is olive-shaped according to its previous form.
Chapter XXXII.
On the cauterization of feet and parts (of the body).
When the feet are immersed in cold water and become filled with water (or possibly swelling), cauterize the feet over the top of the foot, between the big toe and the little finger, and do not crush it; then raise your hand with the cautery and do not return it completely, for the cold water will seep out.
It is the cautery according to this form: And then make two cauterizations on both thighs, and on each thing make a hot cautery at the end of the cutting cautery. And the cauterizations should be according to the length of the thigh: one should be placed on the inner side and the other on the outer side of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauterizations.
And leave the plague open for a long time so that no water remains in it.
Then take care of those causes that we have mentioned.
Chapter .xxxiii. (Note: The number xxxiii is in Roman numerals, translating to 33)
On the cauterization of abdominal parts.
When abdominal pain is caused by heat and moisture within, it is the digestive and retentive virtue, located in the stomach and intestines, that must be addressed through appropriate treatment methods, and sometimes the patient endures painful cauteries to exhibit these virtues. Then one should apply a large cautery over their stomach as previously mentioned regarding the cauterization of the stomach, along with circular cauteries and four cauteries around the subtle circulatory channels, or a fine-pointed cautery; and also cauteries over alkalines on large stones, or two cauteries.
And if the excessive humidity and the illness tolerates it, then cauterize over the anus and intestines, strongly applying two cauteries over the stomach and near the groin, for this is a perfect cure for a young condition from which one does not stray.
**Capitol .xxxiv.** (Note: The capitalization and numbering system here may not strictly follow modern conventions, but I have maintained the original formatting for consistency with the provided text.)
On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When hemorrhoids, either old ones or caused by thick humors or corrupted by humidity, do not heal with the methods mentioned in the previous sections, they can be treated by cauterization using three cautery instruments on the pus-filled area of the spine at the base of the back, and another cautery instrument over the navel for two days.
If it is observed that the patient's stomach is chilled and their food is not digested, and their face appears pale, then cauterize over the stomach using a large cautery as previously mentioned; also apply a cautery to the intestines with one instrument and another cautery to the patient's navel with a clavicle cautery. Leave the cauteries open for some time, and then care for the patient until they are healed.
Chapter XXXV.
Of cautery for hernias, one should remove them.
When you remove hernias, you use the cautery that is similar to a ray of light. Next, insert that ignited instrument into the hernia you have removed, and keep your hand over the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
And do this once or twice, for if the hernias are too numerous, you cauterize each one of them as we have mentioned, and then apply heat to them until they heal.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on anything, it is better to do so gently.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the natural openings of the body.
When nature does not comply with the treatment we have described in its proper place, and the patient is frightened by that, then healing is achieved through cauterization.
Therefore, when one finds a fistula in nature that is old and corrupt with bad humidity, it is most befitting to attempt its healing with subtle attempts, and then gently apply the quantity according to the depth of the fistula as indicated by the aforementioned attempt.
Apply the cautery that resembles a ray. And place that ignited cautery into this fistula, according to the quantity in which the attempt is successful.
And apply the cautery repeatedly until those corrupt bodies are burned, once or twice or three times, according to the amount of your need.
And be careful of the burning of nerves and veins; if a fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the hernia cavity, then pay attention to all those places; and do not perform this unless the fistula is in fleshy tissue and you think it is not penetrating.
And then take care of the area until it heals.
And if the area is sealed and the materials that caused it are removed from it, and they remain like that for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
And if the materials are not from the body, then know that it is penetrating or in the process of corrupting it, or falls into those causes of which there will be remembrance in its place.
Chapter .xxxvii.
On cauterization of ulcers.
When ulcers cause pain due to cold or excessive heat, and the patient's condition becomes aggravated, you should cauterize them by applying a hot iron to each ulcer, as is done with the cautery clavo, which helps to remember.
And we should strongly cauterize them according to a small space, so that there will be three cauterizations in line, and thus they will heal more quickly.
Chapter .xxxviii.
On cauterization of the bladder.
When the bladder is weakened and softened by friction and moisture to the point that the patient cannot retain urine, apply a cautery to the urinary passage opening above the bladder; the hair at the base of the penis begins to fall out, and cauterize with a pointed cautery on the right side, and another on the left.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the depth of the pain; cauterize with a cautery in the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And the cautery should be driven according to how it is processed.
Chapter XXXIX.
On cauterization of the breast.
When fever and moisture appear, conception is prohibited, and the patient's menstrual cycle is disrupted, making it difficult to induce labor. At this point, the area should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have explained for the vesica; or with two cauteries, one on each side of the back, or with a single cautery in a clava-like shape.
Chapter XL.
On cauterization of the dislocated ankle.
When moist mucus infiltrates the ankle joint and causes its displacement, leading to prolonged pain in one area compared to the other, it is a sign of the condition's progression. And the affected area of the dislocated ankle should be immobilized with a suitable boot.
Then apply the cautery to the hernia at the opening of the anus, making it circular with the cautery as you have practiced around the opening; in this way, the opening falls into the middle position within the circle.
And the cautery mentioned above has a similar form in the cauterization of the stomach.
If this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three large olive cauteries.
And make the cautery according to the quantity of the inflammation in all parts of the body, and be careful that everything is healthy.
Chapter XLII
On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain appears in the lower part of the body, caused by friction and moisture, the illness is treated with the water we have mentioned, and this should not be delayed, when you see that the disease is filled with thick humors, bind them with foul pills or artificial pills or similar; then apply cautery to that area.
And the application of the cautery in that area follows two methods: either with medicinal burning substances or with fire.
It follows two scientific methods, one of which involves cauterizing that area on the patient's thigh with three triangular cauterizations in this manner and making sure they are deeply inserted. And the space between each cauterization should be according to the thickness of the said area, and whether the cautery is olive-sized or large.
Some times, cautery may be applied to the middle part of the ankle for four cauterizations.
And if you wish, cauterize the circle from which the shape is taken in the cauterization of a dislocated ankle, one that is circular and burns away all the edges.
And this is the method of cautery for chronic pain in the ankle, when the pain is persistent and not spread to the thigh.
If it is spread to the thigh, then cauterize that place with two cauterizations on the thigh at the spot where you direct the disease that causes the pain; and one cauterization on the shin bone for four days on the inner side.
And if the cautery is cutaneous, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the amount of inflammation in the ankle.
And if the disease spreads that the pain is in the foot itself, then cauterize here where you see it with three or four or more points if you need to for this.
And if the disease perceives that the pain is left in the side, then cauterize here with a cutting cautery.
And be careful in all cauterization so that you do not end up harming nerves or causing great pain, and thus against the will of the patient, aggravating or restricting them.
And you have already seen others of those who cauterize on the ankle and finish with the cauterization, and the bed of fire inflated as the swelling achieves the foot, and the fire pierced and corrupted all the foot. And then apply a strong acid solution of the belly, and this brings death.
And if the pain is in two parts, then cauterize each according to this manner.
And certain wise men spoke of the cauterization of water cautery, of which this is the manner: make it like a circular iron ring whose circumference is the width of a palm; and its opening should be according to the thickness of a date palm bone or somewhat less.
And within that circle, make another third; and let the space between them be the thickness of a night's rest; and those circles should have two parts; and the length of those lines should be one or two nights, and make the edges of the iron rings decently embellished on the circles; this is its form.
Then light it in the fire until it wraps around and sparks, and once it's paused on the part of the water, place the patient on their side with the afflicted area above their thigh. And so, three cauteries should be made around that area at once.
Then, leave it like that for three days; apply a poultice to the wound, keeping it open for too many days; and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasis says: O, my children, we have little experience with this kind of cautery because of the fear of watching it and because few have found those that watch over it.
One should make the most severe cauteries for those who suffer greatly, and find the right place for them.
The most severe cauteries, as medicines, are such that you make two circles with a perforated armature in which the keyhole of the door is placed; their length on the wall should be equal to the diameter of the keys or something similar.
And if the space between certain parts of the body is such that it corresponds to the thickness of the said part; then place cushions on both sides and ensure they hold each other in this manner:
Then place your hand over the affected area where the patient feels pain in the side, and take some cold water, form it into two circles, and gradually apply heat to it, for a duration of an hour, allowing the patient to endure the burning sensation and adhesion—as if the fire is biting—until the burning ceases.
Then raise your hand with the instrument and dry the affected area with warm water.
Then repeat this process for three days, placing your hand over the affected area until the burning sensation returns to its original intensity, and continue this treatment for several more days, as it is effective in healing. This is the final step in the treatment.
And then apply a remedy for that pain until it heals.
If the pain is extended within the thigh or leg, make them assume a position that retains water as is done in hydrotherapy.
And this is the manner of water therapy, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Prepare a solution of alkali and cause no scarring from both an opening, and after washing them, place in a new container where the opening is left pierced for a small amount to enter inside.
And leave the bottom of the container immersed in another highly concentrated solution, then place them over the alkali and live water mixture with two fingers, and after compressing them well with your hand, let the hot water from the solution descend into the opening left by the other solution in the container.
And then carefully adjust all that water, and pour it over another living cause and a renewable alkali, so that the heat produced will be of great intensity, which is administered in many medical operations and in cauterization of other members, as the operation uses fire.
And among the medicines are some that are cauterized with wide applications, both quickly and gently, and cause no harm but rather provide benefit.
A wise man from ancient times describes an operation and cure for the pain of water (edema) and sciatica, and magnanimously proclaims that it is a wonderful thing to have discovered this, and says that no other treatment is needed, as it heals completely with repeated immersion in hot water.
And it is that near a fresh wound, if it is not infected with green (gangrenous) matter, take a recent fig (fig leaf) and tie it tightly to the affected area in water where the pain resides, whether in the foot, or the thigh, or the leg, and let it be.
And it should be left for a duration of three hours or as long as the patient's condition allows for relaxation from tension.
Then immerse him in hot water, and while his body is heated, insert that into the sun, for the pain ceases and healing occurs.
And know that one should not use cautery with these medicines unless it is for the removal of harmful substances from the body.
It is already stated that when the narrow vein of the goat is cauterized, it brings relief; and the cautery should be applied to him in this manner: take wool and dip it in ancient oil, and place it between his toes and between his bones.
And take a dry goat's vein, inflame it over fire until it is done, and place it on the wool, leaving the inside to be stretched out. And then repeat this process, and do not cease to do so until the sensation of the bite penetrates into the water and relieves the pain.
And this method of cauterization is called the "cow cautery.
Chapter XLII.
On the cauterization of joint pain.
Sometimes the pain in the back is caused by various reasons, such as bending or hitting, or excessive evacuation, and for similar causes, due to the infusion of foreign, wet material.
And cauterization does not apply to any other species, but only to this one which is caused by the infusion of foreign, wet material.
Therefore, to achieve evacuation of the malady, prepare pills that resemble them, which are made over the part where the pain is located in three lines according to its extent, and apply cautery on each line as much as necessary, depending on the severity of the malady and the virtue of the treatment.
And cauterization should be done with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four with clavished cautery according to this form:
Chapter XXXIII.
On cauterization at the onset of jaundice.
This malady often appears in small children; the sign of its onset in children is that their structure becomes tight in the evening, causing elevation and limited movement.
And it examines the last spine of the back and the knots of the spine that begin to rise above the others.
And so when you see this and wish to restrict it, you cauterize it with a circular cautery in this form: that takes the cautery across all parts of the spine evenly.
And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery in two or three lines. And the points should be appropriate between them.
And then take care of the area until it is healed as we have said.
Be careful that cautery is not administered to a swelling caused by a spasm of nerves.
**Capitol. XXIV.**
**On the Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.**
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And thus, when gout is caused by cold and is not relieved by usual treatments, then the pain should be treated with cautery.
It is because you cauterize the immediate evacuation in the circulation of the joint of the foot with pointed cauteries.
And apply an olive-shaped cautery whose form is as follows:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain increases within the joints or other parts of the body, and this persists, then cauterize each joint with three or four of these olive-shaped cauteries.
And if you find that these cauteries are sufficient for your needs, then cauterize the area and do not press too hard with the cautery, only target the specific part of the joint.
And if the pain persists within the joint and spreads, then administer the cautery as we have discussed in the previous chapter.
And if the pain is in the lower limbs only and is called rheum, then make incisions along the course of the veins as they return, in those two lines.
And if the pain persists in these areas, make incisions around the course of the veins on each side and on the nerve root of the hand.
And if the pain affects various joints or muscles, apply cautery to areas all over the limbs.
And do not remove the illness with improper treatment and medicines, for if proper regimen is followed and the fever is reduced by this cautery, God will help.
Chapter .xlv. (This appears to be a heading or title, indicating the start of a new section or chapter in the medical treatise.)
On cauterization of ruptures.
When a rupture occurs in the angles and opens hernias against the intestine in the genital region, treatment begins by returning the intestine to its place, and you should order the patient to fast for a day and use gentle means so that the hernia does not return from his belly.
Then continue to massage the patient between your hands on his back, and command him to keep his mind at ease so that the hernia or rupture does not reappear.
Then return the intestines to their proper place, and gently attempt to reduce the hernia over the bone of the penis, marking the end of which is similar to the shape of a circle in the upper openings of the body.
Then apply the cautery in the shape as follows:
Within which there are many ropes and bands. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then place the cautery over that sign with your hand holding the cautery properly, and take care to reach the bone of the toe within the middle of the foot; and repeat that another time if it does not succeed for you at first attempt to reach the bone.
And observe carefully the position of the hernia during the cauterization, so as not to disturb that hernia, lest it cause death or another great harm to the patient.
And be aware that when you use the cautery, do not touch the bone, do not apply your operation.
And take care that the cautery on children should be gentle according to their size and measure.
And then take care of the cautery site for three days, applying fresh bandages until the burn crusts over.
And take care of those with other burns until they are healed.
And the patient should be laid on their back for 10 days until the site is sealed and the pain subsides.
And be aware that the patient's food intake should be adjusted according to the duration of their healing process, which strengthens their stomach, and that the intestine should not protrude outside due to efforts made to heal.
And when it is deemed appropriate to remove it after approximately ten days, administer a suitable treatment, and continue for another forty days.
And it should also reduce hard work and the intake of food and drink, and avoid loud voices, for when one follows this regimen of healing diligently, they will be healed completely.
And now I will describe the treatment for hernias in other parts of the abdomen, which begin at the commencement, and do not heal, then cauterize the hernia with a red hot iron according to its size, and it is important that what comes out from the abdominal wall be cleaned as if from the third part of the intestine; and take care of that as we have said, and do not allow it to become infected.
Some have previously said that the hernia should be cauterized with a triangular iron according to this method, as it is indicated by experience:
And it is a pause line that they hold by the width on both sides of the tear, and another line above it; then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Chapter XLVI.
On cauterization of twists.
When pain is felt in other parts of the body due to sudden impact or accident and that pain persists for a long time without responding to medical treatments, then cauterization with a pointed cautery should be considered.
And the type of cautery should be chosen for each member based on its size and depth, as well as the nature and location of the twist and pain.
Therefore, if the first cautery is successful, stop; otherwise, repeat the cautery on it; for usually those pains are caused by the injury to a member closest to it, so make sure you get those with cautery before the patient recovers.
Chapter .xlvii.
About the cauterization of leprosy.
Lepers sometimes need cauterization due to severe disfigurement, and most often if the type of leprosy is characterized by putrefaction of the flesh and melancholy.
And so if you wish to cauterize this, consider whether the leprosy is severe and such that it can be cured by what has been said in the previous division, and not by any other means or treatment, and fear regarding the patient that corruption will spread throughout the body and affect all its parts, then cauterize the head above the affected area: first at the middle of the head, and second below it, extending to the forehead; also on two sides, forming horns, and behind, over the nape or neck.
Finally, with your hand on the cautery, apply it slightly inside where it touches the bone, and remove any excess scabs to prevent further irritation, and cauterize over the affected area as necessary.
If leprosy has already spread over the body and appears manifestly, you must cauterize those parts with those cauteries that we have mentioned in the beginning; cauterize on the tip of the nose, two cauteries on each eye-lid, two cauteries on both shoulders, five cauteries on the spine, one cautery near the coccyx, and one over the hip, and two on each ankle, and one on each foot, and two on each thigh, and two on each muscle, and two on the soles of their feet; cauterize those on all the joints of the hands and feet, and on every toe of their feet, and on their claws.
And be careful of the nerves that are on the sole, do not irritate those.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the penis and another on the opening of the stomach, and another on the colon.
And you know that the more precise the cautery, the greater its effectiveness and benefit; and you know that disease does not reside in the cautery, as it does in its parts, for this reason because the body of the patient is already stunned.
And consider that the size of cautery should be great or small according to the members and joints as previously mentioned regarding the kinds of tools.
Then carefully apply the cautery with flour mixed with honey and other remedies within that it is healed.
Chapter .xlviii.
On cautery for stupor.
When a member is stunned or asleep and treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, but it is not healed, then you cauterize that stunned member with cautery according to the size of the member or the extent of its injury.
And let your hot cautery enter slightly into the wound of the cord. And then apply that ointment which will heal it.
And sometimes, certain cauterizations cause numbness which extends to the most and the feet, and the spinal columns of the back, and the tension of the nerves causes that member to go numb.
Do not attempt this unless one is skilled in the anatomy of the members and the emergence of the nerves throughout the body's movements.
Chapter .xlix. (Note: The Roman numeral 'xlix' translates to 49.)
On cauterization of ulcers that fester.
When the blister is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal treatments, then apply a cautery to it with a pre-heated iron according to the quantity of the specific type of scarr within the limit that the whiteness and color of the blister are preserved, and its color is changed.
And then prepare a cure from flour of oats and lentils mixed with warm oil and leaves of arnica, or pigeon's blood or deer's blood, each one a separate component but all mixed together, and apply it as a compress over the affected area until it is healed.
It appears that the text you've provided is incomplete or missing context, making it challenging to determine its meaning or provide an accurate translation. The term "Capitol .l." does not appear to be a standard phrase in any known language. If this is part of a larger text, providing more context would greatly assist in offering a proper interpretation and translation.
**De Cauterizacio de Cranc (On the Cauterization of Cramps)**
When cancer begins to form and you want to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference as it is turned.
And the wise ones say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of it; however, I have not seen this, as I fear it might become ulcerated, and I have already seen this a few times.
It is more precisely done that it be cauterized around its circumference with a circle as we have said, or with multiple cauterizations.
Chapter.
On cauterization of abscesses.
When an abscess is delayed in maturation, it may be due to excessive moisture or the patient's condition, as it becomes old and brittle, lacking strength, or because of time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize around its circumference with multiple small punctate cauterizations; and apply pressure to that area, as it will aid in its maturation.
If you wish to make the incision with a cautery, then heat the cautery whose form is thus: and pause it at the middle place of the softened skin until the needle penetrates.
And if the cautery at that place is left to heal, so that the body of the arm is relieved; and then take care that it heals properly.
**Chapter II.**
**On the Cauterization of Corroded [Tissues]**
Corrosive is a progressive corruption in the member that eats away just as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you encounter that corrosive in a place that requires cauterization with fire, then heat cautery claws, both small and large, as appropriate for the location where the corrosion is.
And then apply the cautery from every direction until you eliminate all corrosion and do not leave any cause for it.
And then bind it for three days, keeping the cauterized areas covered with a mixture of oil every three hours until all scars are completely eradicated and all corruption is gone.
And then treat it with a poultice of warm, moist flesh.
If after three days the flesh has healed and there is no corruption, then it is good; otherwise, the cautery should be applied again to the areas that are corrupt.
And corruption is treated with certain sharp medicines, as they are half-way between the application of poultices and cautery. However, using a hot cautery over fire is more effective for healing quickly.
And you have already mentioned the treatment of it with sharp medicine in the division, so take that when you find it lacking strength.
**Chapter III**
On Cauterization of Wounds and Similar Procedures
You should pay particular attention to the parts around the foot affected by malady, which is called a 'claus' and is often an excruciating, protruding growth, damaging the foot; cauterization on these areas is done in two ways: either with fire or with water-cooled cautery.
The hot cautery with fire should be made with a flame shaped like a serpent's tongue, crafted from iron according to the size of the claus in the wound, and have delicate edges.
And then apply the heated instrument to the toe, and rotate your hand with the cautery around the toe until it reaches the depth of the toe. And leave that for three days until it begins to heal. And then apply a plaster made of wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the plaster on top of it for one night so that it is eradicated from its roots.
And then treat the area with a ointment made from generated animal fat until it is healed.
And if it is not healed and you notice recurring accidents on the surface of the body, especially in the joints and feet, then apply these cauterization instruments with water. Take a small glass or iron needle or a turnspit, and apply that to the toe; pour a few drops of water into the glass, and hold your hand over it, rotating the instrument around the toe until the water evaporates from the root of the toe. Wait for the patient's pain to subside for an hour, then remove the water, as the toe will have shed its roots.
And thus they do to these individuals, bringing them close so that all of their parts in the body may be examined.
And then treat those wounds whose roots in the joints have been eradicated with these ointments that the flesh regains strength.
It appears that the text fragment you've provided is simply a page number or a marker, likely from a medieval medical treatise, indicating the beginning of a new section (Capitol .liii.). In this context, it doesn't need a direct translation but rather serves as a guide to navigate the document.
Regarding the cauterization of tremor.
When you encounter tremor caused by irritation of the nerves or fever due to some other irritant, or similar causes, you should cauterize these with four cautery points or two on each side of the spine, between each spinal bone with a single cautery; and cauterize the foot of the patient, and the stomach with olive-shaped cauteries.
And the tremor of him rests and hastens the health of the afflicted illness.
Chapter XXV.
On cauterization for accidental burns on the body.
When burns on the body break out with pustules formed of corrupt thick matter, at the onset of this appearance, cauterize over all parts of the fistula with a subtle cautery or a hot iron, extending its end to the fire; or cut it off with a sharp blade; or cauterize with a lens.
And sometimes, too, cauterization is applied at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; they are not crushed, and the excess matter is broken off, doing away with those, and healing from these.
However, be aware that this should be done with an appropriate evacuation through phlebotomy.
**Capitol LVI.**  (Chapter 60)
On the cauterization of flux of blood from a wound by cutting with an arrow.
Wounds that result from arrows that have been cut into the flesh often cause a flow of blood, or it may be due to the onset of boils or cauterization on a limb, and it appears similar, making it difficult to control.
Therefore, when this happens to anyone, you should use both hands on the wound caused by the arrow and press firmly over it as you slowly raise it until the flow of blood stops completely so that it does not come out again.
And then apply hot olive oil cauterization, both small and large, for many wounds, and blow on them until they are ignited.
And then take from them a small or large amount, according to the location and the wound in which an artery is broken, applying pressure firmly on that vein as you have raised it, and cauterize it until it is completely blocked and that flow of blood is stopped.
And if the blood is expelled from the arteries when you remove the cloth and withdraw the cautery, take another cautery carefully selected from the cauteries that are prepared over the fire, and do not cease to repeat this until the clot is reduced.
And beware that you do not injure the nerves here, which could lead to further harm to the patient.
And you should know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to constrict the clot in those cases, especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: either with cautery as we have mentioned, or by extraction, where the ends of it are burned and the clot restricted, or tied with thread or ligature for a strong contraction, or paused over it with medicines whose virtue is to constrict the clot; and be tightened with a cushion or compression at the cost.
He who administers a proper restriction of it with bandages or by positioning opposing causes and similar ones, offers only temporary relief.
If this must be done for someone and the doctor or medicine is not present, then open a pause at the said indication over the orifice of that vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction of it within so that the blood flow stops from the sovereign departure of the plague, and beyond the arteriary, the aforementioned method should not be repeated; and instead, sprinkle water that is extremely cold on the arteriary until the blood clot hardens and thickens; and then consider what cautery or medicine is required.
From incision and perforation, and venesection and phlebotomy, to plagues and their likes.
In the first chapter, we have discussed all illnesses in which heat from cauterization is appropriate and by medicinal combustion, their occasions and causes, and the instruments necessary for such forms of cautery; I have ordered the chapters on the upper body starting from the head down to the feet.
And in this chapter, I will proceed in this manner so that anyone seeking knowledge may find relief, regarding whatever they have asked about.
And before you begin, note that this chapter is dedicated to extreme cases where the first chapter on cauterization is not sufficient.
And because it is in great caution that one should be when performing the operation detailed in this chapter, which often leads to blood loss—due to the severing of veins or making an incision on the abscess, or draining pus, or removing arrows, or beginning to set bone—and similar things. And among all these, fear and trembling accompany them, and in most cases, death results from it.
And I warn you that this should not fall upon you, for sometimes you must be careful with the ways of men, as they can be contaminated by illness. And it is from them that you will learn about their illness, and they must be light-hearted in the face of death; for so violent is the nature of this condition that it finds him in his sickness, and because of its long duration, the sickness itself becomes a cause of death.
And it is of those people that you say, "He has given me health and hope," while their illness is destructive.
Therefore, do not agree with anyone who comes to you with this manner; let your caution be greater than your trust and your greed; do not presume any cause for it, but only accept the certain knowledge that confirms it to you, and which has a worthy history behind it.
Use in the treatment of all your ailments the knowledge of diagnosis and indication, for it assists you in acquiring fame, memory, praise, and glory.
Oh, my children, God inspires your understanding and does not allow you to stray from His guidance and protection, for it is in His hands.
And you have ordered this chapter to be distinguished into sections, according to what precedes in the chapter on cautery, from the treatment of the head down to the feet, so that it may assist you regarding whatever you inquire about and need.
First Chapter.
On the treatment of water that is retained in a child's head.
You know that this illness manifests itself in children at various times, and when the dark liquid enters the child's head, it affects their life.
And sometimes certain conditions must be observed because of a hidden cause that is unknown.
This disease is often seen in children, and to all those I have seen die from it, I have observed little benefit from any treatment.
And you have seen that a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of him was always thus swollen so much that he could not remove it from his body because of the size of his head, and more than that, the humidity increased within until fire death occurred.
And this humidity is either added between the skin and the bone or it is added beneath the bone on the brain.
If the operation is on that part when the humidity is between the skin and bone and the abscess is small, then you must make an opening in the middle place of the head with a fissure at its breadth, and the length of this fissure should be enough for the humidity to flow out, and this is the shape of the spatula:
And therefore, if the humidity is greatly increased and the abscess is larger, there are here two cracks according to this manner:
And if the humidity remains between the bones, it is a sign that you should open the entire edges of the head wound and the water will be squeezed out when you press with your hand on those openings inside, which should not be protected. Make incisions in the middle part of the head as follows:
and then extract the incision to remove all humidity; and tighten the cracks with strips and plasters; and on the fifth day, drill holes above them and pour vinegar and oil inside, and loosen the crusts and treat the wound with cauterization and bandages, and hold the head in an equal position; and feed the patient dry bread with little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
And there is another way of incision, which considers the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, for sometimes it appears at the back of the head, or in front, or on the right, or on the left; so pay close attention to where the abscess appears and the accumulation of water, and act accordingly as best you can.
And observe that you do not incise the artery, and try to stop the flow of blood and delay the patient's condition due to the flow of blood and the evacuation of humidity.
**Chapter II:**
When dealing with sudden or severe pain in the ears or feet, and this condition is long-standing and does not respond to medical treatments, then the final cure lies in the incision of those two arteries.
And therefore, when you wish to incise those that the illness has made its head, then rub the place with rough cloth so that the arterioles appear, and tighten firmly the collar of the illness with another cloth; and consider where the vein pulses; and the places of each over the places that are most affected, and they remain concealed in some people.
And then, with the needle on the arteriole, incise each one carefully where the cut has reached the bone, and do this according to the size of the head.
And if you wish, insert the needle into the artery after the cut and draw it along the incisions from there.
And the length of the incision should be about two fingers, for when a vein is incised, the blood flows out pulsating, which would otherwise escape frequently.
If the inflammation does not appear in the belt, then measure from the auricle the quantity of space equal to three fingers, and then carefully make an incision and enter into the bone.
And what you need to get from the wound is a quantity of wine one ounce, and read it strongly do not get more or less, and all this depends on the amount that appears from the severity of the illness and the depth of the inflammation in him.
Then consider the plague, and if there remains on the bone any cause of infection, you will incise it so that it does not develop gangrene cautely.
Then strengthen the plague with poultices and bandages of linen, and take care to cleanse it until it is healed.
Chapter III.
From extraction of the tendons which are in the temples.
When ancient or sudden migraines occur due to atmospheric humidity and the quality of the temples' lacertae (possibly referring to the skin or membranes), or when they are violent and similar to those described in medieval medical texts, and the usual remedies of medicine do not help, then we resort to the extraction of tendons in the temples, or cauterization of those areas as we have shown.
The method of the operation and extraction of those tendons is to address the pain that originates in the temples; understand the visible tendon in the temple, as it is shown by its pulsation, and it is hidden from most people due to its severity.
And if it is hidden, then tighten the collar of the pain with a cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the tendon appears visibly. And then you take the sponge, which has this form: Then, with the appropriate cut, you open the lock as easily as possible; then turn it around and extract it from the superior parts until you extract the lock from the door and discover that of the tunic, which is left behind, from every part.
If the artery is thin, then you wrap it at the end of the finger and cut a single part according to the amount by which the extremities are stretched and contracted, and if they are not incised, the blood will not flow entirely.
Then, empty the vein of blood completely; within three times.
And if the artery is large, then you tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk or with cords long, and do not cut it before the plague has healed and allow the blood to flow.
And then you incise the surplus which is between two ligaments; and do this at that moment or another time.
And if you wish, cauterize that with a hot iron within the bone, cauterizing the ends of it while the incision is still fresh, and ensure that this work is done in the right place.
And it is better to work if the patient has a fever or a cold complication; for cauterization is one of the remedies that help reduce moisture, and thus it is better in youth.
And then cover the removal of the tendons that have been removed from their original place, and place them properly over it, and treat them with suitable dry medicines to make the flesh and blood flow again as it heals.
And if while you are working another bleed from the tendon occurs, immediately restrict that blood flow, either with cauterization or by filling the space with something, and tighten your hand over it until the bleeding stops. And if any cause of those symptoms is not present, hold your tongue over the area until the swelling subsides, and apply cold water with great urgency until the pain ceases, and press as needed.
And what is more commonly extracted from the arrow wound is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two edges, after you have cleansed the two sites, and then apply some fire, until it reaches the bone and cuts the vein into two parts, so that what is between the extremities of the vein is elongated, as it is not stabilized by all this cauterization.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the sharpness of both edges is an example. However, it may be better to have greater sharpness than two edges, because if they are both very sharp, they do not cut the flesh with speed.
Therefore, when there is any inflammation, heat from fire is retained in those areas, and the flesh is slightly separated.
And this work is best of all works and most delicate.
And the space between two joints is determined by the thickness of that said part.
Capital quarter.
On the treatment of acute and acidic eye pain.
When it is acidic eye pain, and there are veins in the cornea just above the perforation of the eye, and no medical cause for treatment is found, and the patient's face appears swollen and there is a feeling of ambulation as if crawling like ants, and the eyes are exhausted, moistened to the point that their eyelashes become uncomfortable, and the eyelids are irritated by the sharpness of the tears, old remedies used in the treatment of these conditions, and I will mention this cure as extraordinary.
And it is that you command the patient to shave the hair on their forehead, and then make three incisions on the forehead equally distanced according to its length. And if the length of the incision is two fingers: one incision should be equally distanced to the length of the nose in the middle part of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little more than the movement of the eyelids, which are on the lacrimal, and the third from the other side.
And be careful with the incision of the arteries, which are in two cuts, and extend your hand along the continuation of both mandibles. And if the space of each incision is three fingers wide, adjust it accordingly.
And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloth to apply, it absorbs the blood.
And then insert the knife with its two sharp points, which is the form of the incision. What is removed from the temples during the second incision. Excise all the cord that is between the two incisions on the ribcage, and then make this cut from the first incision to the second. And then strike with this knife in the first incision, another time with another tool called a scissor, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And hold the sharp edge against the flesh attached to the rib, and along the bone, and use it to reach the middle of the fracture, and cut away all the vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
It may be continued the incision to this appear of the colon, and then make it in the middle fissure between the other fissures.
And as the flow of blood decreases, press the places of the frozen parts of the sanction.
Then place in each fissure something cold like wool, and press upon those powders coated with wine and oil, and it should not develop gangrene cautiously.
On the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of cold water or tea, and then care for it with a mixture of basilic oil or rose oil and others until the wounds are healed.
It appears that the text provided is incomplete or missing several lines. The phrase "Capitol .v." does not offer enough context for a meaningful translation without surrounding text. Please provide additional content or clarify the request for a more accurate response.
On the treatment of bleeding from cataracts and the descent of fluids from the head's cavities.
When acute bleeding occurs and continues, and the patient's wounds exhaust the doctor, their eyelids become ulcerated along with the hair in their sockets, and intense pain is felt in the head's cavities, then it becomes known from this accident that the matter and cataracts do not come from outside but rather from veins originating inside.
And the best treatment for these is this: order the patient to tilt their head, and then make an incision at the middle of the forehead, a small one (and begin with the incision of the left temple towards the right temple; and cut through the bone; and pull out your hand from under the cheek's cuts, which are better done after chewing). Make sure the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with sponge or cloth, and then repack between the two lips of the cut with new, clean gauze or cloth. And then sprinkle on them a dust mixed with wine and oil, so that it does not catch fire dangerously.
And when you loosen it and see that the abscess has already decreased, then know that you must rub the bone inside that begins in the new flesh, and then apply a dry cure that causes the flesh to shrink, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, creating a paste that is applied to these wounds for the benefit of the native flesh.
**Chapter VI** (assuming this is the heading as per the context)
**On the treatment of what cats in the ears.**
Any cause that cats in the ears is one of four species, whether it is a mineral or causes similar to stone, such as iron and copper, or from plants like peas or beans, or fluid-related such as water and wine mixed with them or any animal.
And when catarrh appears in the ear or any other cause similar to those that do not adhere or swell in the ear, and you rest the ear towards the sun, and if the catarrh is drained, it distills into some cause of violable oil or black bile, then promptly administer its extraction, and make the nose blow with a condition, and support the nose to prevent the occurrence of sneezing. And then apply some pieces of cloth or wool to the ear canal, and extend the ear away from the body parts, for the moisture thus absorbed is helpful against these causes.
If it is not discharged, then administer its extraction with the instrument called a delicate epicyclic gesture of which this is the form:
And if it is discharged with the gesture, well done; otherwise, administer the extraction of it with a very delicate instrument with a slight doubling.
And therefore, if this is not forgotten, make a tube of aram and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal, and close around the tube with wax and soft oil so that only the tube opens. And then extract the tiest wind with strong attraction, as we have seen with this condition.
If it is not forgotten in this manner, take a piece of hot embers or some kind of hot equipment with which the outer part of the limb is gently rubbed, and place that on the tip of the ray, and then wrap it decently around that part. And then insert that into the ear canal with ease, and carefully dry the ear from humidity.
And therefore, if all the causes we have seen are not forgotten, then hold fast to that which prevents the development of gangrene or spasm.
And the method of cutting is that at the beginning you make incisions on the affected vein and extract the blood according to its virtue, then do so between your fingers and turn the edge towards the cuts, and make a small gap in the base of the edge where the thickest part of the vein lies. And if the fissure is of lunar shape and reaches the skin, and the skin is affected, stop it if you can with appropriate instruments; then quickly make the cut at that time and treat it until it heals.
And if the cause of the pain in the auricle is one of the inflamed fats that are swollen, then administer treatment and extraction of the pus; but if you do not obey your vision, then take a fine needle according to this form: and administer the removal of that fat which has fallen into the auricle.
And do not attempt this when you think the part is already moistened by the heat of the aura, place it on heavy weights, and carefully extract it from those places with incisions or subtle gestures, or through incision as we have said, for it eases the extraction.
If water has entered the ear, which is the cause of the disease at the beginning, and fills his ear to any extent with young wool, then he should throw that ear in water in which a small amount of fire is added, and if by doing so the water is expelled, it is good; otherwise, take some very hot stones and lions according to their length, and heat them slightly in the fire, and the patient should insert one of those stones into the opening of his ear and jump on it with one foot, striking another stone against the stone that is next to the ear. So do not stop until all the water is expelled.
So do not stop until all the water is expelled. And already water has been drawn out as you take paper or cloth, and place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end over the fire until most of it is burned away.
Then take another cloth and do this several times until all the water is drawn out, and tear that away from the pipe as it is said of the stone-extracting instrument.
In the extraction of a beast entering that ear, if it is small, it should be handled gently and treated as we have said in the previous section; however, if it is a large object causing an apparent blockage, then administer the extraction with gestures and scissors, and the cause of it is a foreign body, much lighter than all other causes that affect the ear.
However, in the extraction of worms born in the ear, when you treat it with water as we have said in the previous section and distillation techniques, do not apply your treatment, then guard the ear towards the sunlight.
And therefore if any cause of the worms appears here, then extract them with your fingers or some subtle instrument, but if no cause appears, take a tube from narrow to wide whose shape is like this: And then insert the very subtle extreme into the ear according to the amount of suffering caused by the illness; and with a strong suction, suck it out, making movements until all the worms are expelled.
If you do not follow this direction, then close and seal the tube at its circumference with wax as we have said; administer the distills that have already been prepared in the treatment of worms, and you will find it described in the treatise on distills.
And let your effusion be with which you pour medicinal oils into the ear, using this instrument whose shape is like this: And make a small, narrow incision, leaving an opening, and place a bandage or cloth tightly over it.
And thus, it is with these procedures that one addresses the concavity of the hernia sac here, which will be necessary. And if you wish, take the needle and wrap it around the base of the auricle neatly, and then pour oil into the depression, or some herbal juice, or whatever medicine from these remedies you prefer in the lumen — that is in the ear —, and then insert the needle at a slight angle above it and press with your hand to expel the oil into the concavity of the ear and ease the patient's discomfort.
And what is inserted into the ear should already be softened with a small amount of heat. And be careful that the cause you are treating in the ear is not too inflamed, as ear medications do not tolerate excessive inflammation.
Chapter .VII.
On the treatment of ear infections.
Sometimes, children's bellies can become infected without any visible perforation, and this also happens in some adults, either due to an infection or inflammation of the ear tissue, or because of excess skin or tissue around the ear. This infection can sometimes occur inside the ear canal, which is not always noticeable, or it can be external.
And those that occur inside the ear canal, which are not always noticeable, are often the most difficult to heal.
And if you can see the infection, hold the infected ear towards the light and examine it. And therefore, if there appears an excess [of fluid], open that thin spatula from which this takes its form:
If the extremity of the fluid where the opening is narrow, one part being sharp and the other not; and the spatula has two thin edges so as not to harm the ear.
And therefore, if the obstruction is due to flesh grown in the ear or in the meat of the fluid, then take those thin scissors and cut with a sharp ease until all the flesh is removed.
And if the obstruction is in the root of the ear, take a thin, sharp razor and heat that with a little fire, then gently insert it into the flesh of the ear.
And therefore, if you have sensed an obstruction as something that the patient finds easy to pass, due to urgency, apply pressure to ease the obstruction; and be careful not to hurt the nerves of the ear.
And then place a bandage on the wound, according to its size, which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are certain of the healing of the ulcer, or immerse it in water and sprinkle over it, following the third method, and use it; if the ulcer has already formed a crust, be careful not to spoil the water and change it for another water which you wrap in cloth that is either oiled or smooth, until the inflamed part yields; then take care of it until it heals.
If there is a discharge of blood, immerse a clean cloth or drape in cold water, place it on the wound, and use other treatments that stop the flow of blood, as mentioned in the distillation treatment.
**Chapter VIII**
On the treatment of inflammation affecting the eyelids.
Moisture which accumulates on the eyelids of the eyes, sometimes is wet, other times dry.
So you should have those sharp instruments or scissors, and cut away the hardened matter from their roots, and then place your finger over the incised areas.
If severe pain flows with hot blood, then you should cauterize those parts with a fine, sharp cautery.
And the best cauterization is to make incisions and thoroughly clean them, and when there is no cause for their roots, return them; and when cauterized with fire, those roots are consumed and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for a severe condition that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas seen on the eyelids of the eyes, caused by some condition, are characterized by great strength and hardness, and hence are called cataract.
And there is addition of thick humidity on the eyelid below and above.
So the operation on them considers, when the great size is proceeding from within the part that appears from the eyelid and is destroyed entirely; and the cause of it is slight.
Therefore cut along that gap with a knife, and carefully remove it from within entirely while it is still pliable, and then suspend it from above, and separate it.
And if the wound is large, you will adjust it with a suture; and treat it until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not suffer much because the pain of the wound is restored and healed.
And if the swelling is decreasing within the eyelid, you must dig into the surface, raise the eyelid, and suspend the swelling with a bandage, other than what you initially intended, and press it from all sides; and if the eyelid itself is enlarged for some reason, this should not be noticed in any case.
Then make the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and treat it with medicine until it is healed.
Chapter X.
Regarding the treatment of the eyelid above the eye.
Axcirnath is an inflammation caused by the growth of granules in the eyelids above, and it most often affects children, worsening their vision and leading to severe discomfort; and they cannot see the clarity of the sun due to this, as tears accumulate at these places.
And so you must apply these to their faces constantly, and while they sleep; and as a result, the eyebrows over their eyelids become moist, covering the swelling that is about to occur; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the acute pain within them.
And there is a certain method of operation in which the hernia pauses the patient's head on the thigh, and then drapes cloth over it and applies cold; and makes it circular according to the quantity of gas contained from every part, and then places that over the hernial orifice and presses with the fingers throughout so as to add pressure to the middle of the circle, and stops in the middle of that humidification by striking the opening with a spatula according to its size, so that the opening is not larger than the one made in flebotomy.
Place in the pre-incision cover that you cut through the entire cord until you reach the artery, for in the most appropriate positions of disposition, the artery is closed by fissure according to the shape of the white grease.
Therefore, remove those cloth strips that you have wrapped between the parts outside and turn them with your right and left hand until they are completely separated.
And be careful not to adjust the fissure, so that the spatula does not reach the wound and tear it.
If it does not appear to your spatula at the beginning of the fissure, then adjust the fissure slightly with ease until the spatula proceeds; and then remove those cloth strips that we have mentioned; and subsequently immerse them in water and vinegar and place them over the area and sprinkle those as powders.
And so some who bleed stop it by placing something in the cavity of the fissure to prevent what comes from that moisture.
And then take care of that which needs to be healed.
If an accident occurs in the infected area while using cautery, then treat it with bandages until it heals.
Chapter XI.
Regarding the tactile examination of the wound.
When in the eyelids of the eye, natural growths appear and become antique, these our enemies at the eye cause constant inconvenience in various ways, such as tearing and softening of the eyelids and tissues, until it becomes a cause of the destruction of the eye known as 'tactile injury to the eye', and its cure is done in four ways: either with cautery using fire; or with acute medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery; or by incision and suture; or through canning, as will be explained.
And so take care to place the patient's head in a comfortable position; then turn the upper eyelid with your left hand, and if it turns, that is good; otherwise, insert a needle into the area where the lid meets the eye, and let the needle pass through the thread from beneath the eyelid, close to the edge where the hairs are, and draw the thread away from its attachment to the eyelid, and turn it towards the inner part of the eye.
Then, within the gap between the eyelid and its edge, with a precise movement, cut the hairs using a scalpel or a similar instrument; remove the thread and place it to one side, under the eyelid, using small cotton swabs or cloth; then press firmly on the eyelid with your thumb, creating a slight indentation, as if shaping a pearl.
However, it is important to note that the shape should be adapted to the amount of swelling in the eyelid; this varies among individuals, as those with more significant swelling require a deeper indentation.
And then open the spatula along both lines that you have noted, starting from the lacrimal duct major into the lacrimal duct minor. And if your fracture is near the natural hairline, it should also be as thick as a king's crown.
And then place the owl in one of the two angles of the wound, scrape it entirely, and adjust the sutures on both lips with glue or thin wool, clean the discharge, and make any excess from the poultice stick to the two eyebrows for certain reasons entwined, if you wish to do so, otherwise, do not treat it.
And then change the dressing of the poultice every three or four days, and take care of it.
And if you wish, leave the scarification of the sutures, and treat it with what dries and constricts, since the eyelid is lifted due to the sealing of the wound and the addition of pus; tighter sutures are better. Therefore, I tell you about the ancient remedies.
Nevertheless, be diligent in caring for the patient, as it is a good operation and there is nothing to fear.
And there is another method in examining: one sees on the eyelid a figure like a plum, and then lifts the eyelid at three points, separating and bringing it together according to this form:
But if this is not possible, having the points, and it does not hurt, then take a needle with thread and insert that in the middle of the figure, and then insert the other two threads near the lacrimal glands, the first one closer to the larger lacrimal gland, and the second one closer to the smaller one, and adjust between these two threads so they are equal, and then with your hand at an equal elevation, elevate all the eyelid as we have recounted.
And then adjust the two edges of the eyelid with stitches, and heal that space once it is cured.
If an abscess occurs after your incision or wound, cover it with cerum and similar materials, and treat it with fire.
And in some cases, it occurs on the eyelid where its hairs are turning, so use what we have mentioned about the incision; however, stitching is more artificial in some.
Inserting needles is done in this manner: and it is that you turn the eyelid and divide the figure within as I have mentioned; then, with an artful hand, insert two needles or two fine threads of which the length corresponds to the length of the eyelid and their width is adjusted to the width of the space. And you have already made incisions at the ends of each fragment, where you hold the threads.
Nearby, add any subtleties under what is superfluous from the eyelid of the eye, and constrict the canals of any broken parts with firm tightness, and leave it for a few days, because the inflammation due to tightness will die and be rejected, and it will fall off once it has absorbed itself.
If it is delayed, then break open the abscesses, and treat the infection until it heals.
Therefore, when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hair does not hurt.
And this is the way to make two canals according to this form: and it should have the quantity of length and breadth neither more nor less.
Capital XII.
On the elevation of sharp hair pains in the humid area with an agule when the hair is dense.
When there are unnatural, hard, and sharp hairs in the humid area that cause pain, the operation on them involves taking a fine needle and pricking that delicate skin in a very specific and careful manner, adjusting the extremities of the hair and not damaging anything else in a very subtle way. And the length of the needle should be the amount of one palm.
And then, very carefully, insert another fine needle into it shortly after, adjusting the ends of that one if you so wish.
And then place the patient's head in a comfortable position, near the sun so that your work may be clearly seen, for it is a delicate and fine operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the hair, adjusting it as needed, and make it penetrate the eyelid carefully until you extract it from its natural hair.
Then pull the hair from its root and insert that into the oil, taking care that the hairs are one or two or three and no more.
Then gently pull your hand away, removing the hair from the oil and from its natural place in the eyelid.
If the oil is not completely removed from the hair and it remains stuck, reapply the oil to the parts where it has been left, until it comes out easily from the wound.
And then examine the wound for its appearance, since you will remove the oil and the dirt, and gently press the wound, leaving the bandage on for two or three days, until the hair attaches to its place and healing begins.
And if the skin is more broken, you adjust a longer piece of natural hair, making it elevated to that which you see should be elongated closer to some space, and then you elevate that.
**Chapter XIII**
On the treatment of a condition that occurs on the eyelid above.
When you see the formation of a crater on the eyelid, caused by its contraction when it is drawn to the right or left side, due to poor healing from an infection, incision, or cauterization, and this condition is called leporina (a term possibly related to a hare's ear due to its shape), this crusting or ehacratir can be either natural or accidental, resulting from the healing of an infection, incision, or cautery, or similar conditions.
The manner of the operation on it is that you break up that crust and separate the edges of the eyelid, placing a piece of lint or cloth between them, and bind them together until they heal.
And be aware that you must not treat it from the causes that dry out, constrict; for if you do so, only more pus will form and in no time at all.
Use one of those causes that soften it, also soaking in water in which fenugreek seeds have been boiled and mixed with honey, which is liquid and warm, and immerse the affected area in that, and treat it.
And the treasure of your healing is that you pierce through every part that is not solidified according to the form in which you first saw it.
And this operation that we have spoken of is nothing but a rectification of the pus that does not return to the form of the place as it was before.
Chapter XIV.
On the care of the eye socket that is done on the eyelid.
This care, which is performed on the eyelid and is commonly called an "almucantare" (or rather, not an almucantare), is of natural origin or accidental.
An accidental almucantare may be caused by a plague, or a cut, or a cautery, or other similar things.
And the method of operation is that you take a needle with double thread and insert it into the flesh, passing from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, so that the thread goes through both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh apart from its attachments with the needle and cut with a wide spatula. And so return the eyelid to its natural position if it is healthy; otherwise, take a thread and tie it around the cut in the shape of a figure-eight, and turn the eyelid over that, and make two slits on the edge of the eyelid.
And let the ends of both slits be at two angles of the incision you made, where they meet, and so form an angle within which, when they converge, their figures are complete.
This figure is the Greek letter lambda.
Then press the flesh with your finger, as much as the width of the eyelid allows, to close it.
And then adjust the separated parts and bind them with a thread; also, take care of those areas with the medicines we have mentioned, both mollifying and purgative, until they are healed.
And if you need to increase the opening by incision or suture or cautery, be careful to make a flat incision over the skin of the eyelid as previously mentioned. Then separate the calculus between two eyelids as we have mentioned.
In the entire discourse of treatment for increasing or opening, when it is necessary to let it flow during the operation, according to how it is prepared in the form of an incision, it varies in many ways.
And the skilled artisan always prepares various devices, possible within him, to make the figure return to its natural form or close to it, and treats that malady according to what suits him in the operation and with the instruments in the best dispositions.
Chapter .XV.
From the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this adhesion occurs in many people, it seems to solidify the eyelid, preventing its normal movement and natural functions, so it is necessary to insert an instrument between the lid and the eyeball, and raise or extend it away from the eye.
And then you cut through the adhesion with a thin spatula, which is not sharp enough to cause further injury, slightly blunting it so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and remove the spatula without damaging the eye's sensitivity.
And your incision should cut through that adhesion easily, so that the eyelid can return to its natural position and all traces of the adhesion are healed.
And then put salt water on the eye, which you wash with; or distill steam into it from a sun-heated solution in water.
And then separate the eyelid from the eye with cold water, place a woolen cloth soaked in egg album on the eye, and on the third day use consolidative remedies until it heals.
Chapter XVI
On the knowledge of the understanding and prominence of the flesh of the eyelids.
Know that the eyelid is according to two manners: either it is nervous, similar to a delicate hard chip, or it is non-nervous, resembling white frozen humidity, which when pricked, is easily separated and the point does not stick to it.
And both of these species do not begin until the larger eyelid, as it gradually covers the sight and prohibits light and the movement of the eye.
The method of operating in the incision of the hernia is that the patient holds their breath, then opens the hernia's orifices, raises the eyelid with your hand, and then grasps the edge of the hernia with your finger after making a slight fold and extending it outward. Then take a needle and insert it into the edge of the hernia using a horsehair, or similar material, or a strong thread, duplicating the end of the needle little by little and placing it in the middle of the finger's nail; then penetrate with the needle and tie the thread to the nail; extend it towards the sides and excise the hair from the edge of the nail that is blocking the pupil. And so you also remove the hair inside the hernia's opening.
Then you make an incision in the membrane across from the tear duct using a thin spatula or small scissors, and expose the flesh of the natural tear duct to ensure that, with the incision, there will be no continuous flow of tears.
And some times the ungual (finger or toe nail) is attached to the skin so extended or adherent, as we have said, and then it should be carefully extracted with a leech-like instrument of which this is the form.
And be careful not to touch the corneal tunic on the instrument, lest it rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
After the incision is made in the wound, apply a little salt or finely cut silk, and leave it for another day; and then take care that it heals properly.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it deeply embedded in that spot, then look for other remedies to cure this kind of nail; it is healed thus, as well as recomposed in its division.
And if you want to incise that, then open the wound of the patient and take a fine, sharp instrument according to this form: With caution. And if it happens that it is hardened and bent and stuck in that position, then it will exude from your body in the form of a clear liquid or a foul-smelling pus or salt water, and you should apply the liquid to the affected area within the next day.
Then repeat the operation until all of it that is infected is removed, otherwise, apply a hot cautery to the wound, for if you leave it, the infection will spread and you must treat the beginning of the infection until it is healed.
And then repeat your operation on that wound until it is healed.
The urgency of the lacrimal tissue, if noticed in the wound causing great discomfort, should be suspended immediately; cut it away from that area, but do not close the incision so as to prevent the flow of tears.
And then apply the distilled liquid from the main tear duct to clean and heal it.
**Chapter XVII**
On the incision of scrofula and things that arise from adjusted flesh in the neck.
Sometimes in the eyes of certain people, there is born diseased flesh, which is so swollen that it covers the pupil, or pressed close to or drawn back over the eyelids, and strongly pulls them from their sockets, like a bulge in a wall.
But the operation on them is that the disease holds its head in the eye; and then open the eye of that person and collect all the flesh with scissors as is convenient for it, and to this attach either forceps or a basket; and then cut the flesh from the beginning until everything is finished with the knife, and be careful not to damage the eye, which you must do if you want your operation to succeed.
And make your incision, with which you incise those or remove the splinters that we have extracted in the incision of the finger, or small forceps with which you carefully extract them according to the shape they take as we will discuss in this chapter.
Therefore, when your incision is complete and all that flesh is removed, fill the wound with fine salt or sprinkle it with powder made from herbs similar to corrosive medicines, and place a clean cloth over the wound until you are certain of no further infection.
If any cause of infection is perceived in the wound and seems to be a serious threat, and you fear further infection, leave the wound open and treat that infection with whatever means necessary, and then repeat the operation until it heals, making sure to take care of the surrounding flesh that may have been affected by this particular wound.
However, you should always ensure that all danger of infection in the open wound is removed, either by natural means or accidentally, using instruments, and do not put your hand to any of these operations until you see that the member has endured that operation.
Chapter .xviii.
Collection of sabres in the warehouse.
Sabres come in various shapes, some with hardened edges over the warehouse (huel), and prevent access to their operation. The warehouse remains open for days.
Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning to consider if the warehouse where the sabre resides is strong and free from other ailments but only contains sabres, then you should collect that sabre.
And it is that you command the patient to rest their head on a small pillow, and then suspend those veins with a pin or two, according to your discretion; and let that pin have a subtle, double prong in this manner:
or two pins gradually in the body according to this form:
And then gently squeeze those veins with subtle force, at the right moment, until you see the veins refill with blood and become pulsing.
And be careful not to let the blood reach the ends of the incision; and if your operation is in the morning, facing the sun, be very firm in your operation, cutting only those veins.
And when you have finished, pour the warm or cold distillate onto the wound to corrode any remaining debris from the saw.
If you are unable to collect all of it at that time, then apply a poultice to it, which will alleviate the pain, and leave it for several days until the pain is eased and there is no risk of infection.
And repeat the process according to the patient's condition until it is healed.
And this is the shape of the forceps:
Chapter XIX
On the reduction of elevated nasal bones.
When you treat elevated bones with cautery or sharp medicine, as is preceded by the narrative of their condition and it is not cured, then no skill is involved in them; instead, you make incisions over the swelling, waiting for its maturity, and extract all the moisture that is within it, until the bone is exposed.
And so when the bone is exposed and there is corruption or blackening in it, then you clean it with an instrument whose form is as follows:
And it is called an instrument with a sharp point, and it is made to cut, and the head is rounded so that it can be punctured by lime or alkali through a fine puncture (as shown in the following form).
And place that over the corrupt part of the bone, then gently turn it between your fingers, and press your small hand little by little until you know that corruption is gone.
This is done at times, and then the place is restored using drying and astringent agents.
So if the place is consolidated and there is good flesh in it, and the body is separated from the sound and healthy for 40 days, and it is not renewed or inflamed and no further harm occurs to it, then you know that it is healed.
If that is not the case, then it is only to reduce the fissure to its natural form, and according to this manner: and this is that you uncover according to the bone with a sharp instrument or medicine, and once the bone is exposed, you take hold in this shape:
Let the end of the instrument be triangular in shape, and first extend the rod of the instrument within the extremity thusly as you repeat this.
Then place your hand over it, specifically the area near the lacrimal bone; extend your hand a little and turn your hand so that it penetrates all through the bone, and you will feel the pain as you apply pressure, which makes the patient wince.
Therefore, you will now restore the area using astringent medicines that have been prepared.
Therefore, when the flesh is no longer inflamed, the material that had escaped into the outside parts returns to the cavity, hence this is considered a lighter stage of the illness.
Chapter XX.
For the reduction of the bulge of the hernia.
When the hernia protrudes completely and does not occur in a painful or unpleasant manner, it is necessary to relax the patient, and then continue with the following steps: make incisions in the neck for drainage and apply suction for better extraction; then apply a liniment made of aloe, fennel, and other herbs over the hernia, and finally, strengthen the bandage over the area using powdery materials.
And the manner of the powdery materials is that you take linen cloth with a coarse texture, cut each piece into four parts, and make them into powder.
And then place them one on top of the other according to the quantity of hernia that the patient has. And tighten them with a strong, hard cloth; repeat the suction with the blowers for better extraction; then remove the blowers and leave the hernia compressed during the day and night.
If, meanwhile, the ligament becomes softened, then it must be made very tight.
And, at the appropriate times during the day and night as we have said.
And if the hernia has already been reduced, which is good, or otherwise, repeat the application of poultices, compression, and suction until it heals.
Chapter .XXI.
On the incision of the prominence of the choroid tunic.
When a disruption occurs in the choroid tunic, and it is prominent and you proceed to remove the eyelids with some pressure, shaping them as you do for this purpose, and wish to make an incision, the operation on it is done as we have recommended, that you insert the needle at the root of the uvea starting from below its attachment, and then place another needle through which there is a double thread from the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; and then incise the site where the double thread is located and lift that portion of the uvea around the needle, and tighten it.
And then extract the needle and place it over the humid wool soaked in honey and leave until the thread falls from the wool.
And then apply the humid wool to it, which will comfort it until the plague is healed.
And in some cases, from all parts, around the entire circumference of the wound, a great eminence is formed, and then it is pierced with a thin spatula that reaches the depth of the wound, allowing the white humid fluid to flow out, and the wound is dressed and left for some time.
And then tighten it until it is healed.
Chapter .xxii.
On the treatment of eyes.
This illness called alconati is not, as it seems, a healthy condition that descends like water; it is not that.
The manner of working with this condition is to seize it firmly on the affected side and right, then take hold of its head in both of your hands from either side, and stop that which you see approaching from within, and prevent it from descending; thus, light will remain, and the illness will thus perceive its causes.
And if it does not descend below, you will know that it is water.
If, however, the descent of the illness is not prepared with what we have said, then seize it between your hands and take a fine, sharp tool to that place over the panniculus, just behind the conjunctiva (in the area desired), until it expels the water.
Therefore, when it is removed, you distill the warm water mixed with honey or water in which fennel and honey have already been boiled.
And then it is cured as well as the other causes, as long as it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of water coming from the knee.
We have already discussed the types of water in division and what is suitable to drill into the wound, depending on its condition.
Now you must remove the patient's clothes between your hands on a couch and tie their limbs tightly.
And then place your hand near the patient's eye, if the water-bearing humor is on the left side, use your left hand; or if it is on the right side, use your right hand.
And then take your right hand if the swelling is on the left side; or take your left hand if the swelling is on the right side.
And then hold the end of the swelling close to the edge of the eyelid for the thickness of the membrane in the region of the lacrimal gland, and gently press the swelling with your hand as you turn it.
And then penetrate the membrane of the eyelid, and feel that the swelling has already been pushed forward due to pressure.
And it should be noted that the measurement of the path of the swelling to the point where it touches the edge of the black circle (the pupil) within the boundary of the white part of the eye (the cornea), is the same as the width of the pupil itself; for you will see the pupil through the clarity of the transparent cornea.
And then place the magic within the area where the water is, and throw it down once, then another, and so the water descends, and you will see the malady over which his sight falls first, and mix it with its own.
And then rest for a moment; so if the water has descended, you will rest again before casting the magic.
And so when it has evaporated and does not descend, then extract the magic with ease, turn your hand a little by little, and dissolve a small piece of clear salt gem in the water inside and wash that part deeply; and then remove the swollen or stopped or woolen bandage soaked in rose oil and white of egg and apply it to the afflicted part.
But as for us and those of our time, we do not rely on such things as the white of egg.
And if you do not obey your alchemy in the insertion of the hul (hernia) due to its hardness - it is one of the men whose hulk is hard -, then know that you must take the sponge which is called 'alberid' in shape of which this is:
And therefore pierce that particular joint, and do not stop your hand in the track, and make sure you create a subtle opening for the alchemy.
Then insert the alchemy as we have said.
And you must complete your work, prepared for the patient's comfortable sleep in a dark room where they sleep on their back at home, and all movements are prohibited.
And hold it in such a way that its nature is calm, and do not force your head to the right or left from its natural position.
And arrange the ligament according to its position within three days.
Then, in that dark manner, he expels the evil sight and perceives some causes, and returns the ligament within seven days.
And do not cover this during the hour of treatment or, perhaps, apply an infusion afterwards. You should know that this is done because the water can suddenly and violently break through due to great pressure.
If an abscess forms after cauterization, know that you should open the wound and drain it on the seventh day, and correct any deviated blood flow.
Then you should examine the patient's condition and focus on the face where the problem originated, leaving it untreated for several days, existing in that dark state.
And then gradually lower yourself into that position while discussing its causes.
And you know that in alchemy, the student is not excused from seeing certain things, and now you should be daring with regard to the operation.
And we have already discovered some of those who are in the art, and one said to make a fire in the air with a certain instrument through which water is drawn out.
However, you should not think that what I am about to describe has ever been seen in our land, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books; and it may be a novelty.
And these are the forms of the spices of magic that are above those who ignore them:
And they are made of iron or bronze properly, and their ends have this triangular subtlety, the acute end also has that shape.
**Chapter XXIV**
On the cure of flesh wounds in the nose.
When in the nose are diverse carnal growths adjusted together, of which some cause is akin to a cluster of foot-roots or a nasal polyp; this malady is called polypus because it resembles that very nose (or "peas" - likely a typographical error for "nose"). And of it is cancerous flesh, blue-grey in color; and of it is the flesh of a lion, not of a grey hue.
Therefore, in that which is in these lion flesh, not fraudulent nor cancerous, you must sever the malady between your fingers and place it in the sun, and dry the nose of it, and pierce the small point onto those meats. And then carefully extract it from outside the orifice, and then divide what you have understood from those by a delicate spatula from one partition to another, knowing that all the flesh is held; if any cause is found of which the dissection is possible, then quickly do this with one of the delicate instruments at hand as long as there is no other cause involved. But if it is an infected or acute abscess, then apply it to what it covers; but if it is a malignant abscess, then cut and cauterize it until the abscess is drained and all cavities are healed.
Then carefully get into the nose with the incision tool, applying either water or oil. If the nose is open and you find humidity process within the palate, then know that it has healed.
If the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside him there is flesh, nothing but bones of the nose to which no amputation has been performed.
Therefore, you will understand that you insert the instrument into him where there is any abnormality, and it moves in him with smooth motions, and you stop between each joint the amount of the said instrument or less, and then place the illness and insert one end of the instrument into his nose either by force or for other reasons possible.
And once this is done, it releases its odor within so that it reaches the nasal canals, and it should be held over their throat, for many times these actions have been observed in schools, and it is a slight cause for those who want to do so.
Then hold both ends of the instrument, one end emerging from the nose and the other penetrating into the nose, and apply pressure to the flesh around the instrument, and do this until you know that the flesh is seated on the edges of the instrument.
And then extract the gallbladder, place it in a container with a mixture of salt and vinegar, and do this for three days or more until the glue corrupts everything that is soft in the flesh.
And finally, after the condition has resolved, insert a lead tube into the nose for several days until it heals.
If these remedies come to an end, use them.
And this is the form of the cleansing instrument that distills oils and medicines from the nose:
And make it of silver or bronze, which is similar to a small, open lamp with a small cavity, and insert something resembling it.
And if you wish, make a closed tube with a cane, and the tube of the cleansing instrument opener should be flat, uncovered; it should have a handle at the end, which you hold when you suck oil or water from the substances or causes that need to be drawn out.
It appears that your message includes a reference to a chapter or section, "Capitol .xxv.", but the text itself is missing. For context, "Capitol" likely refers to a chapter in a book or a section of a document. To assist you effectively, I would need the actual content of the "Capitol .xxv." for translation or analysis.
From the roots arise in the extremities of the nose.
Motas (small masses) are seen as roots in the extremities of the nose, and they swell and increase in size over some days until the attention of them is required.
And for this reason, you should incise it at the beginning of its appearance, and eradicate all of it. Then apply over the area a cautery or medicine that burns, which is in place of it.
If its incision is delayed and it has swelled up, consider if it is soft, hard, of a dark color, and lacks feeling; then do not touch it with a hot iron, for roots seen at this place indicate great evil to the one on whom they are located.
And if the abscess is of a bright red color and not dark, sometimes it is possible to incise it entirely, evacuate the infection, and cut through the surrounding area until it heals.
**Chapter XXVI**
On the suture of the nose, lips, and earlobe when continuity is broken due to disease or something similar.
Know that when continuity is broken in one of these cartilages, little benefit is derived from the operation except in certain cases.
Therefore, when you encounter any of these conditions for whatever reason, and it appears as fresh infection with discharge, consider it a plague, adjust the two edges of the infected area with suture, and take care of it until it heals.
And if the openings of the solution for continuity are already separated and each one is made healthy, then you must extract each part from its connection until it does not bleed. Then adjust the two openings of the wound to stitching and strengthening them; sprinkle dried dragon's blood on them, then place a piece of clean, fine cloth or some other consolidative plaster over it, leaving it for two or three days. Remove that plaster, replace it with another, and keep doing so until the wound is healed.
The method of the suture is that you add the solution for continuity either with needles as we have recommended in the suture of the abdomen, or add the solution to the continuity with thread in such a way that it becomes known.
Chapter XXVII.
To extract those causes that come in both cheeks inside.
These swellings are often found in many people inside their cheeks; some are hard like dense fat from erysipelas, and others are larger or smaller.
Therefore, he will open the cheeks and remove each of those hard swellings from every part, and then fill the area with a clean thread while ensuring the wound is restrained. Then, he will wash it with wine and treat the place with water that has been distilled, until it heals.
Chapter 28.
On the removal of the flesh attached to the gums.
Remove the swellings that are found above the attached gum tissue, which the ancients called albulus. Therefore, he should suspend it using hooks or hold it with forceps and cut it along its root, allowing the healthy blood to flow and the wound to heal.
And then apply a poultice or other stimulatory or purgative powders to the affected area.
And if that flesh returns, you should cut it secondarily and cauterize it, for the cautery will not return.
**Chapter XXIX**
Of the reason for toothache.
When on the surface of the teeth within and between the gums there are rough, hard, and some blackened cuts, which turn red or green due to corruption affecting the gum, and the adjacent teeth are also affected.
And so you should clean the patient between their thighs, hold their head in a certain position, and extract the teeth in which these cuts and similar debris are present, as long as no other cause prevents it, and do this to remove the blackness and redness and other conditions until they are purified.
Therefore, if this is something that occurs at the beginning of reasoning, it is good; otherwise, you will repeat the reasoning about those things on the other days and the second and third until it comes to the final statement in what you want.
And you know that teeth have required various forms and shapes of cutting according to how they are prepared for your operation. And for this reason, the scissors with which the tooth is extracted from its place are different from the scissors used to shave between the teeth according to other forms, and these shapes of scissors must be prepared that you will see soon.
Chapter .XXX.
Eradication of teeth.
You must understand that you cure the tooth of its pain with all diligence and spend time in its complete eradication, for there is no substitute cause that alleviates its appearance once it is eradicated, as it is a sublime substance in the process of its eradication.
If the disease forces you to extract a tooth, it is essential that you are certain which tooth causes the pain, as false indications may lead you to believe that the pain comes from another part of the body or a healthy tooth; therefore, you should extract that one and, once eradicated, the pain will not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is also extracted, as we have seen this in barbers' operations.
Therefore, when you must be certain which tooth is painful and understand that it knows best, you should sacrifice the circulation of the tooth using a spoon or any other instrument with some force, until it is completely detached from the gingiva, and then, slowly but surely, cut it away using your hands or fine scissors until it falls out.
And then apply strong, large tools for good speech or sharp objects, hold the patient's head between your hands so that it does not hurt, and treat the tooth according to its straightness in a way that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
And therefore, if this is not forgotten, take one of those instruments and insert it into the affected area with ease and effort, so that the removal happens as it did at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or rotten, then you must wrap that part of the cloth around it tightly with a thin, sharp thread so that it does not come loose during your strain when holding it.
And be sure to perform the scarification precisely in all parts of the gumline, and take care not to break or tear it, and then return to the patient for further treatment if the pain is greater than the first.
And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their haste and audacity when dealing with it, because they do not administer what we have recommended; for the excrescences that appear on men's bodies are great and difficult to remove, and their roots completely uprooted, or sometimes only partially, or extracted from some bones of the jaw, as we have witnessed with repeated occurrences.
And then the eradication should be washed with vinegar or salt water.
And if there is a flow of pus, as with repeated occurrences, then some quantity of egg should be applied and washed over the plague, and if that egg does not confer benefit, cauterize.
The shape of the forceps should be subtle, suitable for extracting a tooth at its beginning, with a short handle and thick, so that they do not bend when used in such cases.
And so there are certain large instruments that, when you first use them, as long as they are not bent, their ends should be carefully extracted.
These are instruments made of Indian steel with straight ends; at the ends of these there are teeth that interlock with one another and emerge from a tight constriction, and sometimes the ends of those instruments have the form of the beak of a bird called a woodpecker, which is very sharp.
**Chapter XXXI** (assuming this is the roman numeral notation for the chapter) is missing the actual text content. Without the accompanying medical treatise, I cannot provide a translation for this specific section. If you have more text from the treatise, I'd be happy to assist with translating it.
**Eradication of teeth and removal of broken bones from the jaw.**
When you need to extract a tooth that is lodged for any reason, you should place your fingers over the area and apply pressure for one or two days until the area is softened; then insert some pliers or tongs with their ends shaped like the beak of a woodpecker (ciconia) or a crowbar (guanta), which is the form of a pair of forceps.
The extremities of their bodies are treated within this way with lime or alga.
And if you do not obey these instructions with these forceps or hold them, then know that you must lie down on your side and discover all the flesh and insert the instrument which is called a small lever whose shape is like this:
And the thickness of the small end should be slightly smaller, so that it is not obstructed.
Therefore, if the incision is not correctly made, this one; and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments whose forms are as follows: the form of the first instrument is triangular with a thick end:
The form of the second instrument is triangular with a more subtle end.
And they already help with this instrument having two slopes of which this one has the appropriate form as follows: And other instruments that are used for tooth extraction; because it is done with this instrument which resembles a large claw, and its shape is:
from the triangular end, either curved or straight, which is of some thickness, and not obscured so that it is not distorted.
And you also know that the instruments for moving teeth are similar to other instruments.
The skilled and subtle artisan in this art finds, by himself, according to what the operation means and diverse ailments, for there are ailments to which the ancients did not give name or pause with their instruments due to their various forms.
If the bone of the jaw or any other bone in the mouth is broken, then apply its appropriate weight at that place with the instruments and forceps that we have mentioned for the extraction of teeth, and assist with the gesture which this figure demonstrates.
And if there is any swelling, little by little, and it is squeezed or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or burst until the bone is completely extracted, then restore the area with appropriate medicines for this purpose.
If there is a small fracture in the bone, then remove that of this fracture and its blackness, and treat it until it heals.
**Capital .XXXII.** (Note: The absence of text after "XXXII" suggests this is a heading or section marker rather than content.)
**On the treatment of prominent teeth among others.**
When teeth are prominent beyond their natural socket due to caries or especially in women, and most particularly in the sacred parts, then take care to consider: if one tooth is not properly attached to another and it is impossible to clean or pull it, root out that tooth; but if it is not joined to any other tooth, then cut it with this instrument, which resembles a pig's tusk, made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp point.
And make your incision with the instrument you use to cut that tooth, which should be done over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and ensure it is not connected to any other teeth.
And if the prominent tooth is exposed and requires filing, then file it with a file made of Indian steel in the shape of this.
And it should all be of Indian steel with a precise edge; and it should have fine, sharp points like needles, with which the tooth is filed little by little over several days with ease, so that no other teeth are damaged or infected. And then cut those at the end, and quickly sever them with some scissors.
If it is a tooth that is causing the pain and it affects the tongue, you must then cut into the space where the aching from this fracture is trapped and stuck, and press on it so that the tongue does not get hurt or the speech corrupted.
**Capital XXXIII.** (Note: This appears to be a section or chapter marker, not a direct translation.)
On the restoration of lost teeth, use gold or silver wire.
When teeth are affected by a strong blow or removal due to impact or breakage, and the pain cannot be relieved by usual remedies, consider using gold wire instead of silver for tightening, as silver becomes weak over time, whereas gold remains unchanged forever.
And the thread should be of such fineness and thickness according to the amount that can fit between the teeth; the shape of the filling is to take the thread and draw it twice its length between two healthy teeth, and then increase its curvature in two bends towards the sound tooth of the other half, or if there is one or several knots, until the fabric reaches the healthy tooth on the opposite side. And then repeat the stitching within the opening from which you began, strengthening your hand with ease and skill so that it is not damaged.
And the tension you apply to tighten the thread must be such that it does not pull out the teeth.
And then cut off the excess thread using pincers or scissors, and insert them in various places with dexterity, and twist them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so that they do not harm the tongue. And then tighten it thusly as in Rome.
If it is loose or broken, strengthen that or those with another strap in such a manner all the time.
And this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, thusly when these ligatures are made:
And when it is done so that a tooth or two return to their proper place in each location and are grown again thusly as we have recompensed, they will be renewed.
And this can only be done by skilled artists and sages.
And sometimes it is appropriate to use the bones of a cow, made thusly in the form of a tooth, and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter .xxxiv.
On the incision of the ligament which is found on the tongue, preventing speech.
This ligament which is found on the tongue, sometimes seen or inherent to it, and which humans do not naturally have, can be caused accidentally by a plague that has already set in.
And the operation on it is to open the mouth of the malady, eliminating its existence in the throat; and raise their tongue, and then incise that nerve ligament according to its width until the tongue is detached from its attachment.
If there is any hardness or resistance, and this is due to the consolidation of the plague, then you apply oil and cut it according to its width until you incise the ligament and dissolve the knot.
And be careful not to cause a wound in the flesh, and do not tear here and cause blood flow.
Then wash the clothing of the incision with warm water or vinegar or clean water; and leave the tongue loose; it is necessary that the patient keep the tongue relaxed during each night so that it does not harden again.
If there is a flow of pus, apply vinegar to the area; if the pain is acute, cauterize the area with a hot iron suitable for this purpose. And then apply the cure for other causes as long as it is sanitary.
Chapter XXXV. (Note: This appears to be a section header, not a translation.)
Remove the tongue from the extraction of the ranula.
Sometimes, the tongue becomes infected and appears swollen, preventing its normal function; and since it is very strong, it is magnified within the mouth.
And the operation on it is that you open the patient's mouth wide, facing the sun, and consider the infection.
And if it appears as a dark, hard, and numb lump that the patient does not feel, then do not touch that part which is cracked.
And if it turns white, in which there is moisture, then place your finger in it, and insert a thin spatula, and cut it apart; and if you have strong winds during the time of your operation, then hold a hot compress over it, as long as it constricts the wind.
And now, return to your work until it is thoroughly cleansed with water and salt, and tend to the other remedies for this until it is healed.
**Chapter XXXVI**
On the extraction of abscesses from two auricles, and those that occur in the throat, and other abscesses.
When a throat infection occurs, there are glands that become swollen and gather together, which protrude outward and are known as tonsils, which, when you cure them according to what has been said in the previous section and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, of a dark color, with little sensation, and do not touch it with force.
And if it is of a dark color and the base is thick, do not touch it with force due to the flow of pus; instead, let it mature, and either it will drain on its own or it will break open by itself.
And if it is of white color, radiant, and its texture is subtle, then that one needs to be incised.
And the operation on it is what you consider, in comparison to your operation, if the abscess has rested and been treated with rest or if it has decreased in size; then make an incision against the sun, and place the head of the instrument in the center, opening the mouth of it, and the servant takes hold of the tongue with his fingers, using a delicate tool whose shape is as follows:
It should be made of silver or bronze, and be sharp with a delicate blade.
So when you hold the tongue with your fingers and show the abscess to your patient, observe the pain in that place, then take this little hook and insert it into the opening, and pull it out as far as possible outside. Another thing that removes some cause from the tunics, then cut with an instrument of this shape.
Another thing that removes some cause from the tunics, then cut with an instrument of this shape. It is similar to forceps, however the ends of it are curved, so that the sharp points on each are in the opposite direction, one very acute, made of iron but covered with cloth.
If this instrument is not available, then cut with a spatula of this shape: sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
And having cut one incision, then cut the other in this same manner of incision, and apply heat to the patient's wound to drain off any excess water.
But if there is a flow of pus, drain off the water from the decoction of chamomile or mint leaves and similar things until the flow of pus stops, then take care so that it heals.
And in some cases, there are no visible signs, other than swelling or red spots; others have two auricles, and you should incise them as you have been taught in the incision of two wounds equally.
And you have already treated a woman suffering from an abscess that was born in her groin, an abscess that tends to a dark color, with little sensation, which had already closed the opening in her groin, and the woman was breathing heavily, and she had forbidden herself food and drinking water, and she would have died if more time had passed, even one or two days.
And the abscess had already torn so much that it had created two openings through which pus could be seen coming out.
So, you should listen to me carefully and follow these steps: remove the abscess with a knife, and discard a significant portion of it; then, incise the one from which you understand the other wound originates; close the opening, and press on the tongue; finally, place the stone over the abscess.
And then you cut out a large part of it, and there flows only a little blood from it. Therefore, the treatment for that woman is absolutely necessary, and she should begin to drink water immediately, and then consume food, so you should not continue to make incisions on those motas (lesions) for a long time, but rather succeed with successive incisions in the same place, which prolongs the healing process.
Therefore, you should apply and cauterize the ulcer of the patient, thus adding to it; and then walk and do not wash what God has done for that person right now.
**Capitol .xxxvii.** (Note: The lack of specific content or text makes it impossible to provide a translation for this caption. It seems to be referencing a chapter or section in a medical treatise, but without the actual text, further interpretation is not feasible.)
On the incision of the huvela (a term possibly referring to a specific body part or condition), when it becomes infected.
When catarrh occurs in the nose, and it is blocked and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the front part thick and round, then it is called a bump.
Although the treatment may be as we have said in the previous section, and your doctor does not agree, and indeed it is often found that the bump has already formed and is hard, you must then incise the round additions; and if it is of long duration and bloody, of dark color or black, and does not give way to touch, then you must be wary of the incision, for there is fear of worsening the condition.
And when you observe it according to the manner I have said regarding its whiteness and length, that you remove the evil and press the tongue of it with an instrument which shapes its form, and then place the new one in its place, and pull down that one and incise it with one of two instruments which are called in the incision of two cuts.
And be careful not to insert anything that is beyond the natural limit of its addition, for if you insert too much, you will harm its function.
Then make the incision, using what we recommended for the incision of two veins, and treat it until it heals.
If the patient was afraid of the incision, use skill in the cauterization of it to alleviate their fear, and the manner of the cautery on it is simply sharp knife, and it is important that you hold the head of the patient in place, and press the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and take water as we said in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it to the live cause, and do not make it too thick or too thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument whose shape this is.
The extremity of the patient's body where the medicine is placed should be concave like a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on top of it, and have the patient lie on their side so that saliva or mucus from their mouth does not fall due to the intrinsic medicine, so as not to cause any harm to the throat of the patient and relaxes that.
And then apply your hand to the medicine, and squeeze it onto the uvula until the space in the middle is filled and the swelling is reduced by the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take care and wrap that around the end of the finger, immerse the cloth in the medicine, insert the finger into the cloth in a channel so that the cloth adheres to the finger, and do this as many times as necessary until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, then let it dry so that it falls off after three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and then clean the cauterization of the uvula with cloth soaked in the medicine around the wound, cleanse it with water, cure it externally with embrocation, and tend to it with gargles until it is healed.
And this type of treatment is both safer and less fearful.
Some times, the uvula is cured by something finer than cautery and incision, for it is treated by sublimation in this manner: take calament, hyssop, origan, rue, scicados of Arabia, chamomile, broadleaf, and similar herbs, and combine all those causes, or some of them, into one bundle, and submerge them in wine, and let them bubble; then let the wave be gently stirred decently, and in the middle part of the wave place a trap, on which is placed an instrument of hard wood according to this manner; it should be made of silver or bronze.
And then insert the tip into the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the uvula over the veil, until the uvula is completely obscured.
Then repeat this process over the affected areas until they are dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at mealtimes, for it would excessively irritate the appendix, and you should not do that unless you have received a diagnosis of appendicitis from a doctor.
If you do not have this instrument at hand, take a cane and attach a seal of wax at its end to block the mouth of the hernia, for the wax seal prevents the air from burning the opening.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter .xxxviii. (Note: "Capitol" likely refers to "Chapter" in this context, as it is a common heading in medieval treatises.)
On the removal of splinters and foreign bodies embedded in the skin, and other causes.
You may notice foreign bodies, such as splinters or pebbles, embedded in the skin or mucous membranes due to various causes.
So, when you have removed what is visible from these [foreign bodies], using an instrument placed over the tongue to examine thoroughly within the mouth, you will be able to identify what is in your mouth.
And for what appears hidden to you in the gullet, be aware that you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because the strong cause attached to the gullet will be forgotten through vomiting; or let them swallow some piece of nap or shredded lettuce or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge and tie it firmly with yarn, and then make the patient swallow that, for when it reaches the place where there are thorns and it is extracted, then it will be forgotten. And you can take a snake and tie it with yarn, then immerse it in boiling water and extract it; or take a toad and boil it until it is soft and extract its entrails.
If, however, these causes are not forgotten, then use an instrument of lead in the following way:
And it should be sharp, about the size of a small nail, and at the end of it, there is a hollow cavity that you insert into the patient's mouth with ease.
And raise the patient's head in bed, and be careful of the pressure on their throat bone, so that he understands what causes him pain, whether it is the bone or the spine, or what the doctor places his hand on.
However, if the illness is more severe, it is better to use his knowledge of the location of the cause and apply pressure downwards, and with his hand on the instrument, according to the amount prepared for him, until the pain disappears.
**Chapter .xxxix.**
On extraction of the blood clot attached to the throat.
When treating the blood clot as described in the previous section, consider the patient's throat under the sun, and remember to clean the tongue with the instrument you have chosen.
Therefore, if you examine the blood flow, extract that small or subtle clot appropriately.
If it is not possible to extract the clot, take a concave needle and insert it into the affected area, then place a heated iron on the concave part of the needle and do this several times (as long as the blood flow stops and the clot is removed from the affected area) and keep the patient well hydrated for the rest of the day.
Then take a clean cloth filled with water, apply it to the affected area, and wash it; do not suck on it or spill any water, as the blood may soon absorb the water.
If what we have recommended is forgotten, then fumigate the patient with herbs or use the instruments we mentioned for the smoldering of the uvula.
Do this, so it falls in place.
And another method of operation by suffocation is that you take a cloth with hot coals on it, cover it with a blanket in the middle of which there is a hole, and place the end of the instrument over that hole; then apply the suffocation from above; and ask the patient to open his mouth at the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the suffocation is not blown aside until you know that the suffocation has reached the bloodstream, for the blood will soon come.
And if he does not eat, you repeat the suffocation with motes again, and prevent the patient from drinking, and make him eat salty foods and herbs, and do not let him drink water, and so it is necessary that this regimen be forgotten.
And this is the form of the instrument used to extract blood from the veins when seen; it is similar to pincers as well, but with no curvature in it. Which is placed in the throat, and its end resembles a swallow's beak, which is called a guanta, where it is sharpened with lime, therefore, when we encounter any cause, it does not cease.
Chapter XL.
In which is the summary of the discourse on the perception of apophthegm and their section.
The apophthegm are special words, in various ways, according to the recollection of their memory, each one in this book.
And they are diverse in their perforation and section in two ways, of which one is for the special nature of the apophthegm themselves; and for what we understand about humidity.
And the second manner is specifically the places where bodily accidents occur, where the apophthegm occurring in the head is different from the apophthegm occurring in the foot; and the apophthegm occurring in the fleshy part is different from the apophthegm occurring in the joint; and each of them has its own operation.
And some abscesses are such that they do not require puncture but rather the maturation of the health in those or the completion of their course.
Other abscesses that require drainage when they are infected, and are not matured according to their course, are those that tend to affect joints; for an abscess that is close to a joint will persist as long as you do not drain it, and its corruption weakens the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that member. Or if the abscess is near a major limb, and you delay draining it after it has matured, it will harm the main limb; or if it is near the anus, then do not drain it until it has matured, for if you perforate it too soon before it has matured, the pus cannot escape and it becomes elongated within the parts of the anus, and a fistula is formed, or it becomes infected at the point of drainage that is not healed. You also know the time for draining the abscess, and that is when it has matured.
And you will know that healing has begun when the pain ceases and fever abates, and there is a reduction in rigidity and pulse, and the redness of the affected area becomes less pronounced, as well as other symptoms.
And furthermore, know how to recognize the time for puncture in the area where pus has collected beneath the abscess and from the healing of the protrusion.
The puncture should be made through the thickness of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the thighs or feet, and in places of knots, of nerves, of tendons; and finally, in all other places equally, where there is no reflection; for in those that are reflected, use puncture according to the affected member.
But if the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to wait until the puncture is confirmed by the passage of pus, as we have said; for if you make the puncture before that, the course of the disease will be prolonged, and it will cause great pain and strong inflammation of the tissues around it.
Some incisions may be made directly through the skin or according to the thickness of the flesh or body part that needs it.
And be aware that you should make small incisions, and in large incisions, make a deep and wide cut or sections as per the diversity of the size of the incisions.
And other types of incisions where the skin is to be cut and left open, when made in such a way that it heals like a wound already existing, similar to what happens in cases of double or bubo-like infections.
Of those that are incised in sections with three angles; and of those where the incision is made like a figure of a myrtle leaf, as with the apostemas of the elbows.
And of their kind where a round section and a lunar section are administered, similar to those.
Make sure those who have no such symptoms of surface inflammation understand that you are making a superficial incision or puncture, not too deep.
And if the inflammation is severe and has already collected a lot of pus, do not make a deep incision at once; instead, withdraw a portion, then re-incise it the next day, and withdraw a larger portion, repeating this process in stages according to its severity until it is completely drained.
And particularly if the patient is in a frail condition, a woman in labor, a small child, or an elderly person, because the animal spirit quickly resolves itself with the exit of pus, and often these patients die from the illness, while you perform the operation on them.
Take great care with this chapter: when you make an incision to drain these inflammations, be sure to clean the sores and consider whether the inflammation of the apostema is mild, or if the incision is deep, then administer suitable medications; if the apostema is large, and the incisional wounds are wide, then apply pressure over each wound until they heal together.
And if a portion of the fascia or tendon is severed in the abscess, then cover it with thin cloth or thread from linen, just as you would cover a wound with bandages, keep it moist; and strengthen that area within three days; and then treat and cure it with ointment until it heals.
If there is a flow of blood during your operation, you should apply clean water and vinegar to it, and place a linen cloth over the area where the bleeding is happening, pressing it gently.
If the bleeding persists, you must administer remedies and treatment as recommended in various parts of this book and according to division.
If it is during the winter, and the abscessed area has many nerves, you must apply poultices in hot oil and vinegar, and place them over the affected spots.
And if it is summer and the parts are fleshy, then cover what you place over them with moist poultices of water and oil or wine and oil, and change all of this every third day as we have said, and ensure that you loosen the crust and clean that area and apply what is suitable for its healing until it is cured.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of hernias universally, but more according to the method of distinction that I have already mentioned about every hernia in what way it is a path to its cure, chapter by chapter.
Chapter .xl. (Forty-first)
About the incision of hernias that appear in the groin of the head.
In the groin of the head are small hernias, which are of different types and contain membranes that are formed at their edges; these types have distinct names.
And from them spring drops, and those are the ones that contain moisture similar to lemon. And those are the ones that contain moisture similar to sweat, and they resemble them; and those are the ones that are stony, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, as the extraction of those does not cause annoying pain.
And the operation in the section of those is that you expect those with instruments in the shape of which they infiltrate, which is called an entrom, as you know it contains.
If what it contains is moisture, then you divide that as if cutting according to length by sectioning the surface according to this form:
And it begins in the section of the line B within the line G. Therefore, when moisture is evacuated, you will scrape that part where that moisture was located, and do not leave any cause for that, for troops seen returning from that cause.
Then immerse the affected area in Egyptian niter (a form of potassium nitrate), if present, or in water and salt; fill that with the paste and leave it for another day, as it corrodes everything that breaks through that crust.
Then repeat the treatment on that area with Egyptian niter according to need, as long as you are confident that there is no other cause for that crust; cure the ulcer with niter when it is healed.
And if an abscess forms with fatty nodes, then you will incise it according to this form: I have a section that is cut in the shape of a cross, and it gets inserted between two folds of the section and removed from all sides, and use your virtue to extract the tunic that contains this.
If your bowstring causes resistance, then do as I have told you first.
And similarly, perform in the abscess of the section and treatment as I have told you; the section over the abscessed lapified is lighter because it has little pain and little moisture.
And sometimes there are these abscesses of which some are in the head on men as well as those on women old and young; which causes it because you must incise an abscess on the head of an elderly woman and drain the abscess thus with a hard, sharp, white stone that cannot be chewed, and if anyone were to touch it, they would be infected.
In other accidental boils on the head, except for this one, which is not covered in this chapter, just as the boils that appear on the heads of children and require shaving the hair, the treatment for all of these should be superficial.
And stop the perforation of those in the lower part of their course so that the matter from the abscess is removed from the deeper parts.
Then take care of those affected as is appropriate for the cure.
Chapter .xlii.
On the section of scrofula that occurs in the collar.
Unexpected outbreaks of these boils occur in the collar, armpits, and angles, and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And thus those that occur in the colon, and such motes that are generated among them, all scrofula of those arises from their own tunic, and thus also with nodes and apoplexy of the head, as we have recollected.
And the types of these scrofula are motes; some are stony, others contain moisture, and those that are malicious do not obey treatment.
Therefore, in that which you perceive to be of good disposition upon touching, of which the color is characteristic of the ulcer, and it is worsened at every point, and not attached to the colon's nerves, veins, or arteries, and is not swollen, you must incise it along the dry superficial surface from its origin within the body to where it leaves the corporeal line G. (a line possibly referring to anatomical regions) in the region of B., and remove it entirely from every part, and extend the edges of the ulcer with onces (small tools), or oncis (maybe a type of tool) if necessary, as we have said regarding nodes on the head; extract that small bit by bit.
And it requires greater caution that the vein or nerve is not incised.
And if the knife is not sharp enough to fit in your hand for incision, or if it causes the patient distress or you make an unnecessary incision into a vein or artery, then you will be left with a wound filled with vitriol or other powders that prevent pus from flowing out and clearing the infection, leaving the affected area until the heat of the abscess subsides and the infection is softened, and begins to fester. When the pus is drained.
Therefore, return to your operation until the task is completed.
And then carefully examine the aforementioned small lumps, inquiring if any are connected to the others, and if so, make incisions into them and clean them.
And if it is in the root of a large scrofula, you must be careful not to cut that scrofula from its root. You must be careful to open that closed and tightly folded veil, and gently pull it aside so that it does not tear.
Then fill the wound with a poultice of warm, Egyptian-style ointment and tend to it.
If you cut the whole scrofula, be careful to close both edges of the wound so that no excessive pus forms above.
If you find that there is excessive discharge due to the size of the scrofula, be sure to cut into the root of it, drain it, and then stitch it up and apply the treatment as mentioned.
And those of the scrofulas that contain humidity, make a perforation with a superficial punct at the place where it appears to you as the site of its formation, and stop the punct from which pus comes from below the body, as we have said.
Then administer the punct, you should find and similar things to those, so that it corrodes what is broken down by corruption. And when you see the plague is already cleaned, then you cure it with the found substance of living flesh until it is healed.
Chapter .xliii.
Of the section of the pilot of the abscess, cut through the gullet accidentally.
The ancients said this section in the piloth, and we have not seen anyone in our land who does that thing.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those people.
In some men, there is a weakness that requires caution when extracting the stones, for if it is not done quickly, all the veins and major parts of the ailment are here.
In those who have abscesses in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the ailment is not in the intestines, it is necessary to avoid extraction of stones to prevent loss, which is caused by perforation.
Therefore, when we want to do this, incise the stones below three circles of the stone's circles, or four with a small section according to the distance between two circles for quantity, that the section is in bone, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for sectioning, as it is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels of the stone are open.
And if the doctor is cautious, you must prevent him from extending the cordon of the scrotum too much, and then cut the cordon until it reaches the channel, but avoid the vessels of blood if it be from any other cause.
And then, insert the knife according to what we have recommended; it signifies on the section of the channel for the flame that is from that which is broken and by the removal of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, when the time is passed in which perforation is feared, add two flaps of the cordon of the wound, and with that single one, the cartilage is healed.
And then, administer medicines that promote the healing of the flesh until it is cured.
And Albucasis says that the essence of our discussion is to understand that some of these abscesses have already filled up the hollow space of the patient's body, and the illness has spread throughout causing death, and the blood vessels are blocked, and some cut through the epiglotis so that the patient breathes on the site of the disease in some way and is saved from death.
And for this, I command that the wound be left open until the evil of the illness is consumed; and the evil of it lasts for three days; so now I command that the treatment be as follows, and cure it until it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant pressed a sharp object into the patient's throat and cut them in the hollow of their neck, and I was called to treat them, and I perceived the breath of death coming from them, and I uncovered the wound and sought out the source which had come from the infection.
Therefore, you must confess that you did not cut a vein or guide it, and the wind still blows from the wound, and you treat it until it is healed by fire.
And do not be hasty in the treatment if it is not necessary in your voice, and after a few days return for the improvement of your conditions.
And now I say that in the removal of the epiloth (adnexa, e.g., lymph nodes or glands) there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
Of the removal of the apostema (hernia) that occurs outside the gullet, and it is called a hernia of the gullet.
This apostema (hernia) called hernia of the gullet is a large hernia according to the color of the skin, and it occurs more in women.
And it has two manners, either it is natural or accidental.
In the natural, it is not possible to cure.
And the accidental has two manners: one is similar to node-like masses, and the other manner is apoplexy, which occurs due to the interruption of an artery, and that should be feared. And it is not prudent to make a diagnosis with a needle unless it is requested. And you should examine that and investigate that as it is said, and if it appears similar to a nodule and not suspended from any vein, then you cut it out like a node, and extract that which contains the pus from the swelling; otherwise, you should scrutinize his entire body, and pay attention to the area that requires treatment until it is healed.
Capital .45.
On the section of the removal of nodes.
These nodes have various species, and I have already described all their species in the previous division.
And it is important to distinguish between the node and the excrescence, with due caution.
Therefore, you say that an excrescence is heat and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of excessiveness subsides; and it is complete putrefaction that stops the fever, pain, and heat.
A node does not exhibit heat, fever, or pain, and it is that cipher lion that is in the body, which is to be extracted.
And according to the color of the body, its beginning is like a cease and is done thus with vacuum, either greater or lesser, and they are according to two species, either fat or lean and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as I have said in division.
Therefore, when you reach the treatment of a knot, you must expel it and investigate the beginning of the stirring which is called an "intrusion", according to how its form comes in the chapter most appropriate to this.
This is the manner of examining abscesses and all knots; you take this stirring and insert it into the place most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will turn your fingers around that small area little by little until you know that the stirring has already penetrated the knot.
And then, with your hand, you close according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and you extract the intrusion and consider what has remained in the trace of it.
And if the current humidity is forgotten, of any colour, then you insert it into the superficial section as I have said in the other appendices.
And if there is no humidity present from the previous incision, then you know it is fat.
And dry it on the section having no form of cross according to this shape: Thus taught, raise the section with incisions, carefully extract the cord from every part, and observe the skin or sac, if possible, over it and extract that health from the node.
If it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that health, repeat attempts accordingly, and carefully extract it from the body before any further damage.
If, for any reason, either too much or too little, the knot returns according to its nature.
And if you notice that the hernia involves a small part, complete the plague with some sharp corrosive powders and tighten the plague, and place a hot poultice over the one that is abscessed, and treat the other with the appropriate cure until it heals.
And if it is not large, then cut both lips of the hernia and treat it with this that adheres to it.
If the vein is pulsating against it, or not pulsating, then cut and apply a hot compress at the site of the inflammation that is made of vitriol and let it stay tight for two days or three until the plague subsides and the swelling of the sanch (vein) decreases; and then return to incise what is broken off from the node.
Chapter .xlvi.
On the forms of tools necessary for cutting and piercing.
Of those are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three kinds, of which some are larger, others are medium, and others are small.
The form of the large instrument is as follows:
The form of the small instrument is as follows:
They are made of iron, aluminum, and with precise movements, so that the instrument fits into the incisions.
And these are the practices of the experienced ones, and they are called alchemists, and one of them is known as the healer.
And it concerns three spices: one is great, another is medium, and the third is slight.
The form of the experienced one great:
The form of the experienced one medium:
The form of the experienced one slight:
So, they are indicated for those suffering from apoplexy, discharge, fistulas, and hernias, so that between those are the bones and other causes.
And they make rounds, thick, lion-like, also with large needles sewn onto them, and they are made of iron or wood or silver, and the best ones are when they are made of lemon wood.
And they prepare the experienced plaster of black pigeon guano, which remember that through these are opened the fistulas in the concavity of which reflections are reflected to their lightness on those reflections.
And they are of three kinds, some being long, others medium, and others short, according to the extent of the fistula and the tightness of it.
Shape of the experienced great plaster of pigeon guano:
Shape of the experienced medium plaster of pigeon guano:
Shape of the experienced small plaster of pigeon guano:
The shapes of the plasters are diverse, being made from specific spices. They have a simple curvature and come in three sizes: large, few, and medium.
And from their body's humors, there are three species.
And of these there are two curves, which have three species.
And they have three curves, which are of three species.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Shape of a single rare curve, shape of it:
The shape of a large half-moon has two curves: The shape of a half-moon has two curves: The shape of a small half-moon has two curves:
The shape of a large half-moon has three curves:
The shape of a half-moon has three curves:
And these are the forms of scalpels which are sharpened and cut through nodules and abscesses, and there are three kinds: one is large, another middle-sized, and a third small.
Large scalpel form:
Medium scalpel form:
Small scalpel form:
The ends of these have sharp blades, while the other ends are not sharp and are not designed to stop in a particular way; rather, they are made to cut through nodules without damaging veins or nerves, and by doing so, cure the disease and provide immediate relief from the pain caused by the abscess.
And these are the forms of knives, which are also of three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you can see.
They are made of iron and look like rays from which alcohol is also produced.
And at the extreme side, there is a hidden point with a spatula, which goes into the inside and outside of the parts, whenever you want, just as often.
The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between these times during the piercing of the apertures and do not harm the patient, come in three types: great, middle, and minor. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of vents through which the flow of blood is interrupted, and there are three kinds; great, medium, and small; their shapes are:
They are made of thin, round, or somewhat elongated metal, sharp at one end.
And these types of vents should be great, medium, and small, so that by opening them, the flow of blood is interrupted at the right speed in case of need, and they are used when first aid is not sufficient.
I do not recommend using those to interrupt the flow of blood everywhere in the body, but only in fleshy parts, such as on the legs' varicose veins and between the thighs, and on the arms' veins, and the breasts and abdomen, and the genitals, similar to their shape in moist flesh.
And sometimes other small instruments are made in the form of scissors to interrupt the flow of blood when performed by phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
And some times are performed in circles according to this form:
Chapter .XLVII.
On the care of the nipples of men which are assembled from women.
Some times the nipples of certain men become inflamed due to the pressure during sleep, and they become inflamed, and the nipples of women are assembled and hang down.
And for those who wish to treat this, they should incise the affected area with a sharp instrument according to this form, from the line B to the line G, and then remove all the grossness, and fill the wound with incarnate medicine, and sew together the two lips of the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
If the nipple retracts from its position and is softened by its magnitude, as it should be in women, then cut it in two parts, its pus overflowing, resembling two half-moons, each containing the other's end, so that the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line .B. and .G. And then excise the cord connected between the two lips of the lesion, stop the discharge, and administer what we have said about stitching and powders, which are necessary for healing until it is cured.
And if you do not perform the incision correctly, due to the patient's restlessness or discharge of pus, then fill the wound with a hot corrosive ointment and leave it until it corrodes what is broken off from the pus, and then treat it until it heals.
Chapter .xlviii.
On piercing wounds that leave scars.
These scars that remain after wounds are from the nature of scrofula, hard swellings, which contain a puss that needs to be drained.
And of those (wounds) that contain humidity, those with humidity should be incised in the lunar section according to this figure: from the line marked .G. to the line marked .B. And once all that is within the wound has been evacuated, you should secure it with a clean bandage and leave it open for another day.
And keep the bandage intact and clean with suitable ointment until it is healed.
And if the scar from nodules or scrofula is, then you should incise it in the same manner as we have said regarding scrofula generally.
If the plague spreads so that it causes gangrene, then apply cautery to it as we have previously mentioned.
**Chapter XLIX**
On the sectioning of abscesses that occur through arrow wounds or veins.
When an arrow breaks through the skin and the wound is healed, abscesses sometimes form at that site, and the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are caused by an artery or vein: for when the abscess is from an arrow wound, a long one is added to the body; and when you press the abscess, you feel a hissing in it.
And that which is from a vein tends to return to the general condition of the body.
And cutting into this abscess is dangerous, especially on those that are in the joints, and in difficult places, and in most parts of the body; it is very large, therefore be careful that its treatment does not escape you, and one on the extremities, or at the head, should be avoided.
Lay a cloth over that which is affected by inflammation of the orifices of the arterioles, cut in the longitudinal section along the limb; then slice open the section with scissors and expose the arterioles, removing the tunic until it is uncovered.
Then place the needle on that spot and make it penetrate into the other layer, opening the arterioles with a double thread in two places, which causes the patient to urinate from two arterioles located in the thighs.
Then apply the place between the two ligaments with a spatula until the inflammation subsides completely, and dissolve the abscess.
Then administer treatment where pus is formed until the ligaments fall, and care for that with a suitable poultice until it heals.
And if it is an abscess from a vein cut, you must have your hand over the place as close to the abscess as possible with your thumb, and insert the needle at that spot, making it penetrate; then wrap the thread in a double knot until you extract it from the other side, and tie the abscess with the proper ligament as I have told you regarding the grape-like ligament on both sides of the thread.
If you fear that the thread might come out, insert the needle into the wound again at a different point, following the entire path of the first needle, and tighten your threads in four places.
Next, dry the wound in the middle part where it is most affected, and once it has healed sufficiently, incise the surplus skin, leaving only what is attached to the patient.
And then apply the poultice you have prepared with vinegar and oil to it, and administer the treatment that is required, until it heals.
Chapter on the healing of an apostema caused by nerve damage.
Thus, when an apostema occurs in the rear and in the veins, and it seems to be similar to apostema occurring in the nerves due to their impact or excessive work, or for similar reasons.
And apply the most of it to the areas of the auxiliaries or the foot, or anywhere where the joints are troubled.
It is a severe apoplexy, resembling the color of another body, located in its most vital parts, and when it is straightened by violent force, the patient feels a stupor-like suffering from the illness.
It is not an apoplexy affecting the anterior part of the body, and thus the patient is left with a lock (or possibly a paralysis), feeling pain throughout their entire body, but not in the front or back parts.
Therefore, regarding those who have this condition in their joints, it does not cover being attacked by iron, as they will naturally develop contraction due to its strength.
One should make a lock with the fingers on the head or forehead. If it is a minor abscess, then cut it open with scissors and incise it at its base.
And if it is large, then hang it with a hook and cut it out, and close it up; and dress the wound with a suture, and care for it until it heals.
Chapter.
On the section of the abscess that occurs from the chest down to the abdomen.
Indeed, some people experience pain in their abdomens and other parts of the body which are called fungal-like due to their similarity to fungi; the root of these is subtle and the head of each is large; and the edges of these are curved, and it is from these that a great deal of pain is derived.
And you have already seen one, and in its belly there were two parts which were more or less similar, and there was no difference between those whites, of small size.
And the lips of those [parts] were reversed and split open, and moisture flowed from them constantly.
Therefore, cut these off and insert them into the hole in the foot, one weighs 18 uncias, and the other weighs 6 uncias.
And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider when the disease is humid, and the color of the lump is white, moist, of subtle size; then cut them with a broad spatula, and they should be cauterized over fire while you observe, so that the section of it is expelled without pain; and if you feel the pain, cauterize that.
And if the patient is frightened and disturbed, beware of sudden cuts with a knife; then take a fresh, clean cloth, tighten it around that wound in the manner we have said, and leave it for two days.
And then adjust the tightness of the thread; so do not cease to tighten the large thread after its cut, until it is completely detached and falls off by itself in its work.
If the part is of thick consistency, there is no cause for fear or worry in its incision, especially when it is in the abdomen.
It is possible that you cut off the bulk of it, and then cauterize that area to prevent its return.
And then take care of it until the plague is healed.
And be careful not to attempt to incise that which is of a dark color, has little sensation, and is well-connected, for that is absolutely cancerous.
And now I will come to the remembrance of remedies for this.
Chapter II.
On the cure for hernia (or "eminence" of the navel).
The hernia (eminence) of the navel is caused by various reasons: either through fissures in the abdominal wall over the belly, and from these openings protrude the intestine or hernia, as appropriate for other ruptures; or by swelling due to a flux of blood or wind, as described above; or by tightness of breath constricted within.
If it is due to a fissure in the abdominal wall and protrusion of the intestine (hernia), then the color of the hernia is similar to that of the body; and it is very painful, and appears in different positions. And if it is for the release of the hernia, you observe the position of that mass which we have described, with greater or lesser variety, and when you press on it, saying that it is concealed, then return; it is very hot to its own place, and it glorifies a great deal the introduction of water and vigorous work.
If it is due to humidity, you will observe a swelling and it is not concealed when you press with your hand, nor is it restricted or ruptured.
And if it is due to infection, then these signs appear as black spots declining in severity.
If it is not due to flesh, then the abscess is severe, thick and hard, and it festers according to its quantity.
If it is due to windiness, then the touch of it is hot.
And the operation on it is that you consider when the prominence of the navel is due to hard or venous arthritis, or due to gas; then know that you must abstain from treating it, for there is fear and danger as it has been taught in the chapter where I have spoken about abscesses due to arthritis and vein.
If the prominence of the navel is due to a hernia or a bulge, then you must order the patient to lie on their side and stay extended; then carefully probe around the entire navel area, and command them to rest with their back between your hands over their hips, and wrap a wide spatula around the hernia in the navel area; then extend the extent of the abscess towards the upper parts using a large spoon; and then tie the opening with a strong thread or catgut in a proper manner.
Then you should cut open the abscessed area along its seam and insert your finger into that opening to explore; if it is constricted or held by a ligament, then carefully cut and pull out the hernia and push it back inside the abdomen.
And if you have found the cloth, then take some oil; and cut away its excess.
If it is against your skill or vein, then circle that area and return to your operation; take two needles and insert them into the two strong threads and, in a crisscross manner, penetrate the circuit you made around the abscess, which causes it to rupture; then immediately tighten the abscess into four parts using the needles.
And if you prefer, leave the needles and let the location heal on its own until the flesh is extended and falls off; or cut it when it has loosened and drained, and then care for that with something that cleans the pus until it heals.
And if the protrusion from the navel is nothing but flesh or due to moisture, then cover and tighten the abscess as we have said before, dislodge the stone or moisture that you find there, and then care for it with something that covers and strengthens the area.
Chapter .liii.
On the cure of cracks.
As we have discussed in our classification, the various types of cracks and the methods for their treatment using medicines, it is incorrect to cure them with a sharp tool so as not to cause an ulcer; we have also spoken about the causes of these cracks and the precautions to be taken for their treatment.
And the ancients said that sometimes cracks are in places where it is possible to completely remove them, such as cracks located on the breasts or in the groin, and similar parts of the body, especially when they just begin to form.
However, when it is old and deep, it does not respond to treatment on its own, as I have neither seen nor heard of anything that has proven effective against it.
And the operation on him is as we have said, you should proceed and remove the disease and purge it of black cholera several times, and then bleed that, if a manifest repulsion is found.
And then prepare the patient for the preparation in which the operation will take place, and make sure that the incision covers it; and carefully explore all parts with a good seal to prevent any cause of further complications from arising. And stop the bleeding, do not open it further, compress the areas, and clean the abundant blood with your hand or an instrument that you have at hand from among the available instruments.
If it is contrary to you to make a large incision into a vein or an artery, cauterize it until the flow of blood stops, and then care for the other wound with the proper treatment until it heals.
Chapter .liv.
On the treatment of hydropic (edematous) conditions.
We have already discussed, in the previous section, the types of hydropic conditions and their symptoms, as well as the medicinal treatments for each type.
And the one that is cured with iron is nothing but the specific type of altitude, and it is not similar to the use of iron for tympanitis or for hypostatic conditions, which are fatal.
And when you have already treated this specific type of hydropic tympanitis with medications and do not confirm the improvement, consider this: if the illness has been weakened in the patient or if it is another type of hydropic condition, similar to those affecting the lungs or abdomen, then be cautious not to treat it with iron, for fear of exacerbating it.
If you find the disease of an exuberant growth and it is nothing but hydropic and not old or young, then the manner of treating it is that you raise the growth between your fingers, and apply pressure to the abdomen with your hand, draining the water from its opening below the pubic bone, and take out pus with a sharp instrument in this manner:
from two sharp parts of long instruments, with an acute end as well as with pus; however, make sure that in their extreme sharpness there is no brief moment of hesitation, so that during the operation on that part, it does not enter into the cavity and you successfully handle it.
And consider whether the generation of hydropic is from the cavities, for you will find that in sectioning close to the navel, three parts should be separated on each side below, right above the pubic bone.
If the generation of hydropics is due to disease of the veins, then your section should be on the left side of the navel by three parts.
And if the generation of the hernia is due to weakness, then your section should be on the right side.
And be sure that your section is on the side where the disease wants to go, so as not to cause excessive discharge at that location.
Then thoroughly pierce the hernia with the instrument, enter that section, and place your hand between the hernia and the abdomen, and gently extract it; and if it is of the size of a nut or egg.
And pierce the abdomen until the space reaches the desired location, which is where the water lies. Then extract that and insert an instrument of this form: It resembles a fine silver pipe; it is made of silver or bronze or iron, and on its lower part there is a small opening, and on its sides there are three openings: two from one side and one from the other; its end is cut according to the shape of a plume, thus:
And at the end of the pipe is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, it will immediately exert pressure on the instrument, thus evacuating a considerable amount of water in one moment; if you evacuate less than necessary in that moment, strong pain will beset the patient due to the resolution of his animal spirit, or he may suffer death from kidney failure.
One should evacuate according to the quantity necessary, as per the strength of the pipe and depending on what one understands about the patient's condition, based on the virtue of its pulse and the goodness of its nature.
And when the instrument is removed, retain the water which causes it, because it is often retained by the string which blocks the opening over the patient's chest, and you should perforate that according to that manner.
And then repeat the procedure on another day if the patient tolerates it, extract a small amount of water and do this for several days with caution, and be careful not to remove too much water.
If you are concerned about the illness and drain a large amount of water, then treat it with a burial in sand, followed by a bath and exposure to the sun for a long time; also use drying medicines as long as it heals.
And perform a cautery on the stomach, and the intestines, and then extract the water as I have described above.
Chapter XXV.
On the treatment of children whose birth places are not perforated.
Some times a child is born with a hole in the abdomen of its mother and the head of the mixture (amniotic sac) is not pierced (or it is too narrow or not in the correct position).
Therefore, one should perform an incision into the sac as soon as possible after birth using a delicate and gentle touch in this manner:
And then one should place a thin leaden clamp over the opening and tie it with thread, and do this for three days or four.
And as for urination, it should be done slowly and carefully; then return to the previous position.
And if the leaden clamp is not properly secured, it is possible that the urine, which flows over the area, will not be prevented from entering this closure.
If that of which the pain is tight is to be treated with a lead claw, as we have said, for many days until it is relieved.
For those in whom the pain is not in its proper place, it is said, which causes these people: he who is born with a deformity of the penis, due to this, the root of the shame is at the base of his organ, so that he cannot urinate inside, until he raises the shame with his hand from below; and it is not hereditary, therefore because of this, the sperm cannot reach its mother according to rectitude, and it becomes a motley disease.
And the method of operation is that the disease is turned over on its back, and then extend the tip of his penis with your left hand by violent extraction, and cut off the head of the penis at the place of the foreskin with a sharp knife, or whatever you do not make any cuts, so that the middle part of him comes to look like the head of the penis and the pain falls in its proper place as it should.
And be careful in your operation to free the flow of blood, for accidents may occur; hold it firm where it cuts through the vein, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LVI.
Of an albaster (or white, delicate tissue) that occurs in the prepuce at the tip of the penis due to decay and blackening and adhesion of the prepuce to the tip of the penis.
Various accidents occur to this albaster on the penis, and it causes an eminence of raw flesh.
And some are malignant, while others are not.
Not malignant, take care to suspend it gently and cut off that part; then place your hand over the exposed area with Egyptian ointment; and afterward, cure it with refined ointment until it is healed.
And if the wound is infected, of a bad color, then you must administer cauterization near the incision and its treatment.
If the abscess is in the foreskin of an uncircumcised man, and one side of the abscess is inside the foreskin and the other side is outside, then you must drain the abscess that is inside at the beginning, until it is consolidated; and when you cure the external part, be careful not to tear the foreskin again.
And they also occur in the genitals and foreskin, dark and swollen, so you must clean everything that is already discolored and about to rot or rotten; and then apply a line of this mixture made with flour from scorched millet and crushed garlic and pepper.
And treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
If there is an end of bleeding, then apply cautery once a month according to this form:
The cautery is beneficial in two dispositions together, either for bleeding or for a wound when it is corrupt.
And if the head of the foreskin is corrupted and completely destroyed at that moment, then insert a lead tube into the inside of the foreskin so that the malady urinates through that passage.
In the adherence of the foreskin to the head (and this adherence does not occur except in that of whom the foreskin is its own, and no circumcision is required; and when adhesion occurs due to a wound or abscess), then extract with an obtuse spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the foreskin is completely liberated.
And if it is difficult to free them delicately, then extract with a certain spatula from the head of the foreskin and the prepuce, and this is because when the prepuce is thin, its delicate nature easily perforates it.
And then carefully separate the prepuce from the head of the penis using a subtle knife, which has already been cleaned with water to prevent adherence in the future.
And then, once the fracture is healed, apply a cooling treatment within the affected area to ensure its consolidation.
Chapter XXVII.
On the purification of children and the cure for what happens to those of circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution for continence as with other ailments; however, when it is of our own operation and volition, and done on infants, it is necessary that we assign to this better operation and method the gentlest approach for the sake of health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of their free peoples, since they do not use it in their laws, and only do so because we have acquired by experience, which cause many skilled craftsmen and barbers to use circumcision and purification with a new knife and scissors; they use glue for binding and the fingernail for incision.
And having tried all these methods and not finding better relief than with scissors, or bandages, or faithful glue in the operation with the finger, since the wound escapes more easily, the foreskin's cord, consisting of two tunics, is cut off closer to the root, and the inner tunic remains, and it is forced to another incision, certain of pain. And the operation that is performed by cauterization, which is digital, and is used by barbers, does not ensure the incision of the end of the male member, as it quickly enters the wound.
However, in the operation with the finger, too much force causes damage and corrupts your operation. And the foreskin of a child is short by nature and often does not require such treatment that it becomes necessary to operate on it, and I have seen this.
Concerning the preparation that is made with forks and binding with silk, I have discovered through experience its excellent quality, because the forks are of a proportional incision, thus matching the sharpness that is above with the sharpness that is below; and therefore when you press your hand with two sharp points according to a calculation in time, it creates compression of the binding in a form containing all parts of the whip, to which no error can adhere.
And the first manner of the operation is that you must keep the child mostly still if it is one of those who understand a little, doing nothing but binding the hernia to its cord only, and letting it enter into the other on the following day.
And then do whatever you can to make that person happy in all ways, according to their understanding. And then make sure to be between their most esteemed preparations, without causing pain; hide the forks in your hand or place the foot down so that the child does not see those or any other of the instruments.
And then insert your hand into the patient's anus and blow into the rectum, pulling it until the tip of the instrument reaches the base of the anus, and clean that which has been added to it from impurity.
The shape of the forceps for cleaning, this is the form:
The extremities should not all be of the same length and others should be such that the axis of the foot does not remain straight, and the length of both toes is equal to the length of two handbreadths.
Do not make the mistake of purification when you strongly repel the intrinsic code; either entirely or in part, it requires incision.
Therefore, understand that you should extend the one from your hand to your finger in front of the placement of the spot and inscribe it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, extract it with a hook and inscribe that.
If it has passed three days, and they say that it is swollen from the fiery spot, then you should leave it until the inflammation subsides, remove it gently, and inscribe according to what is prepared for you.
And observe the head of the hernia, so as not to injure it.
And therefore treat that which the plague solidifies from the powders we have mentioned in the treatise on powders.
And if it is incised from the cord on measure, and you obey to the partitions of them, it will not hurt him.
And make treatment for that which we have said, so that it is healed.
Chapter LVIII.
On the cure of urine retention in the bladder.
Urine retention in the bladder is caused by swelling due to stone or sand, or impaction or congestion, and resembles those we have mentioned regarding treatment in the chapter on parts.
And if it is not dissolved as mentioned above, the cause of the disease should be treated by drawing out the urine with an instrument called a syringe, which has this form: It should be made of silver and very thin, like a lion's claw, with a tube of fine hair similar to a palm and half again long, having a thin cane at its tip.
And the method of urination through that is to take the urine tube and tie it at the end with a string or twine for proper drainage; and insert the tip of the tube into the urethra, cutting off any excess string if necessary, and then quickly insert it into the catheter and fill it with urine. And immediately stretch the bag on both sides and attach it to the body.
And make an incision on the hernia over the skin, and open the bladder of the patient and clean it with oil and olive oil and water.
And then insert the catheter easily so that it reaches the root of the hernia; and fold the hernia towards the opening of the incision; and push the catheter through it; and push it until it reaches the bladder, and make sure that the hernia is freed from its cause, and do not force it in a different order than this, but insert the meat where there is curvature.
And then slowly extend the cord along the thread, little by little, as the urine dries the thread.
Next, extract that one for the cure of urine, use a catheter, do not stop doing this and use a catheter until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief again.
**Capital XX. (XX.th chapter)**
Of the quality of bladder clisterization with forceps and similar instruments that are suitable for this.
When it happens in the bladder ulceration or abscess, or there is a severe infection in that area, and you wish to drain water and medicine from that place, then use an instrument called a forceps, and this is how it is done:
But if at the end of it there is a deafness, it is closed tightly. And at that time, there are three tools: two of one kind, thus as often.
In the beginning, there occurs a congestion, which is what is being propelled, and according to its quantity, it accumulates, until some cause throws out humidity from it, which is then thrown away, and when it is expelled, it attracts something, and when it is withdrawn, it leaves behind a residue similar to the pitch that is found on the ship's battles.
Therefore, if you want to prevent humidity in the bladder, insert the tip of the pitch into the humidity and throw away that which is being propelled upward from below, for the humidity is thrown into the cavity of the pitch.
And then insert the tip of the pitch into the opening as we have mentioned in the ring; and push the humidity away from what you are pushing, for that humidity will reach the bladder soon enough, and the illness centers on that.
The shape of the delicate crystal that is chiselled onto the bladder, and this is its form:
Whether it is made of silver or steel, it should resemble a small feather in shape, and leave a mark inside the wound.
Then take the bladder and move it, applying the humidity you wish to crystallize in the bladder, and bind it tightly between two pieces of strong double thread, and heat that humidity over fire.
And then insert the tip of the crystal into the urine.
Then place your hand over the bladder, pressing down with the humidity still within its folds, so that the urine is fully emptied from the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder at hand, take a piece of cloth and make a circle from it; pierce it through its entirety; then insert strong thread into those openings, twisting them as needed; and add the circle to hot water or vinegar, so that you retain whatever humidity, odor, or essence you desire.
And then you insert this instrument into him in the same way as you have done with the bladder, and express with your hand inside so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
**Chapter LXX (60)**
**On the Extraction of Stone**
We have already discussed the classification of stone types and their treatments with medications, as well as the distinction between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each.
And we have discussed the stone that requires surgical intervention by hand, or incision.
And the stone formed in the bladder specifically is the one that becomes lodged in the bladder.
And they recount that exposition of the matter in a clear and concise manner.
Therefore, it says that the pain generated in the bladder often goes to children; and among its signs, the urine expelled from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, appearing in that sand; and the disease scratches its own flesh, causing frequent pain, and when treated, it recovers. And these are the reasons for its name.
And the healing of children from that disease becomes easier after they have reached 13 years old; and it is a difficult cure for the elderly. In the young, it is milder because of what is between those (parts).
And of him whose pain is greater and healing is more difficult; and if it is slight, it is contrary to that one.
Therefore, to arrive at the cure of this condition, we must begin by cleaning the patient's wound with vinegar, which extracts all the opening in their intestines; for sometimes this opening prevents the flow of urine after examination.
Then, taking hold of the hernia near their feet, and positioning and massaging it gently, helps urine to flow down into the bladder, or sometimes it may move from its place.
Then use the appropriate clamp between their legs, where the patient's legs are placed with things under them, so that the bladder is completely emptied by declining it to the parts below.
Then take hold of it and extract all that is removed.
Therefore, if you feel the urine in the space, then cut it as soon as possible over it.
And if you cannot catch hold of anything, then cover it with oil the size of a small bean, either from the patient's left hand or a small piece if it is a child, or a larger amount if it is an adult, and insert that into their anus. And once the stone is extracted, leave the small bean-sized amount inside. And gradually convert that small amount into the bladder's neck.
Then apply pressure on that with the small bean-sized amount, and expel it outside from the same place where you extracted it.
And command the assistant to press the bladder with their hand; and command another assistant to extend the patient's legs with their right hand above, and with their other hand to hold the skin at the place where the extraction is being made, below the legs.
And then insert a sharp instrument into the opening of which this is the form: It splits into what is between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle of the leg, first on the side of the left thigh; and the incision should be on that bone, and it is said to be in the buttock, and a transverse cut is made so that the external cut is wide and internal narrow according to the quantity that can be extracted from the stone, not excessively, because strongly holding the said saying that the stone is in the buttock, one forgets the ability.
And you know that there is a stone with angles and edges, making its extraction difficult for this reason.
And from that, it resembles a grain, it is round, and it is made of the lightest material.
Therefore, if it is the one that has angles and edges, adjust it in the fracture.
And if it is not thus easily accessible, cover your hands over it or tighten it with a gesture decently, the extremity of which is as sharp as a lime, which you tighten over the stone, and do not let go of it; or insert from behind it a subtle instrument with a curved extremity.
If you cannot do that, then amplify the opening a little, and if you want to release the pain, cut and strengthen it with hot iron cauterization.
But if the stone is larger than one, at the beginning, push your hand into the opening of the bladder and cut into it; then insert a small tool inside; and similarly, make them appear as if they are more than two.
And if the pain is very intense, ignorance consists in incising such a great section, which causes harm to the patient due to one of two reasons: either it stops (the pain) or it promotes the discharge of continuous urine, for this reason the location is not entirely consolidated.
If it is necessary to expel what is inside that is foreign, or if there is a fracture, use forceps within to extract that which is in the wound.
Once you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. And place over that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water, to prevent the wound from closing too quickly.
Then return the patient to their bed, and do not remove the bandage for three days.
And when that is loosened, soak the area with water and oil, then apply a mixture of mint and camphor until it heals.
If a case of plague occurs with abscesses, swelling and corruption, resembling as if the urine is frozen in the bladder, and due to this the urination is hindered (and it is known by the expulsion of urine), then one must immediately address this plague and extract that urine, for if it causes the bladder to corrupt and putrefy.
Then wash the plague with wine, water and salt, and opposite all species, what is suitable for it from the treatment until it heals.
And during all the stages of treatment, ensure that you cover and adjust both things and apply the medicines that are placed on the area.
And if the stone is small and located in the urethra, and its passage is blocked, treatment for this should be sought immediately, as stones treated by this method are often associated with urinary obstruction; already having tried and exhausted all means, take a metal probe, which has this shape:
with a triangular end, sharp, stuck in the flesh.
Then take hold of the thread, and tie it around the urethra to prevent the stone from returning to the bladder.
Then insert the metal probe into the urethra, piercing it until the tip reaches the stone. And turn the probe with your hand on the stone, slowly and carefully, piercing it from both sides until the urine flows freely.
And then press your hand over what is broken off from the stone of the kidney, outside the bladder, as it is squeezed and expelled with urine, and the illness is cured.
If this treatment is not suitable for any reason due to a particular condition, then tie a thread around the kidney and another thread on top of it. And then close the bladder over the kidney between the two bands. And then extract it. And then release the bandage, loosen the frozen blood clot that is formed in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie a thread around the kidney again, but only to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other bandage on top, because when the thread is loosened, the stone is expelled from the kidney, and the obstruction in the urinary tract returns to its place, causing the illness again.
And for this, it is necessary when you bind their bowels, that you raise the ligature at the openings of them, or return to its proper place, and tie the wound thus as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
On the extraction of stones from women.
Stones in women are rarely generated.
If you see a stone in any of those (parts), then the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden by many methods.
One of them is that women with strong wills are less prone to illness.
And the second is that you do not find a wise woman who reveals her secrets to a doctor unless she is in labor or has a husband.
The third sentence translates to: "Cleanliness is why you do not allow women uncleanly to handle this art, especially the surgical operation with their hands.
And the fourth sentence states: "And the place of incision over the stone in women is far from the place of the stone, so a deep incision is needed, and there is fear regarding that.
If it is necessary to do so, you may call for a clean and knowledgeable female surgeon, and they are not hard to find.
If you are lacking those, then seek out a skilled and subtle surgeon, or present a woman midwife well-versed in the facts of women, or a woman who has herself experienced the art.
Therefore, present this one, and command them to do everything you order them to, from the examination of the stone to its beginning. This is because it matters if the woman is a virgin, so ensure they insert their finger in her anus to check for the stone.
Therefore, if you find that, cut it off and then command him to incise on that.
If it is not yielding, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the wound of the patient and feel around on the bladder, for she places her left hand on the bladder and extracts it with due care.
Therefore, if you find that, carefully cut it away from the horrible part of the bladder to the sides, adding to the force of your virtue so that it reaches that point of the matter.
Then make an incision on that position corresponding to the shape of the bladder from the root of the thigh to some extent, and ensure the finger is not removed from the bladder by cutting it off.
And the incision should be slight at first; then insert the ray into that section, and if the bladder is felt, adjust the section according to the amount, knowing how much urine will be released from that.
And you should know that the spices of the pear are diverse: for some are small and sharp, others large and bitter, some long and round, and they have thorns.
Therefore, you know how many species there are of it according to what you have mentioned about what you want.
And if you want to drain the abscess, apply hot glass (or a similar material) to the affected area for an hour until the abscess is discharged, and then return to your operation to remove the pear.
And prepare yourself with the tools mentioned for the removal of the pear in men, so that you are aided by them in your operation.
And if you want to drain pus, and you know that the expulsion of pus is from the deep incision, then place powder on the area and use a dusting and compressive movement, and do not repeat this; leave the pear and do not extract it, for the strong pain will die out in the illness. And then treat the wound.
So when the pain of the wound subsides after a few days and the location becomes accessible, then you return to your operation while ensuring that the stone is removed.
Chapter LII.
On the section about hernia treatment.
A hernia inguinal is no more than the accumulation of moisture in the white trunk, which leaves the opening of the generative vessels containing the seed, and it is called the scrotum.
And in some cases, it is within the natural sheath that prepares it for the departure of the seed, as if it were another seed; and it is the opening of the generative vessel between the white trunk that we have mentioned, which is not a hernia but rather a tartar.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the muscles, for these are the areas where this matter is discharged, and sometimes it occurs due to impact on the muscles.
And this humidity does not have moving colors, for the color of it is either declining to citron or bloody, or red, or black and sticky, or white water, and it is that which is most common.
And the signs by which one knows this addition of water are as follows: for if it is in the white bone that we have mentioned, then the swelling becomes round, declining a little in length, with the shape of an egg, and the muscle appears, because the humidity is concentrated from all parts.
And if the humidity is in the own fat, then the swelling becomes round and divided from the bone, and thus one estimates that it is another bone.
And if moisture is between the joints of the toes and the white skin, then cut away the sensation.
And to determine the color of the moisture, you should observe the color of the moisture in the cavity where it has formed; and according to what is evident from the trace of the formation, judge what lies within.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of the hernia, you should ensure that the patient is in a reclined position if possible, and turn them over frequently.
And then place them on their back for some time, if necessary, and cover them with clean sheets.
Then position yourself on the left side of the patient and instruct the helper to follow behind them, extending their finger two hand-widths from the joints of the toes to the edge of the abdomen.
And then carefully take a wide and sharp knife, incise along the middle of the cord at the exact place, extending towards the anus.
And make the second cut according to the same measure, at a distance from the line that you have made through the skin of the genitals, reaching up to the white bone.
And extract it, observe and be careful not to pierce; your incision should be clean and smooth, examining the extraction carefully according to its quantity and as much as possible.
Then carefully pierce the white bone with a wide perforation and extract all the water.
Then separate the two lips of the incision with scissors, extend the bone apart in its divisions; do not touch the cord that connects the genitals, and incise the bone in that manner as much as is possible. And cut through that organ in its entirety or into the pelvis, and especially its thin walls, because if you do not carefully inspect the incision of it, there is a sure risk that the water will return.
But if, during the process of removing that from its place at the time of your operation, you have completed the section of the ciphas, then return inside it, and properly adjust both lips of the hernia from the genitalia with sutures, and likewise take care of it just as you do with other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find that it is corrupted by another illness, then know that you must ligate the vessels that are above the suspenders, remove the hernia, and take care of it as we have said.
But if water is added in two parts, then you know that both are hernias; therefore, cut through that part according to what you have done with the other in the same manner; and if it appears to be a suitable operation for you, then perform it.
And then clean the wound, and enter into the sections with a cloth submerged in oil or olive oil; place another cloth that you have submerged in wine and oil outside, and spread it over both legs and the miracle of the abdomen; and cover it with folded sheets and powders, and wrap those with a linen according to this form:
Then take two sheets of linen and wrap them with woolen tape according to this form; press the extremities where it is held by a cloth or woolen tape, add tension in the crotch area of the trousers, one extremity takes up from behind and enters between the two, and the second extremity takes up at the opening of the pant leg, and two other extremities on each thigh and two other extremities on each knee, and all tightness is adjusted in the crotch area of the trousers.
And in some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cauterization instead of cutting; so you take a thin cut-wedge cautery and make an incision at that point of the leg's bone, and ignite it according to what we have recommended until the white scar tissue containing the water is discovered, and then you take the cautery as follows: And it resembles Greek letters.
And then perforate that cicatrix, and light it until all moisture is driven out.
Then extend the cicatrix with incisions, and excise it with incisions, and excise it with a subtile cautery ignited; cut according as you can until you eradicate all of it; and beware that the fire does not touch you.
And know that this operation is much safer and farther from pus flow, and better than an operation with section.
If it causes you contrary trouble to use cautery in the time of section or in the time of burns, or pus flow, then hide that you cure what contrary trouble is caused by this, as treatment which you deem suitable for it according to what has been said.
If the disease is severe and does not expect a second operation because of its terribleness, then perform incision as you have learned; and it is at this point that you, based on what we have said about signs, must be certain that this hernia is watery.
Now you understand that you must sever the disease on a raised spot, then make an incision in the lowest part of the abscess with a sharp knife, and stop the incision according to the length of the body.
And observe the opening widely, so that all the water flows out.
Then place your hand over the area, hold it there, and let the water drain out. And then tend to it until the plague is healed.
If there is contrary tension to the flow of water at that moment when you pierce it: this is not done except because the white panniculi in the orifice of the abscess cause opposition and prevent the outflow of water, then you must insert into the abscess a needle or instrument by which water is extracted, whose form precedes; or reduce the tension on the abscess with a small amount.
And you know that water returns, and is retained for about five or six months; and when it is added, then it should be pierced in the same way as before, because the disease will thus pass its days.
Chapter LXIII.
On Hernia Carnosa and its Treatment.
You know that in the section on this hernia, there is great fear of death in the patient's main dispositions; so it seems to me that its release and salvation are best.
And you are reminded of the operation on those and the spices of the abscesses.
Therefore, it says that the abscesses arise in the bodies of those whose genera are composed of them and are caused by various reasons: either by a sudden acute inflammation that is poured into the genera, or by impact.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not painful in itself, and it is a severe abscess.
And the very rare abscess is hardened, of which the color is dark, and it does not hurt.
And sometimes it is caused by the compression of the arteries, and by the inflammation of those thus, which has already been perceived as a recollection of it, or by the inflammation of veins.
It is known that what is caused by the inflammation of arteries is called the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it should not be touched.
What is caused by the inflammation of veins should not be dispersed due to any cause; compression with your fingers is not advised.
And it is also possible that on this specific case, incision and removal are made, while on the others, only the outer flesh is cut; you insert the knife into the genitals, then open them, extract the testicle, sever the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, tie them off, and incise the suspensory ligament farther in, after having severed that of every part of the testicle.
So if the testicle has already been consolidated in those muscles, then you must extract it and make an incision to get it out.
And if there is an adhesion due to any cause within the wound or between the bones, you must carefully remove all that adhesion and cut it with a circular incision.
If the adhesion is caused by native flesh in the location of the adhesion, which is behind, then you must carefully cut all that belongs to it and extract the foreign body as we have said.
So when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine; and then take care of it with other remedies until it heals.
Chapter LXIV.
On the treatment of hernias that are of the viscera.
It is an apostema (hernia) wrapped by some enveloping similar to a bud and softening of the testes, making it difficult to perform exercise and walk due to the affliction.
And in the treatment of this illness, one must be cautious regarding that which precedes its remembrance.
However, I note that they mention operation in that second step which I described first.
And it says that you must stop the illness on a raised platform; then, gently pull the suspenders of the testicles towards the sides; and take hold of the chain of the genitals with your hands, extending them with vigor.
Then, carefully cut using a sharp knife across the width at the base of the vessels, ensuring that the vessels remain uncovered.
And remove completely from every part as I have told you regarding the extraction of arrows, which are in the temples.
And then insert a needle with a double thread into them, fasten that one at the beginning of the place where it hurts, and fasten the other again at the end of their pain. Then make incisions in those places in the middle part of the body by cutting deeply according to the length of the body, and extract what is added from the putrid and corrupt humors.
Then treat the disease with a cure for other diseases in which you wish to be free from pain, so that the vessels which cause pain do not remain, as it is not harmful by itself.
If it happens that all the vessels are affected, then you should remove the testicles or tie them off with the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nourishment through the incision of the vessels and that they cease to function, or tie them off so that they do not grow young with these.
Chapter .lxxv.
On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a tear in the abdominal wall that extends over the belly from the blood vessels of the abdomen, so that the intestines protrude through that rupture.
And this rupture is either of the abdominal wall or an outgrowth of it, and these two types occur due to various causes: a blow, sudden movement, shouting, the lifting of some heavy object, or similar.
The sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the abdominal wall, is that it occurs gradually over a long period, and not suddenly, and it is a protrusion entirely within the abdomen as the intestines press against the abdominal cavity.
And the sign of the illness is when there is an inflammation of the joint, which at the beginning causes intense pain suddenly; it appears as a different bump near the affected knee, and this is due to the hernia protruding outside the thigh.
And sometimes the hernia sac is forgotten, and this is called intestinal hernial prolapse.
And sometimes it is caused by pressure, and sometimes it runs through the hernia opening, and here it gets stuck, which greatly impairs the patient's condition, and sometimes it causes severe and intense pain, especially when pressed.
In the treatment of this illness with herbs, care must be taken, so as to avoid the risk of aggravating the condition.
The manner of the operation for this condition is to command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity with their hand inside the hernia opening, and then press down on their chest between your hands, while also raising their legs.
And then tighten the cord that is the cord of the testicles at their attachment, and cut the cord of the testicles entirely through; and fix in two folds of the incised section as you need to open the section with these.
And if the section is according to the quantity that it is possible for you to leave without leaving a gap.
Then remove those bodies that are left by the cord of the testicles, ensuring that the white, hard body of each part is exposed.
Now insert your finger into what is the testicle, between the white body, where the cord has left, and between the second body, and loosen that adherence behind the testicle.
Then take hold of the cord of the testicles at the external attachment, and with your left hand extend the white body towards it, and raise the testicle to the part of the section; and order the assistant to spread the testicle open, and you dissolve the adherence behind with a complete solution.
And seek out the threads that say these are not causes of the intestine wrapped in the hard white ciphe (or, possibly, 'phlegm'). If you find no cause within them (the patient's conditions), then turn your attention to the abdomen.
And then cut away the remaining part of the tie below the testicles, cutting from which flows blood and pus as we have recommended in what we have said.
And then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound; leave it on the ulcer; and apply the dressing we have recommended (and sometimes white cautery is used, as we have said, for fear of pus flowing from incisions, because these have been known to cause complications); and leave the dressing until it falls off by itself.
If the case is severe, then water should be applied as a compress, and it should be left on until the dressing falls off, as we have said.
And then apply the cure for the affliction with other remedies for internal ailments until it is healed.
**Chapter LXVI**
**On Ventous Hernia**
In this hernia, nothing has been observed that indicates a successful cure for it with iron.
And the first step is to perform as we have recommended for the hernia, which is to cut the vessels near it with ease and then dry the middle area around the abscess until the vessels fall.
And cure the affliction as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter .lxvii.
On the dislocation suffered in the ankles.
Sometimes, dislocations in the ankles break and protrude as we have said, and this distends the area.
And they do not mention any cause of hernias at all; and if they do, it is rarely; and it should be treated immediately.
If the condition is prolonged, a fissure should be made in the wall within the hernial sac before it protrudes through the abdominal wall; this happens due to the extension of the abdominal wall in the ankles as we have said, which causes the hernia to occur, since the abdominal wall is stretched and weakened and bulges outward.
And the treatment for it is with a cautery, thus preceded by the description of the condition.
And sometimes the condition is cured by cutting according to this manner: the malady lies on the back between the thighs, and then the site of the rupture of the prominent aponeuroses is incised along its length according to the quantity, in three parts.
And then tighten the white cord that is beneath the skin until it is discovered.
And then take the ray and place it over the prominent site of the cord, and press that against the abdomen's point.
And then press the two prominent sites on the end of the cord's ray, and adjust the suture between one another.
And then carefully extract the end of the bowstring, without piercing the skin with all its force, nor extending the wound, or any other cause that you should know in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
And then carefully tend to that in the treatment of ulcers, and when you incise the lesions, cleanse them, and restore the ulcer until it is consolidated; for the skin is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not yet healed.
And cautery is better at this location, for it is closer to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the cord of the testes.
In some men, the cord of the testes is softened due to the softening of the tissues between them, and careful attention should be paid to it.
Then it becomes necessary for the one who is requested in the treatment of the patient to make the malady lie according to its own nature, and raise all the soft tissues that are softened over the natural tissue; and then fit two lips to the suture.
And if desired, in the beginning, the excess of the softened tissue can be removed with three or four stitches and a firm suture.
Then cut between the stitches; and then take care for the healing of the other ailments within, so that they are cured and the discharge falls.
Chapter LXIX.
Of castration.
You know that castration is forbidden in our law, but for the sake of remembering it in this book, I will speak of it; and the remembrance of it is necessary only through two methods, of which one is so that when a doctor is asked about this condition, he may know its treatment; and the other way is that we ourselves sometimes need to castrate other animals for our young ones, as with horses, donkeys, pigs, and similar beasts.
And therefore it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by constriction or by cutting through a fracture.
In the case of castration by constriction, the surgical method involves cutting off the testicles while they are still soft and pliable so that they can be hanging down. Then take those with your hand while they are resolvable and do not appear to be affected by the touch.
For castration through cutting and fracturing, hold the animal firmly and with your left hand, press down on the cord of its testicles.
Then close the incisions, and cut through each of the testicles with a sectioning tool.
And then you incise those abscesses that you have opened. And do not leave any cause unnoticed from the side of the brain, but rather the subtle inflammation that is over the vessels.
And this method of castration is better, which is done by compression, for strong compression leaves no cause for the testicles, so the animal does not desire copulation.
And then tend to the plague until it is healed.
Chapter LXX (70)
On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one where there is an opening in the scrotal sac of testicles, and in that where it appears between two testicles, resembling a woman's vulva with hair.
And in some cases, the flow of that urine is seen in the scrotum of the testicles.
In women, there is a specific difference: indeed, the organ of the woman over the vulva resembles two testes of a man, slightly smaller in size, just outside the body, similar to the hymen of a man and two ovaries.
And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women. And it is because you must understand how to tightly wrap those tissues to stop the emission of that fluid, and then treat them with a remedy for other ailments.
And in the second kind of men, of whom urine is seen in the scrotum of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for them.
Chapter .xxi.
Of springtime and flesh swelling due to causes related to women.
The swelling of the flesh, when it is severe and arises from natural causes, should be carefully observed; and in some cases, it is magnified in certain women to such an extent that it spreads as in men and prevails during coitus.
Therefore, when you have an excess of swelling in your hand or fingers, use your thumb or some tool to puncture it.
And do not finish the incision with a single cut, especially at the point of penetration, so as to prevent bleeding.
And then take care of that which is under treatment for healing, as it were.
There may be born flesh is the flesh that is not in the horror of the mother's womb until it fills itself, and strong heat has been felt from outside according to the appearance of a serpent (and for this reason some call it "tailed malady"); therefore it is necessary that we cut it as we cut the limb, and treat it until it is healed.
It appears that you have provided a reference or a heading, but no text to translate. If you provide the content following "Capitol .lxxii.", I would be happy to assist with the translation as requested.
**On the Treatment of Arthritis.**
It is important that the woman's hymen is not pierced or broken. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to some evil preceding it, and it is caused either by an improperly adjusted body part or by a subtle and deep (condition/injury).
It is felt or in the region of the mother, or in the sides, or above the navel, or below it, and it prevents conception and engagement and childbirth, and strongly prohibits menstruation.
And the knowledge of it is gained through observation of the mother, if the pregnancy is evident, then it is recommended; but if not evident, then you should seek to know it from your husband or from a wise person.
If the intake is through a subtle leak, especially affecting both lips, then cut and rupture that.
And it is that it rests on both delicate lips, and then you hold your breath, indicating the moment of both emissions.
And the woman lies on her back, her legs spread apart, and then she squeezes both lips with force until that subtle leak is broken and the intake is opened.
Then take wool and hemp in oil and apply it to the area, and keep pressure on it for some time so that the incision does not solidify.
But if the leak is thick and dense, then cover that with a broad spatula or a leaf of mint.
If the operation is for a tumor, then suspend it from an angle, and incise it.
And these are the medicines that stop the flow of blood from bites, as well as pain and dragon's blood, and bandages, adjusted to the patient's wound.
Then administer a wide lead cannula so that the plague is not solidified too quickly.
Hold it for several days and administer water from the source.
Then it is healed with the other treatment of consolidation until it is cured.
Sometimes accidents occur in the native state of other meats, and then you must incise according to this manner. If it is so for gangrene of the legs, to the gangrene of the legs which is in the greatest part, no opposition should be done in any way.
**Capitol .lxxiii.**
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, tail, and red botch that occur in the vicinity of a woman's vagina.
Hemorrhoids are caused by the dilatation of veins within, not unlike those in the rectum that flow continuously; and when hemorrhoids have been present for a long time, they become inflamed.
And you have already described the division of these conditions into species and signs, and indicated which receive treatment and which do not.
Therefore, it is said that hemorrhoids and itching when in the lower part of the body and do not appear in sensation, then in those cases treatment with fire is not effective.
Those that are in the lower part of the body over which sensation is felt, those are the ones that are healed.
And take care that you place the woman in a clean, warm bed and extend her legs with forks or a rough cloth, and insert those into the creases.
Then sprinkle over those parts the flow of the sacred smoke from one of the burning herbs, thus as with oak and similar ones.
Then massage their feet for an hour and place them in hot water.
And if the smoke continues to flow, then make a decoction of sumac and of crushed stones and of gravels and similar ones.
Then take flour of wheat and mix it with honey and wine, and make a plaster of this over the back of the patient.
And if the tumor is incised, it is good; otherwise, make two incisions and perform scarification on the nipples.
Then take wool and immerse it in the juice of colander or in the juice of artichoke or in the juice of gallnut, make a compress and apply it to the place; then treat the place with ointment until it is healed.
And treat it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
On the perforation of the eye socket due to an accident in the head.
The occurrence of various types of abscesses happens in the body, as well as cracks and abscesses, ulcers, and swelling, eruptions, festers, bleeding fistulas, and other abscesses. And you have already described these ailments and their types, the signs of those, and the treatments for them in detail.
And as you have stated in this treatise about abscesses, which you see in the body when they are caused by health issues, and if you want to know in what manner the operation is performed to remove them.
So, when you consider that the pain from the abscess in its beginning is sharp, with inflammation and fever, and sometimes there is a red swelling over it, if you do not cut through it, but rather cure it with something that aids in the maturation until the sharpness of the symptoms ceases.
And then position the woman on her side on a cushion that has two cushions; she should recline on her back and align her feet at the opening below the abdomen, so that her thighs are spread apart, and place your hands behind her knees, and tie some bandage to it appropriately.
Then the midwife should stand at the head of the bed and administer the instrument that opens the womb, the form of which will be appropriate for those conditions that are to be treated.
And be mindful when administering this instrument that you place yourself at the head of the woman, and ensure that nothing from the instrument enters the womb except for the part that is meant to treat the condition and heal the illness. If the instrument is larger than the size of the womb, be sure to place poultices on the surface of the womb to prevent any entry of instruments into the womb.
And be sure that you hold the twist that runs in the lace instrument above and that the minister holds the instrument and turns the twist until the opening of the main orifice is opened.
And when the excitation appears and it is hot and moist, then you must quickly remove the seed from its head with a broad spatula.
And after the stool is evacuated, then you must place in the wound a sponge soaked in warm oil or oil with some styptics; and apply pressure to the section of the colon at the anus of the patient.
And pull out the colon and place it on the clean lint, which is soaked in water containing violets.
Then it is healed in two days with the application of a suitable poultice until it is completely cured.
And sometimes the mother and the plague are washed with water and honey, then add water in which the root of iris or the tongue of long philosophy has been boiled, and return to the mixture.
If the plague is deeply embedded in an infected wound, you must abstain from treating it with iron, instead following the method we have described above.
Chapter LXXV.
To teach midwives how to use the breath of life to heal embryos when they deviating from natural form.
A necessary cause is that the midwife recognizes the beginning of the natural signs of childbirth when she sees the woman experiencing contractions and desires to smell the air; she is distracted by what is happening above her, and hastens the emission of the embryo. Then you will know that this delivery is according to natural form, and is the emission of the child upon his head, or suspended or hanging from the navel.
Therefore, when you observe those signs, you will see that the mother's belly is compressed so that the embryo eases slightly, and it moves to the second position, and it is cleaned of those superfluities with good cleansing.
He who differs from this practice does so unnaturally and unbelievably, for when the embryo is situated on its feet and the body of the mother is before her head and her feet, or one hand of hers is on her breast, or at her hip, or her head and hand are above her belly, or she is strongly bent over her spine, and appears like the unbelievable figures of hers.
For a wise and subtle midwife is necessary in all those cases, and she must guard against errors and disappointments.
And showing all the figures of those, and what wit is in those so that it is made clear about this and established on it.
When the flow is situated on the head by natural egress, and it is urgent in women, and it occurs in a difficult part, and its virtue is already weakened, then do that cessation, which women have, and evaporate the congestion of it with fennel seed and moist olives.
Then insert the meter between their dilated and fractured edges, or rather, that one into her ungual [finger/toe] nail, so as to draw out what is within her of moisture. And press the woman's belly as she gives birth.
If it does not come down, then cover the woman with a poultice of chickpea flour and fenugreek ground into a paste.
Then command him, take off the poultice, which is to be replaced and do that sneezing in position; and close his mouth and nose for an hour, so that the passage [of the labor] is not forgotten soon.
And if both sides of the wound are forgotten at the beginning, then be sure to reduce them with ease, little by little. If you do not follow the procedure, then place the woman on a mattress and lift her legs up, then carefully position the mattress over the ground; and ensure the woman does not fall due to the impact.
And if the cuts are not properly healed and the wound becomes infected, then incise those areas and remove the pus from the wound or secure the body with bandages until it heals, for that will be forgotten.
When the embryo is on its feet, then gently press those areas, and slowly turn the embryo, and then compress it, and stretch each part little by little.
When they are situated between the thighs, then command them to expel, and cause them to vomit at the right time, for it will be forgotten if God wills it.
And if it is not forgotten what we have recommended, then return the small wound little by little until it heals in that second natural form, for that will be forgotten with the passing of time.
And if it is forbidden to do what we have recommended, then take moss and dissolved gum, and grind them thoroughly in a mortar with good percussion, and return the liquid to the abdomen of the patient, near the ovary of the woman. And then make that stop in boiled water, as long as the symptoms improve.
And when the wounds have healed and become clean, then make him inhale mist from mint and hold that over him. And after the fumigation for an hour, you should stop it on a pillow, then make them sneeze and expel air from their mouth, take away that air, and press the lower part of their belly gently to release the gas.
The fetus is delivered longitudinally through one of the openings made in the mother's side. Use skill to reduce the mother's pain, but if that is not possible, raise the woman and make her twist around.
And if twisting does not help, place her on her side, and gently shake the parts of her body with a violent concussion, then apply ointments and bandages that you have prepared beforehand from mud and herbs.
And if the delivery has begun, then assist her on all sides, and carefully study the reduction of pain, then guide the fetus back into its natural position, and make the woman sneeze, and instruct her to press herself until it is expelled.
The expansion of the condition over the colon increases its mass and the fascia around it is twice that of its usual size. The midwife should have her hand on the fetus, then slowly turn it this way and that, which will facilitate the process.
And as it is and how much it has been swallowed, then pause over the cone of it where we have recommended oil and mucus.
Then command him to cough slowly, and when you have done this, make him rest on his side, then command him to turn over, and from there command him to sneeze in that position. Prepare for the exit of the fetus on its side.
When you see a fever in the patient according to this manner, consider it, and then you pierce the second one with your finger until it is free from moisture.
And if the hernia is hanging from the face and neck, then you pierce that of the hernia, so it is not retained and dies.
Then you force the hernia back inside until it is in place, and instruct the woman to buy some vegetables, and if God wills, it will come out easily.
Twin or multiple births. You know that twin births are common, and sometimes even three or four, which is strange and should be rare; however, they may have natural causes, not living.
And in addition to those, if they multiply, a second one, and are separated by measurement, distinguish those that enter the ligament in the navel of each one, and sometimes they are forgotten as if it were a fact due to natural negligence, and sometimes they are observed as an inexplicable phenomenon as we have described.
And if they are difficult to deliver, due to their position, and this leads to the situations we have mentioned about non-natural positions, then you should treat them as we have described.
And if the midwife is skilled and does what must be done with ease and subtlety, and takes her time, and is ingenious according to every figure as she prepares the body for the final stage leading to health.
Reminder that it is formed in the womb from embryos and some are aborted.
Some times are measured in units of one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more, and it is already verified that a woman who experiences abortion cannot get pregnant again, while another, completely formed, causes pain due to the measurement of the glorious sages.
And all this teaches that in the science of midwifery, they should pay close attention to such a young one resembling this, and therefore be wary of it as much as possible.
Chapter LXXVI
On the removal of the fetus when it is dead.
When you care for the dead fetus as we have discussed in the section on treatment and it does not exit naturally, and you are compelled to use manual extraction, then consider whether the woman is of sound constitution and free from any conditions that could lead to her peril or loss.
Now cover the woman so that she is supported on her side with her head inclined downwards and her legs elevated.
The midwife should hold both parts, either supporting them on the side or restraining them to prevent the child from extending during delivery.
Then moisten the mother's mouth with oils and mucilage of althae and fennel and fenugreek seeds.
Then the midwife rubs her hand with these oils and mucilages, and gently enters her hand into the mother, and carefully feels for the position of the child within the womb.
And in this regard: consider then if the child is ready to be delivered headfirst, and hold the catch as it comes out, either at the feet, or the neck, or the mouth, or the soft palate, or the beard, or the furcula (a part of the skeletal system), or in places close to the ribs, or below the hipbones.
If the illness manifests itself in the patient's feet, it is then located in the toes or in the middle of the soles, or in the sides of the chest.
And it should be held with the thumb of the right hand, bending the curve towards the part between the fingers of the left hand, and then insert the finger easily and place the thumb in one of those positions as mentioned, so that it reaches the source of the pain.
Then it should be placed and held in the appropriate position, or the third one if necessary, to ensure an equal attraction, without causing any extension according to its normal state.
And consider this entire process, so that the removal of the illness is also facilitated as it is done in other cases when dealing with teeth.
And be aware of what is between them, so that the extension is softened; if any part of the illness remains, then the midwife should apply her fingers with oil and insert them carefully and turn them over those parts that are retained.
Therefore, if the removal of the fetus is forgotten, then the incisions will be exchanged in the place where the pus is; and do this until all the fetus is removed.
But if the hand is positioned opposite the other and cannot be reduced due to the tension of the hernia, then a cloth should be wrapped around it; and extract it until it is all removed, and cut it either at the joint of the hand or in the crotch.
And likewise, do the same for the other hand and both feet.
However, if the head of the fetus is large, or it gets entangled during extraction, or it's at the end of contracted waters, then you should insert between the spines and split the head and extract the water, or use an instrument called "alundat," which resembles other instruments described in the relevant chapter.
And seemingly, the making of this is of great difficulty by nature: and now you see that it inserts this algimate, or takes up this swelling as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is solidified and constricted, then its fork must be cut open so that the humidity in the foot can be drained.
If it is not complicated and does not contradict observation, then you should cut off the head as soon as possible.
And if the hernia from the abdomen is apsith or within it is moist, then you must pierce that space through which the moisture in it flows.
If the condition is above their feet, then the attraction of it should be light and the direction of it towards the mother's opening should also be light.
If the abdomen and foot are compressed, then you must remove that thick cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and open the abdomen and foot until what is inside flows out.
If the other limbs are stuck and the head is turned, then insert your left hand; if the mother's mouth is closed, then insert your hand in the opening of the womb, seek for the child's head, and pull it into the mother's mouth, then insert one or two fingers, and turn it until it is inside.
And if the mother's mouth is closed due to swelling caused by the heat, then be careful not to make it worse; instead, you should administer an infusion of greasy humid causes. And apply poultices; also, keep the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the issue is on their side, try to slice it open if possible; and administer what we have mentioned regarding the live case.
And if that is not possible, then slice into the flesh, and extract it.
And be sure not to leave any cause inside after the second operation.
And when you have completed all your operations, administer what we have mentioned about the treatment of the wounds that occur from the main cause.
And if there is an occurrence of blood flow, then use strict waters and administer the other treatment.
And you have already seen a woman whose womb was filled with dead children, and another time over that fire another pregnancy was attempted, and another dead child was born from it. It has happened that after a long time an abscess opens in his body; fire breaks out inside, and he begins to shiver with cold.
And you have often been called upon to cure them, and treated them for a long time, but the plague is not healed.
Then stop considering them from some causes of strong attraction, and take one bone out of them, and after a few days another, and another bone; and you will be too amazed when there is no bone in the belly.
And then you will realize that they were bones of the dead fetus.
Therefore, you will pursue the plague, extracting from them many bones, the female existing in their thousand dispositions, and already living in such a manner for a long time, correcting them with a small amount of warmth.
And do not be afraid that it is strange, for there is knowledge and aid in it, and the doctor uses his hand for its healing administration.
On the forms of the instruments necessary to extract the hernia.
The form of the turn which opens the hernia:
This is the form of the strap in which the limbs are bound, whose tightening has two effects on both ends of the foot. However, this strap should be made to be neither too tight nor too loose, and it can be made of silk or leather.
And the width of each strap should be such that two fingers can fit between them, and their margins on both sides should be one finger wide; their length should be about a palm and a half, and in the middle part of the two straps there should be two fastenings already fixed, whose length is half a palm, and the width of each strap should be such that two fingers can fit between them, or a little less.
And these two additions are placed in the mouth of the hernia to keep it open while you apply the prescribed virtues.
Another form similar to that subtle and light pus is:
It is made of bark or bamboo according to the appearance of tongs. However, in the extremity of it, two additional items are placed as well, and the length of those additions is about the width of a palm, and the thickness of each is about two fingers.
And when you want to open the hernia, you lay the woman on her side with her legs hanging down, opening what is between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument like shears, according to the amount you want from the hernia's mouth, until the mesh does as you wish.
The way of vertigo which the ancients spoke of:
The method of pushing that drives the process:
The method of friendship that contains the great head:
And it is assembled like forceps with teeth at the end, thus when using, and sometimes it is made long according to this form, also with teeth like a saw with which it cuts and contains. Method of friendship sparingly:
Form of a hook without a spine:
Form of a hook without two spines:
A form of spatula with two extremities where the head is separated.
A form of two spatulas wide.
All those instruments, when used in combination and with the addition of various spices, prepared as they should be by the artisans, become lighter for their use and more beneficial to humans due to their quantity.
And do not neglect those instruments that are already adequate for your needs, as the necessity of others cannot be excused.
From the extraction of the secondine (a medical term possibly referring to a specific part or procedure).
When the second stage of labor is reached, you must command the patient to hold their breath, then make them sneeze in a controlled manner, place your hand over their mouth and nose, and if they breathe outside, that's good.
And if that happens, take a blade and make a hole in the cover, opening the mother's mouth with herbs such as calendula, chamomile, and licorice root, as well as cinnamon and cassia wood. All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the vessel, and then placed over fire.
And then place a canvas tube in the mother's mouth, keeping it open until the steam enters the mother's cavity.
And make the patient sneeze as mentioned earlier, and the second stage will pass quickly.
If one approaches this cure properly and not rashly, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or an infusion of alder, and gently insert it into the patient's anus and seek for the second one, and when she has found it, gradually pull it out bit by bit. If it is attached to the mother's body, then insert her second hand according to our previous discussion, and when she finds the second one, extract it little by little so that the mother does not feel a strong attraction. It is better to be changed at the right and left sides with ease.
And if the mother's mouth is constricted, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and medication with all kinds of herbs.
If all the causes we have mentioned are not forgotten, then be careful not to do anything in the process of abstraction, but know that what has passed from him into the mother's womb lies in the matter of the woman, and immediately sprinkle it with a mixture of herbs and four drugs; for it will rot within a few days and dissolve and disappear.
When you perceive that there is a high sound in the head and stomach, which causes the patient pain, then know that fumigations and appropriate remedies should be administered to it.
Some of the Ancients already used fumigation with nasturtium and dried figs.
The form of the instrument used to fumigate women for the retention of menstruation and postnatal bleeding:
It is necessary to make a cut or an incision.
And the fine end of the instrument should be in the cavity and the wide end over the fire, and the suction should be applied over the arms of the fire.
And hold that until the suction is consumed, then repeat another one.
On the cure for the unperforated anus of a child.
Many children have this problem, and their anuses are not perforated, which is already a delicate and sensitive issue. Then instruct the midwife to perforate it as she has said, or otherwise, to use a sharp instrument and ensure it does not touch the rectum.
And then apply pressure over that cloth soaked in wine and oil; and carefully tend to that mixture until it becomes peaceful.
If there is a fear of oppression, then apply pressure to the tract through a catheter for several days, and stop it when the child wants to pass stool.
And it also happens that oppression occurs in the anus due to the formation of a fistula or abscess; then, once that consolidation is incised, it should be treated with the same methods we have mentioned for healing and bandaging.
On the healing of fistulas that inevitably occur.
Fistulas that inevitably form in the perineum contain foul-smelling and thick discharge, which either protrude outside or are located in the space between the buttocks.
And it is a fistula or an ulcer.
And when that condition is chronic and caused by stagnant moist white decay or subtle putrefaction, sometimes these fistulas penetrate.
And those that penetrate are guided by the fluid that has accumulated from those below for their exit and by effusion; and sometimes the patient suffers from the difficulty of exit, and very often there is a strong discharge from those worms.
And from those fistulas, some are found penetrating into the space between the bladder and the flesh of the penis; and others penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the notch of the coccyx.
And for the case where the fistula penetrates into the anus but does not exit, you should insert a thin, sharp object like a needle or hook into the anus, and attempt to gently erase or pull on the fistula when it is not painful.
If there is stiffness in that place, then insert a fine attempt of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the attempt or hair in its proper place.
And if you do not feel any of the aforementioned signs nor detect any cause for discharge or swelling, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and you should proceed with caution in treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the meaning of it is emission of urine from that place and prohibition from urinating until that location is medically consolidated.
If it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then its sign is that the attempt penetrates here if there is no stiffness within the bone, and it causes pain in the surrounding area; and it will feel hot always; and it does not respond to any treatment, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
And in all those penetrating ulcers, there is no complete cure, and the cure for those requires work and diligence from skilled physicians over which they are firmly established.
But in those that are neither penetrating nor ancient, healing with iron is hoped for as per what I have advised you, and what you have already tried.
And indeed, the disease moves between your legs over its sides, raising the patient's legs inside, tilting things towards their belly, and then inserting a lead or iron probe, or if it is in a curved fistula, you must know the location where the probe enters.
And if that feels like the disease is around the heart, then you must insert your pointed instrument diagonally into the chest.
And if you feel the probe already penetrates and discovers a space, or feels something between the ribcage and that flesh, then you will certainly know that it is penetrating; and thus do not work on that, because there is no healing in that, as we have said.
Some doctors, however, say that it heals certain people's legs.
And for the treatment by which one hopes for recovery in them, make subtle cauterizations according to the extent of the fistula, as previously described, and insert that hot iron into the fistula until it reaches around the core; then repeat this process two or three times until you know that all the tissues surrounding the fistula, which are similar to a quill of down, have healed.
Then attend to those wounds wrapped in bandages until all the tissues that are adjacent are healed, and treat those wounds with medicinal herbs that nourish and consolidate the flesh; if it heals well, it is; otherwise, it will not heal at all with any other treatment.
If the attempt enters, but does not penetrate into the deep tissue, and between that and the attempt, there is only slightly flesh or a thin membrane, and the fistula affects the surface of the cord, then dry the cord from the beginning of the fistula, and as you dry the attempt, wait until the drying reaches the point where the tip of the attempt enters; and through the attempt, it is freed and cut off.
And then clean those infected flesh openings that resemble punctures from a pen, without any rupture due to any cause.
If a feverish flow of blood comes between you and your operation when you inspect those flesh openings, then the best thing to do is use a sharp instrument, either cauterized with fire or acute medicine, for cautery with fire adjusts the two habits well: it molds those attached flesh, and cuts out the pus by drying up the moisture.
And then take care of those wrapped in calluses or hard skin growths that have formed on the edges where there is friction, and also tend to the infection through hardened, burnt-off flesh that generates and solidifies.
And thus, the medicines that involve cleansing and cutting; when you have restored it, it is already healed and you need not fear recurrence.
If a fistula has already perforated into the anus and is elongated from the surface of the body, then insert the finger into the anus and investigate thoroughly.
And so if you sense a tumor and between you and it is clearly of a phlegmatic or fleshly nature, and it is prone to penetration, then it is not surgery upon it but rather through a path of trust and hope.
The treatment for this condition involves one of three methods: first, cauterizing it as we have mentioned; second, drying it out until you can reach the cavity beneath so that you may insert some remedy; and do not use amputation because you would not be able to close the wound properly, nor let the pus escape, and you should heed the wishes of the patient; and take care of it as we have said, for it will heal strongly. Or else, elongate that membrane and drain the pus that has dried up within it, right next to the anus, as we have mentioned, using a probe or another instrument of sharp extremity, and then clean those fistulated meats with cauterization if necessary; and endeavor to make the complete restoration of all the wounds through surgery, and if the orifice filled with pus does not heal, puncture the open fistula in the anus, and let the pus flow out more gently due to the patient's condition. And in some cases, the fistula is closed in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, it is on the side of the buttock near the surface of the body and at the margin of the buttock, take the probe of the perforating end, which is thus prepared with a needle in this form.
and insert into that wound enveloped in your fields or around those; then, insert the probe into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
If it is penetrant at the margin of the anus very close by, then extract the thread from that trap as you insert the thread into the anus; remove the end of the thread and join both ends together, and leave it thus for a day or two, and when you more deeply cut the thread into the flesh, begin again with that until the flesh between the two ends of the thread is cut through and they fit.
And then treat the wound until it is healed and consolidated.
If the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in some way that you are prepared, either by moving the patient or otherwise, since it is not for you to do this so as not to cause an injury; and then treat it until it is healed.
The shape of the spine that through which the fistula is divided: its curvature is sharp in one direction and the other part is not sharp, so as not to cause damage when you do this, thus carefully.
On the stitching of hemorrhoids where pus flows from the incision of those (hemorrhoids).
Hemorrhoids occur in two ways, either they are between the anus and resemble stones, or those (hemorrhoids) are with the grease of excess weight. And they are small and large, the wound flows from them at that time and it is one, very red, very hot, and in the extremities of it.
However, those that are very open at the anus can be treated with a few drops of seawater or a little bit of salt and vinegar, which flow continuously, and they are according to the colour of the body.
And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is that you command the patient to defecate, and press until the pain subsides and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you hold yourself and suspend with your fingers or what you have at hand, and then cut those parts gently to remove the hemorrhoids.
If the cuts are not held in those by their moisture and softening of them, then take a coarse cloth or a cotton ball or a woolen pad, and remove those from your fingers, and then cut them and sprinkle some powder over them after the incision, so that they adhere to those in place instead of cauterization; or cauterize them as mentioned previously in the chapter on cauterizing. And then attend to those and other remedies until they are healed.
If the bowel does not obey and is slow to pass, then sharpen the sickness with a small incision, wash it with water that sits on the stomach, and thus encourage its expulsion when the sickness squeezes.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, their cause is lighter, and it is because you take those with your finger, or take those with wax, and cut them off, then care for those as we have said until they are healed.
And for those who perform the incision, note how to apply stitches to them according to this method: take a thin thread and wrap it around, then insert the needle into the parts above the hemorrhoids, and do the same below, and wrap both ends of the thread on either side of the needle, and tie it taut; and stretch the hemorrhoid with firm compression, and tighten the thread and remove the needle.
And do this continuously, leaving none of them untouched, so that the superfluous blood flows from it.
Then place your hand over the cloth soaked in warm oil or wax; press it upon the wound and instruct the patient to rest. Then remove that from the wound; and when it is healed, treat those with ointments or other remedies until they are cured.
And when they are old and no longer respond to that medicine, you will need to clean those with the points of a spatula or with your finger, making sure they remain moist and free from any pus coming from them, which prevents their healing; and then take care of those until they are healed.
Now hold those with a strong reason, more violent than the first that enters, and be careful to cure those that are wounded; then attend to those that need healing.
You should know that hernia is crucial, and it does not disappear unless treated according to the color of the body, appearing like a small claw, and it is felt throughout the body, especially in the joints of the feet and legs, and through these pains, you should address it.
And then, you should incise what is in the area around the claw, and hold it with forceps or a hook, and eradicate it from its root; and then take care of that.
And if you wish, cauterize it as mentioned previously in your chapter.
May a verruca be a small, rough, round ulceration on the surface of the body, often appearing in the majority of children.
And the treatment for it is to extend and incise that, or open it again with a sharp tool within the wound. And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or sharp medical tools, as we have said.
May a wasp be a small, hardened or rounded ulceration on the surface of the body, often accompanied by itching, and when the doctor feels it, it resembles a wasp sting, and it is found around the body.
And the treatment for it is to take a sharp cannula, either of goose or rabbit feathers, and insert it firmly into the swollen lymph node until it retains the shape of the cannula; then rotate your hand with the cannula until you puncture what lies within the circumference of the lymph node, and place it on the base of the flesh, and remove the lymph from its root.
And if you prefer, make this as a cannula of iron or steel in this form:
The part protruding from the cannula should be delicate, soft (not perforating), wrapped around itself so that when it is removed from the lymph node, the pain associated with it is alleviated and the rotation of that part is smooth.
And if you wish to cauterize the lymph node as mentioned above in the section on cauterization, follow these steps.
In the form of instruments that are administered to give ice.
Sometimes ice is made from silver or lead or melted earth; and sometimes it is made from those small and large instruments according to those that are administered, for the one that is administered in the treatment of small children is small; and of those whose backs are stiff or painful, the ice of those will be small.
The form of large and few ice pieces:
The top of the tube of it from above, where the bag is tied, should be wide according to this manner; and its distinction is where the bag is bound as well.
And the lower end of it, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (not pointed), slightly bent, and tailored to subtlety; and on one side of its length are two channels, and on the other side one channel, and the width of the channel should be according to the thickness of the rays and more narrow a little.
And let the bag be filled with medicinal fluids from a beast's bladder or sheepskin, and its size be that of a palm.
And it should be pierced with many such instruments as it is turned; and if the space between the parts is large, the size of that instrument should be accordingly.
Then insert into those parts strong, fresh vinegar, or surround them with it; adjust the bag to those parts; and when the bag is in place on the affected area, tighten it firmly between two distinct points at a strong cost, and then bind each part: The quality of binding should be such that you fill the bag with medicine, heated according to the patient's tolerance, and be careful not to make it too tight or too loose.
Then the patient should be made to lie on their back, raising their legs with pillows so that they rest on something flat or a lance; and apply the tip of the cautery to oil or egg albumen or a paste of fenugreek or similar; then insert it into the anus easily, and let the assistant take over the bag and press and squeeze it vigorously until everything in the rectum is evacuated; then remove the cautery and have the patient raise their legs against the wall.
And if the medicine forces him to vomit, take as much as you can; and if he sleeps with it for the entire night, it is more beneficial for healing.
If you believe that the patient needs to be treated with hot applications and vomiting to expel the humors, then you should continue with the cautery until healing is achieved.
And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or painful ulcers, then use a gentle and warm application, of which the heat should be carefully controlled, as these hot applications are what children are taught to use.
**Curation of Plagues**
You have already stated in the previous section regarding the treatment of plagues what is suitable for each case, and you have given the cure for those with more severe conditions and using various medicines according to their needs.
Therefore, it is said that plagues are diverse according to where they are inflicted and according to the place where the plague strikes.
And the causes for which plagues occur are thus: the heat of fire, or an incision of space or metal, or a strike with a lance, or a blow with a staff, or an arrow, or similar to those heat-causing factors.
The plagues that are in the body's parts may also be a plague that strikes the head, or the collarbone, or the foot, or the belly, or the back, and similar to those of the members.
And it is very important to recommend the treatment of certain plagues, in order to stop that reasoning and regulate regarding other plagues.
And one should begin with the simple plagues of the head, since the recollection of the compounded ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, it is said that when a simple headache occurs and it is not a fracture, you should consider: if it is due to the pressure of stone or something similar, and the patient has already bitten the tongue and it is a severe pain, and you fear that the disease will progress to apoplexy cauterization, you should immediately puncture and drain the head, and do not delay; and extract the blood from the vein according to the amount of virtue in it, unless there is any other cause prohibiting fleubotomy, especially if the vein that has been left from the plague is small.
And fleubotomy is contrary to the previous procedure; and attention should be given to the patient's diet, as well as avoiding heavy food and drink.
If, however, any cause prohibits minimization, then the diet should be restricted, and one should avoid meat and wine.
And regarding the plague, if it develops into cauterization apoplexy, apply a small amount of hot oil or wine in which a stick has been soaked.
If you are certain of the abscess's location, apply pressure to the sore, if it is fresh and its pus hasn't changed, then carefully extract it.
And if the air has already changed it, apply some clean bandages until it heals.
But if the sore is large or for some reason needs more space and its edges are not properly joined together, then adjust them with stitches according to the suturing method described for them.
If the sore has already exposed the bone and tendon, and it is not a retention but a small suspension, then incise it and treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh appropriately in the area of the wound, and order the patient to abstain from foods that are rough: seeds and forms similar to their shape, until it heals.
And if you find putrefaction in the bone that does not adhere to the bone, you incise all of it that is rotten and remove it, and then take care of it.
If these plagues are an artery or vein from which pus flows and is not severed by medicines, then you should investigate the artery, and if you find one that is not incised, you should incise it with a knife, or tie it off; and if, in the process, it becomes necessary to do something that we have not mentioned, then you should cauterize it until the pus has been drained.
And if these plagues are simple and small, their cause is considered trivial; so much so that you sprinkle on them this powder, which, when solidified, prevents the air from changing those.
And the manner of the powder is this: take oil from crushed seeds of dragon's blood, two parts of dried pus, and three parts of finely ground and sieved charcoal; fill the plague with it, and tightly compress it with a good constrictive bandage so that it adheres to the affected area, and coagulate the pus with it.
And then tighten it from above with poultices and leave it, and do not loosen it while it is in this condition, for the medicine will not be effective until it is healed.
And at other times, it requires only cautery, when there is no fever or dragon's blood present.
And this surgical procedure is also performed on large hernias when it is necessary to pause and tighten them, and they are recently inflamed with their own blood, the air in them has not been altered.
And if the air has been altered, especially during the summer, then one cannot understand the position of this powder, but instead, apply what we have said, so that you pause over these inflamed places with a paste of eggs or knead flour with water and honey until they are healed; and then apply the other treatment to them.
If a fracture of the bone occurs in a small area, then you extract it by manipulation.
And tell the cure for skull fractures where it is dangerous.
Of the ailments of the chest.
If the plague occurs in the chest, it does not differ much in treatment; similarly, the plague of the head is simple when compared to others.
If the nerves or arteries of the chest are cut, then, if it is a nerve, there is no need for elaborate treatment other than to avoid treatment that causes violent spasms; just as when they inject and bind it with something like vitriol or similar substances to numb them and relax the contraction. And do not apply any treatment to the pain without understanding its cause, for the substance of the nerves is affected and their continuity is connected to the brain, which is the source of all the body's members.
If this requires treatment with lighter medicines, it is also washed with water twice, sometimes with rosewater or other water, and then dried with a cloth, keeping the area moist.
But if the pain is severe, then a suture is administered, or the edges of the wound are bound, and care is taken with powders until it is healed.
But if the wound is deep or there is pus in it, then it is pierced at the most painful point.
But if the wound already involves an incised artery and there is blood flow, then it should be separated or dried, or tied off, or cauterized if this is necessary to stop the bleeding.
If you have already incised the spine from the nape or entirely, and saved the veins of the neck, then adjust the edges of the wound with sutures over the spine's canal and do not touch it; equalize that and return it to its natural form, and tighten it with appropriate stretch, and leave it for some days; and then care for it with ointment where there is stiffness and excitation until it heals.
If the infection has already taken hold within the bone, then probe it, and if there are fragments of foreign bodies, extract all that you can from them; leave what does not belong to the body until the infection dies down, becomes separated, and is removed from the affected area.
And if the infection is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder that has been recommended to you. If the infection has caused a fistula, then treat it with the water whose memory will come to you in its chapter.
If it is a lance or knife wound and one can feel the depth of it, then consider more carefully if the plague has taken hold and its condition deepens; then you will know that the plague is mortal.
And if there is no depth in it and the plague is recent, then at first you should apply a poultice to it, and don't press too hard so that the pus isn't trapped in the depth of the wound and returns to affect the heart and cause more harm; instead, apply a comforting ointment to it twice a day.
And if you don't have any ointment, then place a clean cloth over the wound to absorb whatever comes out; and make the patient lie on the affected area so that whatever is in it can drain properly.
If the plague has passed three days or more and no spasms, tremors of the heart, or tightness of the chest occur, and other good dispositions of the body manifest, then you will know that the plague is safe; and from there, treat those who are sick with calmus and other remedies until they are healed.
If the healing of the plague is prolonged and still open, you will know that a fistula has formed; treat it therefore according to its nature.
And if the plague is due to an incision of the skin or a wound, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with the method mentioned above, either with stitching if it's large, or with powder if it's small.
If the plague has already affected the bones and you have made an incision to remove parts of it, then you should squeeze the plague and extract the separated pieces. If they are not separated, leave them inside so that the plague does not spread, as their removal is alleviated.
And for other accidental injuries in the other members, the treatment in youth is the same as what we have said.
Of abdominal ailments.
The condition that occurs in the belly is either great, or slight, or medium-sized.
And a small disruption is made difficult by another method, and I observe that their reduction is more difficult if one does not carefully place them back in their place immediately, as they open up and become thickened so that the insertion into them becomes difficult.
And therefore the best dislocation is by means of a midline, for in this case the reduction of the hernia is not difficult, whereas it is difficult in both the two types mentioned above.
And you should know that the suturing of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two sutures are common and suitable for sutures in other parts of the body.
And the other two sutures are specific to other parts, but nevertheless, they are more appropriate for the suture of the abdomen.
And I recommend to each of you an exposition and declaration.
Therefore, it is said that when the hernia is small and there is no cause in the abdomen for this, and it is difficult to reduce it, then this is in one of two ways: either because of the minimal disruption as we have mentioned, or when the hernia has swelled due to the coldness of the air.
And therefore, when this occurs, it is necessary to clean that which you immerse in a sponge or cloth dampened in hot water, or take water from a spring, and use it to wash the hernia until the inflammation is resolved.
And in some cases, it is useful to use vinegar, which helps in the resolution of inflammation.
And therefore, once you have determined that the inflammation is resolved, you should moisten the hernia with water containing high amounts of salt and mullein, for it helps to remove the remaining causes of pain.
But if the pain persists despite this treatment, then you should incise the disruption using a small instrument to cut away the hemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is best when it involves no cutting, and there should be no concern about drying or starvation.
Of the instrument, consider its form:
In one part of the sharp knife, and in another part not sharp, and the tip is slightly blunt, rather than having the subtlety of a spatula, it should be somewhat obtuse.
And therefore when the hernia is enlarged and it pushes out the intestine, you must reduce it to its natural form in its proper place, if possible over that, as it is better.
When the disruption is wide, and it occurs in the lower part of the belly, you must have the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you must raise the patient's head and foot higher than the affected parts.
And seemingly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, you must pause your intent and your consideration towards it so that the part where the hernia is located is higher than the other.
And thus it is that you must administer this in both great pains and lesser pains.
And in smaller pains, prepare what you have, and then make the minister between your fingers, holding it entirely with your hand and adjusting its lips, and then gradually uncover from one place to another, seeking any cause for the rupture, both internal and external.
And this is the common method of stitching: take the needle, or count one needle according to the amount of the width of the wound; then lay it from the extremity of the rupture on the ring finger, and tighten the needle once; be careful not to pass through both extremities of the thread at once, but rather penetrate one strand from each side, within that space where you make the thread enter; and thus you have added the two extremities of the thread and the two extremities of the finger, making four orders.
And then tighten the thread double around the needle, sometimes from both sides together, and add both lips and the wound for a proper addition; and leave the thickness of the thread and fix another needle to it, just as if it were the first needle; and do not stop doing this with the needles until you have fully closed the contraction of the wound.
And the needles should be of varying thicknesses, between coarse and fine, for the fine needles pierce the flesh lightly; while the thick ones are difficult to insert into the skin, so it is necessary that they be both fine and coarse.
And it is necessary that the needle be placed in both ends of the hernia gently, so that the flesh is not pierced too deeply and the hernia opens before its consolidation.
And the stitches should not be too long so that the hernia is not obstructed from consolidation.
And then carefully cut the ends of the needles so that they do not injure the patient during their sleep; place them over the wound with expanded poultices from all sides, which have the ends of the needles; and leave them there until you know that the infection is healed.
And these types of suture have needles in what manner is most suitable for small wounds, where one needle or two or even more can be used in the suture.
However, the second suture is more complex: it consists of administering a suture to all four ends (two from the thigh and two from the calf) at once, using an needle carefully wrapped with thread in a specific thickness and delicacy.
And when the needle has penetrated these four ends, return the needle to its initial position from which it began, so that the thread retracts and draws the wound closed in stages; thus, the suture is like a cross-stitch where the threads are tightly strung.
And between each stitch, apply the quantity of the thickest part of the finger.
And this stitch heals men.
And with this stitch, I have treated the plague that had befallen a man in his belly, which was a rupture of a major plague about the size of a palm, and it had occurred around the intestines near the middle of the abdominal wound; and then I have reduced that part where the plague had entered through the abdomen for twenty-four hours.
And the plague became consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and I treated it, and he recovered and was healed; and afterwards I visited him for many years, and he returned to his former state.
And other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; but by a miracle, for you did not cure him with ointment, for he was in a place where neither ointment nor any medicine could reach, yet you applied the plague with great care twice a day and washed it assiduously with honey water until it became healed.
There are two kinds of stitching mentioned according to the account of words.
And so you begin to stitch the wound, and insert the needle from outside towards the inside.
And so, as the needle penetrates the wound and reaches the other side according to the rule and length of the body, leave the tip of the thread on which you inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from the inside to the outside at the other end in the opposite direction of the first.
And when you have made the needle penetrate there, make it penetrate again from that end of the wound to the inside; leave the tip of the thread on this side, and make the needle penetrate from the other end of the inside to the outside.
And make a penetration with that penetration by which you cause it to penetrate into the body at the end of the mirror, which is in its opening, so that all of that penetrates.
Then begin at this point on the side of the body, and with your hand take hold of the extremity that is on the other side from the opening, then reduce it back into the cavity and with the extremity of the mirror on the opposite side from this penetration; extract that which is in the needle from within.
And do this once, then another time, and keep doing this until you have removed everything that is outside according to this example.
The sum of this manner of stitching is that you sew with a stitch of skin, which I have mentioned before, so that you sew the body once from the side of the extremity of the needle, and then you pass through it again until the wound is healed.
But the second kind of suture, which is called gallia, and this is of speech about it and for its recompense, is that you sew according to the second layer to which some doctors sew it, thus adding all parts to its corresponding part to it by nature; and apply the extremity of one part of it to the other extremity of it, and the extremity of the opposite side to the other extremity of it, and this is done as you have learned.
Take care to keep the needle at the end of the mirror in your hand, and make it penetrate the skin from the outside into that hole, and leave both ends of the cipher; then turn the needle around and make it penetrate from inside out through both ends of the cipher.
Then turn around those threads and make some of the layers penetrate from inside out between the outer layers on both ends of the mirror other than in the opposite side.
And this method of stitching is better than common light stitching, as it is the stitch that we remember from before.
This is the speech of Gaul.
And some may say that the stomach suture is corrected with two needles; so you must insert a thread into each, and begin to introduce this needle from the opposite side, according to the suture of those which join the flesh together.
And you should know that when there is disruption in the middle part of the belly, the suture there is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
The play of medical treatment for plague is judged according to other plagues.
Which causes is when you perceive the recent plague at its sore spot in front of the sanch that the air alters it, and reduce the intestine and cauterize it and sew it properly, then place your hand over that fleshly powder.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then place your hand over that alkali soaked with your presence so that it makes hard pain and extracts the humors, and it becomes solidified and healed; and similarly treat that one as the cure for other plagues until it is healed.
If you do not have the medicines at hand, then apply this treatment immediately, since it begins to feel warm, with a little pain and itching, and it changes color twice a day, just as it has been taught to you, until it is healed, for you will not need other medication in case of simple plagues.
But if you are afraid that the plague might communicate to the principal members, then cover them with lion's hair soaked in oil of high quality, or in melted oil, and place it around the area between the angles and leave the ends free.
And if pain or putrefaction is felt in their intestines, as signs of this condition, you should apply a black, astringent vinegar, especially if the gangrene has reached the intestine and it needs to be removed by penetrating within its cavity.
And you should know that the one affecting the larger intestines has a lighter chance of healing compared to the one affecting the smaller intestines.
And its healing is difficult because the intestine called "jejunum" does not receive cure from any plague that strikes it; and this is due to the great number of veins in it, the size of them, the subtlety of the body part affected, and its proximity to nerve nature.
If what you process from the plague is the tissue, and you manage to stop it recently, reduce it according to your knowledge, affecting all intestines equally.
If it has been passed into the space and is already red or black, then you should tighten that thread over the area affected by it, so that pus flows, as there are veins and arteries in the tissue.
And then you cut this other material, and secure the two ends of the thread during the departure, leaving the infected part open, so that by removing the fabric and emitting the pus from the plague's branch, the attraction is alleviated.
Reminder of the plagues that occur in the intestine.
When there is disruption in the intestine and it is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people, so you should look for those who have been previously afflicted with a plague in their abdomen, struck by arrows, and had an ancient plague that formed a fistula, permitting management and ventilation.
Then pursue the treatment of the patient, even if it was not cured through their previous care, rather continue to work on that inner part which is being healed and the location is solidified.
And having observed the location now consolidated, pay attention to the patient's pain caused by the accidents in their stomach; do not interfere with any other bad accident that might break their natural dispositions of eating and drinking, and instead immerse them in water and exercise them as appropriate.
And certain experienced people say that when the pain in the intestine is small, it should be treated as follows: take a hot compress from large heads; adjust both lips of the pain and place a compress from those that keep the mouth open over both lips of the pain; therefore, when you press on those and tighten your mouth, cut off the head, for it adheres and is not dissolved.
And then place another compress close to the first one, and do not stop doing this until you have made several compresses according to the quantity of all the pain.
And then return that and compress the pain; and detach those attached parts within the hernia until the hernia is healed; and cause no harm to the patient.
And it is possible that the hernia appears as a thin, fine thread taken from the hernia of an animal, sharper than a needle; so take the end of these herniated threads, completely devoid of flesh, and closely attach the end of it to the thread, wrap it around, and then insert that thread into the hernia with needles and compress it in the rupture.
And this method of stitching with threads is nothing but a second way of trust and hope.
If the pain is great and extensive, especially if it is in one of the delicate hernias, then it requires not only compression but also subtlety, and it is not healed completely.
On the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
You know that every ulcer and fistula that forms as a result of aging and decay, if it is not healed and becomes chronic, causing pain for an extended period without healing or being incised, is generally called a fistula in any part of the body, and we refer to it as this disease.
And fistulas, in truth, are formed by a hard, white, painless substance, with a hollowed-out appearance similar to the cavity created by pain; and for this reason, they are called acute ulcers, that is, pain.
In some cases, the ulcer is wet, causing pain, and a significant amount of fluid can be discharged in a short period. At times, the fluid can be thick or thin, abundant or scarce.
You have already shown all those causes, and the signs of them, as well as their treatment with medicines in the division.
And so, it is necessary that you know the cure for a fistula which is caused through surgical means by hand.
And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; those are fistulas that reach great veins and arteries, or nerves, or the bladder, or the vesica, or any of the ribs, or any of the spinal joints composed thusly from the hand and foot; and these are the ones that give rise to proximity to the main member and similar ones.
And therefore, among these fistulas, those following this manner are from the difficult illnesses of which cure is not received, and occupation regarding them is work and ignorance.
And if it is any of these fistulas that are so deep as to not reach the places mentioned above and you hope and trust in their cure, and wish to come to knowledge of them, then take care or a knife, and if the fistula follows rectitude, and you inquire about it, you will succeed in its treatment.
If the fistula is curved, then investigate it with a delicate probe, for lead with the lightness of its body is removed and deviated from the curvature.
And if the fistula has an extremely horrible odor, it is not possible for you to treat it effectively.
Then clean the orifices for their horrible nature, for the moisture by which you cleanse them must also affect the other orifices and heal them.
And then, carefully questioning according to the manner in which you can recognize if here there are bones or nerves, and whether the fistula's cavity is distant or immediate, or if it is a fistula with only horrible odor, entirely within your power, using all of your strength, understanding, by which you question the illness, and by applying pressure with your hand over the area, and similar to the signs and accidental causes of the abscess.
And when you have considered all those causes with due care, you will proceed to treatment according to your confidence: and it is that you consider whether the fistula is close or in a clean place, far from joints, or nerves, or arteries, or veins, or one of the places which you know to be at risk.
Then you dry the fistula as mentioned in its description, stop what is in that flow and from rotten flesh, and what is born in the orifice of the flesh, or from parts and similar ones, and cure it until it is healed.
If the fistula is of great depth and according to rectitude, then you must incise it in the place as far as possible with your knife, and then clean it of all its rotten flesh; and then apply some wrapped bandages with sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula which you have previously understood with the knife.
And do this so that, after some time, the sharp medicine corrodes everything that is soft in the cavity of the fistula from corruption.
And then restore it with bandages that promote the growth of healthy flesh until it is healed.
If it is not healed by this means, then you should cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary for you to be certain of this, then examine and dry it according to what we have recommended; if you do not forbid any cause from veins or nerves or from a main member, as we have said.
If the bone is exposed and there is no corruption or blackening, then scrape that within which the corruption is hosted until it is entirely removed; and take care of that with water as it heals.
And if it is not healed and the pain persists as before, then you know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; so uncover it again carefully and precisely perform its reason and purification with the last strength of your will, and then restore it.
And therefore if it is healthy, so it is; but if not, you will know that this corruption is in the deep, distant part of the body, which has not been reached, and thus to you it is not worth attempting anything there.
And if the bone corruption is small, it may be possible to remove it with delicate forceps that are suitable for this.
And if there are many bones, carefully remove all of them, and leave none due to your strength.
If any cause of discomfort arises from humidity, and in their understanding there is no fear or error, then incise these wounds or flesh if they are here, and carefully remove the bones.
If you are not prepared to remove the bones from your patient, then place your hand over the area where the pain is located, and leave it there until the pain passes; do not allow that pain to spread to the surrounding bones, flesh, and ligaments, and be careful that the incision you have made during your operation does not become infected.
While the text does share some linguistic similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, it also contains elements that suggest a unique or regional dialect. Here's a line-by-line translation based on that assumption:
If it is a large bone, such as the thigh or leg bone or similar, and what is corrupt of it is only the skin, then quickly apply treatment behind it until that blackness and corruption are removed, and then restore the disease.
If the corruption has reached a great depth and the decay has already affected the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area completely by making an incision at the site where the corruption has occurred, and then treat it until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you that you enter into the patient's thigh to place a cushion at the site, which will serve as an example and aid in your operation.
Focus on a young man around 30 years old who experiences pain in his thigh, and the swelling originates from within the body, concerning the matter inside the body until it reaches the thigh, and it is a matter of apoplexy or great apoplexy, and do not focus on external causes for him.
And therefore, the time extends during which the disease worsens due to the errors of doctors, as the gangrene becomes pronounced, and it will be surrounded by moist, putrid matter, and its treatment will be delayed until the leg is fistulated, and it will cause horrible wounds that lead to decay and body humidity.
And therefore, many doctors surround the patient for about two years, not focusing on their knowledge but on the arts, as you will be called upon.
And he saw the leg and the matter flowing from these horrible wounds throughout his body; and the skin of that man was entirely stiffened, and its colour was citron-like.
And therefore, he inserted a probe into one of these wounds and successfully guided the probe towards the bone.
And then, he carefully examined all the wounds and discovered their causes from every part of the leg.
And then I carefully cut and incise over one of the openings, where I discovered a fragment of bone, which was torn, corrupt, and putrid; it had already decayed and been corrupted by a part of the leg that had penetrated into the flesh.
And then I secured what I had discovered and prepared the exposed bone.
I thought that it was not the bone itself but the corruption I had removed and secured, which had already been weakened.
And then I carefully paused the restoration of the wound using consolidative medicines for a long time, but it was not solidified.
Then I carefully repeated the process and discovered the bone again, observing the continued corruption within the bone.
And I will address what appears to me as that corruption, then I'll make you pierce deeply to perform the cure and restoration, but it is not restored.
And then you should discover it again and not cease to insert the small bone fragment by fragment and pierce the restoration of it, and it is not restored until you cut around a palm of it, and extract its marrow, and then restore it with medicines, and it is slightly strengthened and healed.
And it is not necessary to repeat the operation and section of it unless for the arrangement of the fragility of it and the lack of its tolerance, and because of its weakness which leads to death, as it slacks off during all hours due to excessive evacuation, causing a bad fainting.
Thus, healing is complete, and nothing takes the place of the hard bone; good arrangement in its body restores it, returns its virtue, and converts it into its dispositions, without causing any contradiction in walking or damage from any cause.
If a bone stands out in the body and needs to be treated, then follow this manner: take lint and tighten it around the end of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend it; then place the thicker lint over the flesh left by the bone, and draw the end of it towards you to pull the flesh away from the gap, and uncover the flesh in the area where you want to make an incision so that the saw does not cut through the flesh.
And place a wooden splint or table under the bone properly, for when you do this, the saw should not cut through the healthy flesh.
And be sure to make the incision over the corrupted area slowly, for if it is in the concave part of the corrupt bone and does not appear on the surface, you may need to redo the sawing another time.
If the bone is corrupt and not prominent, but rather a continuous gap with another, and the corruption is in the middle or at any point along it, then uncover the flesh from all sides; place a wooden splint under it, and saw from the first gap where the corruption began until the other gap is completed.
And the incision should be according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
If the corruption is in the joint, you should incise that corrupt joint and cut the bone where it continues to the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it should not be cut in a straight line but in an arc.
And if the corruption is in the chest or foot of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; nevertheless, you must inquire about the corruption and how it appears to you, and cut away that part, and remove it according to some disposition possible for you, and correct any deformity ingeniously, so that no veins or nerves are injured.
And you should know which saws and chisels to use when cutting these bones, as they depend on the position of the bones, the preparation of those bones, their thickness, fineness, size, rarity, hardness, and other qualities; so it is necessary that for any kind of operation, you prepare the appropriate instrument for that operation.
And you know that this operation signifies to you regarding the kind of instrument you need; since you have great study and long experience of the ways of this art, and are a witness to the methods of various illnesses, for now you will apply to him what is suitable for it among all instruments for any illness.
And you will have learned at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will hold with examples as you proceed with your prohibition which you will experience on others. Form of saw:
Another form of saw:
Form of another large saw:
Form of treatment: The head of this treatment should be in the form of a starred key, and its points are in the shape of spikes.
And it is not appropriate to grind those heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or if the opening is wide.
The form of the smaller scalpel:
The form of the broad scalpel:
The form of another saw appropriately made: it should be curved more above and have the edge of the steel sharp, and its handle firmly attached. Form of it:
The shape of the razor with its concave side.
The other very thin razor.
The shape of another razor with an extremely curved tip.
The shape of a small razor resembling a tent.
The shape of another smaller saw.
The shape of another incisor; this one resembles a ray, with its tip like a saw, and it is used in various places when cutting through bones.
The form which is suitable for healing those who are pierced by bones:
And the end of it is triangular and of a sharp point.
And it is made of Indian steel, and resembles a cover that includes all the causes we have mentioned of razors, scissors, and saws.
Of the incision of the end and the locking of the bones.
The extremities may be affected either by an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, and if the treatment you have applied to that corruption does not bring relief, or the corruption spreads to another part of the body where it does not affect any vital function, then you should incise that member within this place where the corruption is localised, so that the malady may escape through it without causing death or serious harm to the member.
And the sign of that which happens is that the member becomes black within, as if fire had consumed it, or you will see the darkness near that wound in that member which is dried up and takes over the whole body; and therefore cut through this with an incision.
And similarly, it is caused by the corruption and impact of certain poisonous sources such as the sting of a sea scorpion or a viper or a toad and similar ones.
And if the corruption or impact is at the tip of the finger, you cut off the finger and do not give space to the corruption for it to enter the hand.
And similarly, if it affects the hand, you cut off that of the affected finger, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes over the entire arm.
And if you do otherwise, cut the arm at the joint.
And if another corruption or change of temperature affects the joint, then it is the death of the patient; and to treat another cause of this in healing requires a great deal of virtue.
And similarly, if there is corruption in the foot, cut it into one of the bones.
And if you take hold of the edge of the foot, cut off the whole foot. If it is possible to reach the bone, cut the leg at the joint of the bone.
And if the corruption has already reached the bone, it is not possible to heal it, but only to alleviate the patient's suffering, and let the disease lead them to death.
And the method of cutting or severing a member is that you tighten the ligament at the part where you wish to cut, and tighten another ligament over the place; and the surgeon extends a ligament to the parts left behind, and extends the assistant another ligament upon them; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments without causing much damage until all the flesh is exposed; and then it is either cut or severed.
And it should be covered with a clean cloth from all parts to prevent any contact with the wound, and that the injury to the patient be carefully adjusted and dressed with caution.
If bleeding occurs during the procedure, you should cauterize the site carefully or apply certain powders to restrict the flow of blood; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
And then attach the affected member with ligaments as necessary, and treat it until it is healed.
And I advise you to begin with this man on his foot, these accidents that you and I have recommended, which are due to the dark color in his foot appearing like the burn of fire.
And that corruption, which is caused primarily in the inner part of his foot, tends to affect the entire foot.
And therefore, that man prepares himself for these injuries, seeing the cure going to the member with the violence of his pain and disfigurement, and he cuts into the foot at the joint, and applies fire for healing.
Long time has passed since that injury of this method in the inner part of the hand.
And then it occurred to me, and I found myself reflecting on the superfluity of this method that stops with what is placed over the hand in terms of medicine, and appropriates the purification of the body; and the superfluity is not reflected and we begin to go to the other inner part that we began with the hand.
And the surgeon orders to cut with the knife, and you do not want to do it fearing the rebound of that superfluity, but rather you must persevere in the incision of the patient's hand, for the virtue of the malady was on the point of disappearance.
And since he has left me, he has returned to his land and compelled me to prepare and cut off the hand of that man, and he has been healed.
And I have not added this account merely to provide assistance in understanding this malady, but also to explain its cause and how it should be treated.
On the cure of sores and the quality of enema with medications.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy part of the body and the space of the abscess is prolonged as far as a collection of pus, then it breaks and perforates itself, and the pus flows out from it, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel. The wound above it also becomes covered with a thin crust, but it does not lead to a later infection, and it does not press on bones or nerves or ligaments. It is called a sore, and it is not named a fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged such that corruption spreads throughout a member, it is then called a fistula and does not heal.
And the treatment for it is to cut that entire cord as it is twisted, especially when it is subtle and done with a knife, and make sure it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
If you hope that the cord will adhere and that that corruption will not succeed due to its last effect, and if the cord has passed through the face, then you treat it with a cleanser.
And it is that you consider the sinuses, and if they are large, and the arm that they affect has a foul odor, then cleanse it with an Egyptian medicine made of oil, vinegar, and garlic, received in equal parts, put into a vessel, and heated over the fire until the medicine becomes hot and effective.
And then take from him what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; cleanse the affected sinus with a clister, strengthen the orifices of the intestines, and leave the medicine inside for a duration of two hours.
And then extract that foreign body; do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the pain relieved.
In some cases, the sinus is cleansed with water from a burnt substance, when this medicine is not available to you; take ash from a fire, mix it with water, and then use this mixture for enemas until you feel that the sinus has been cleared.
If the patient is intolerant to Egyptian medicine or ash water, then use an enema of honey and water mixed with a third part of cinnamon; also use an enema of wine and honey mixed together, for honey has cleansing properties and washes away impurities, while wine helps adhere to the sinus, especially when the wine lacks excessive stiffness and dryness.
And after you have done this several times and feel that the swelling has subsided, then cleanse that part with water that nourishes the flesh in it.
And indeed, you should take a mixture of dyaphinic and dissolve that oily crust and apply astringent; or cleanse that part with some medicine mixed with oil, which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the orifices of the swelling are narrow in which the catheter of the cleanser cannot pass, then gradually increase its size with a small iron, and place on it hot compresses wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon until it is enlarged.
And if the orifice is seemingly wide, then you should add stitches to its lips and leave it with enough quantity for the cleanser to be added.
And if the orifice of the patient from which the arm flows is elevated above its attachments, dry that at the lower part where it is in him so that the arm runs within, for when the arm is restricted in the fullness of his sinew, flesh is generated there.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinew within the bone's surrounding joint without difficulty, then pierce and prepare the member so that the arm flows out of him lightly as you have devised, without any cause for restriction in the arm.
He who is above the wound of the sinew, which stretches at all times so that it catches what is close to it from the arm. And so that you know if what flows from the arm is hot or cold, or digested or undigested.
And so consider the location of that sinew, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in a gangrenous state.
And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter being discharged over the wound of the sinew has adhered, or acquired a strong adhesion, then on the seventh day or after, loosen the bandage, remove the plague, change the dressing for another one and renew the ointment.
If the sinew has been stretched very much, do not be too concerned about the adhesion of it, for healing will take place on its own, for sometimes flesh grows again in the wounds of some men, and among those who suffer the opposite occurs.
And if a bruised arm has been caused by indigestion and the sinew does not adhere, know that this is because of delayed adherence of the sinew, which is prolonged due to excessive use of medicines; if the medicine itself is humid in its substance and virtue, dry it with dyafynicon when there is an excess of fluid from additional protection.
The last remedy, which is used for healing, is to take dyafinicon and dissolve it in rose oil, then apply it to the affected area as if it were a paste, and use it accordingly.
And it seems to work in the same way when there is no bruise: apply dyafinicon mixed with honey, thick enough, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe vera, grind them, and sprinkle the powder onto honey heated on a fire, then wrap this up in cloth and press it against the sinew; and apply that honey which you have noticed to be thick, sprinkle it onto cloth, and press it.
And sometimes they administer to him long extracts and roots of celestial lilies (celestial lilies), and ermine flour and centaury, and use these simples either pure or adjusted, triturate them and sift and powder over honey which has been recomposed; and apply it.
And if the pain persists and this treatment does not heal it, you will know that the corruption is in the prior part of the body, and already an inquiry has been made into the bones or other hard members or their ligaments; then you treat it with a fistular remedy, as has been said above.
On the treatment of skin rashes, sore nails, addition of finger incisions, and sections.
Panarici is an abscess that forms when the nail of the finger or toe becomes infected, and it intensifies on other parts as well. When it persists and its treatment becomes more difficult, it either becomes a cauterized abscess or corrupt, causing puss to discharge which corrodes the root of the nail. It can then corrupt the entire nail, and its corruption reaches the bones within, emitting an unpleasant odor. The end of the finger is affected, and its color turns dark.
And so when you have treated the condition as we have described and do not achieve relief, then cut away with a knife all the excess that is pressing on the joint and apply a hot cautery to the wound nearby, for heat helps in such cases.
But if the bone is strong and the joint healthy, and the excess of the joint wants to break into the flesh, and it begins to hurt and inflame that part, then stop a subtle cut at the angle of the hurting joint, and push it upward and cut the flesh easily, and apply over it whatever they use from fiery medicinal salves until all the flesh is removed; and then care for it with ointments until it heals.
If the corruption has already penetrated into the bone, then cut into the bone and extract it, for no time is enough to heal when the corrupt bone remains in place.
And if you observe corrosion and corruption in the area, cut into one of the bones as indicated by its recall, and then treat it so that it heals properly.
If there is a need for striking or scraping on the nail, and this causes intense pain, then you should begin by applying flebotomy to the affected area, and carefully dry the nail with a sharp spatula or secator in a transverse motion from above, and be mindful that the secator does not penetrate into the flesh beneath the nail, as this would cause intense pain and lead to the growth of excess fibrous tissue in the area; then treat the spot to alleviate the pain.
However, this adjustment, which is innate in the bodies of many people, is entirely composed of flesh in some, entirely of bone in others, or primarily in their nails.
And some of them originate in the formation of the joint, or it is the nature of them in some bones of the fingers. He who is born into this world without knowledge of these things suffers greatly, and he who is born with strong joints is better off.
Of those who are born fleshly, the incision is slight, for you must insert the blade deeply into the root with a gentle stroke.
He who is born with a root in the joint, healing is difficult; therefore, guard yourself from the removal of it.
In him who is born with these roots in the wrong place, you must first insert the knife at the beginning into his flesh in a rounded incision within the bone, and then close it with one of those suitable saws, and afterward take care that it heals well.
The consolidation that occurs between these joints may happen due to various reasons such as age or the nature of the human who lacks them, or due to hernias or burns from fire, or similar conditions; therefore, remove that consolidation within that joint so that it returns to its natural form.
And then place between their sheets, dipped in warm oil, so that the joints do not stiffen suddenly, and separate them, or place between them a thin plate of lead until they are consolidated as needed.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in certain parts of the hand, then dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
Regarding the incision of veins, they are varicose.
Veins are varicose, which are thick, twisted veins filled with excessive melancholic fluid that occur in various parts of the body, most commonly in the legs, especially in those who walk, work, or carry heavy loads.
Therefore, you should administer purgation to the body from black choler sometimes with strong expulsion, and drain the patient's blood from the basil vein.
The treatment for their pain is according to two methods: one is to make an incision and remove that black ganglion, and the other method is to raise the vein and extract all of it.
The incision is made according to this method: first, the leg is soaked in hot water until the large ganglion is resolved, which is foul from the leg, then the leg of the patient is tightly tied to a superior part of the body at the thigh, above the affected area, and the vein is cut at one, two, or three places with a wide incision, and the black ganglion is lifted upward from the lower part of the leg into the upper part, and from below, upwards, until all the amount of ganglion that you wish to remove is taken out, and this tolerates the virtue of the patient's illness.
Then close it, and command the patient to abstain from cold, black-generating foods.
And continue the treatment with phlebotomy when the veins are full and this relieves the patient.
The elevation of the patient should be done in this manner: you who support the thigh of the patient, if it is covered with hair, then bathe it and immerse the thigh in water until it becomes engorged, so that the veins are distended; or if the patient has been exercising vigorously, without a bath, then apply heat to the affected member.
Then cut the cord at the right of the vein, either in its length or at the very end, or at the lowest part of it, you should tie it off.
Then open the cord with scissors and extract the vein from all parts until it appears healthy, and it is necessary to assess the patient's condition; if the disease declines towards blackness, then...
And so when you have extracted it from the wound, you will see that white matter which is the thread.
Then place your fingers inside so that it raises and detaches from the wound, and gently pull out any sharp or foreign objects.
Then make another cut, about three fingers deep, and carefully remove the edge of the wound away from the vein until it appears clean.
Then raise it and carefully cut into the deepest section, just behind the toe, extract it, and raise it until it comes out through the second cut, and then remove it from the one above that.
And do this until you extract the one from the highest or topmost section of all the cuts, ensuring that all are drained, and then carefully cut it.
And if you do not succeed in extracting and elevating it, insert a strong double-ended needle and tie it there, or insert the ray and turn your hand over the entire area where it has been thrown. And be careful not to cut it; for if it breaks, it is difficult to raise that part and it will harm the patient through that wound.
And once you have completely removed it, place your hand over the infected area, wet with wine and oil, both warm and cold, and treat that until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted without twisting and wrapped around the parts, and it is not straight according to what we have said, then cut your incisions over all of its twisting parts and the places where it is wrapped up, and with a tie raise that entire part.
And be careful not to injure the vein and do not bother it, for it will be difficult for you to raise it up; use your prudence in that matter.
The form of the injury which is dried out:
It is not as acute with ulcers nor has it the extreme sharpness that would injure a vein; and it possesses great flexibility, for if it were too subtle, it might puncture the vein because of its subtlety; therefore, in this case, its excessive thickness serves as we have said.
Of the extraction of the vein of the thigh.
This vein is produced in the legs, as it were, with the heat of the sun in the lands of Arabs and in the hindlands and arid lands of India with little vegetation and no grass or open space.
And a strong burning is caused in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
And the growth of the hernia is putrid, as serpents and worms, and scabs and vermin arise between the hernia and flesh.
And the sign of the impending arrival of the hernia is this vehemence of inflammation that occurs in the thigh, and the area becomes vesicated; then the vein begins to drain from the area of that vesication, which seems to be torn from the inside.
And when the hernia appears, you will notice that you must wrap over it a piece of lead as heavy as a dragon's weight. Then enter the dragon within it and leave the lead suspended from the thigh.
And on many occasions when something causes the hernia to protrude outward, wrap it in lead and notice that. And if the pain persists, you make an incision into it and wrap the raw area; do not cut the one that is inflamed, as if you do, it will contract and enter the flesh, causing abscesses, gangrene in the place, and bad ulcers.
Because it is necessary to treat it further and extract it little by little, until it is completely removed from the backside of it, without leaving any cause of it in the body.
And from this vein, it is withdrawn in some men to the length of their palms and fingers, and I myself have seen it withdraw one of twenty palms.
And if it is cut during the time of its treatment, insert the ray into the channel of it and pierce that long channel into the flesh, until everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the place for some days with medicines; and then take care of it for the healing of abscesses.
And this vein is sometimes seen with great swelling, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot, and it causes much pain, and it comes from each painful branch.
And so cure that as we have said in the division and refer to what is mentioned above.
Regarding the section about worms generated under the skin, and it is called bovine irritation.
This illness is called bovine ill in some lands because it causes great pain, as small worms can be seen within the bowels and flesh, spreading throughout the body, pushing and weakening (the bowels), until they rupture the bowels and come out.
And the generation of this illness is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, which cause worms and snakes and roundworms and ascariasis in the belly.
And it is feared by the malice of it, for when it enters the body and rises to the head, it reaches the joints, strongly breaks into them and destroys the joints, and from there it should be treated with care.
And so when you want to cure it and extract it, it is not done unless you first understand its movement and appearance in the body, and then grasp what is above it and what remains below it firmly, and press upon it, and then extract that which is within it.
If it is embedded in the flesh and does not cause pain, then apply a hot cautery over the place where it resides, and the main cause that is feared is the corruption of it which also corrupts the place as we have said.
If it affects the head near the joints, then tighten over the eyebrow with firm pressure, and press upon it, and extract that which is within; and take care that the patient uses purification of their body with medicines evacuating putrid bad humors, and beware of foods causing putrefaction.
On cutting through the illness above.
This illness is called "nafir" in our land, and it is a pain that appears in some members, and then changes from one member to another.
And you have already seen that second one that I have told you about. You have been called to a female patient in a village, and you discovered her arm, and saw a small inflammation in the vein near the wrist, which you punctured for an hour, and as you pulled out the needle, you saw that inflammation go away, seemingly by itself, just like living silver as it flows from one place to another.
And then he removed the pain from that place and left it in the muscle, and applied pressure for an hour.
And then correct the other body in turn until reaching the other arm.
And then I realized that I had to turn myself over completely in bed, according to what I had seen; and I was too amazed at the change of posture and the speed with which it occurred from one part of the body to another. And I had already seen this in my own feet according to that manner, but I have seen many who are terrified by the intense pain of having it change from one part of the body to another. You do not see this in the feet of women in the same way.
And you should not consider this to be the reason why the woman was old, but rather because her body was weak and her skin dry and her veins visible, and in this state, the sensation of that changeability appears.
And it is necessary that this retrospective treatment does not appear in those who are delicate and have a moist body with clogged veins.
And if you wish to treat the patient and they feel pain, do not appear to give aid as we have said, but tighten over that area and let it rest slightly and dry out, and apply a cautery to that place.
If you do not find it in your veins, then cure that by removing the inflammation from the body and what expels air, and bind those with foul-smelling pills and pills of serpents and similar things.
From the extraction of arrows.
Arrows vary according to species and the parts of the body they hit, for their diversity lies in whether they have sharp or blunt points, concave or convex shapes, or are hollow; some have three points, others have tongues, and yet others are feathered.
And among the signs of the servant, when it strikes with an arrow, and passes through the bone, and it arises from the base which is over the brain, due to the sudden heat, and scotoma, and vertigo, and pain in the legs, and inflammation and pain of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of speech and angry vomiting, and great loss of words and destruction of voice, and it leaves from the place of the disease a white humidity resembling powder, and spots like fluidity of flesh.
And if these symptoms appear to you, then abstain from treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is protruding.
If the arrow penetrates the heart, so that it is near the left nipple, and you feel a hard impact where it is lodged, without any visible cause; and strongly feel the movement of the arrow similar to the pulsation of the pulse, and the flow of black pus, and chills, and fainting spells; then know that death follows swiftly.
And the symptoms when the arrow has pierced the lung show pus-filled black plague, and the vessels near the throat become inflamed, and the patient's complexion changes, and they breathe heavily, and requests fresh air.
And if the arrow pierces the membrane in the foot, and the pain is most acute near the small ribs, it causes intense and violent pain, with deep sighs, and debilitates all the muscles of the body.
If an arrow hits the stomach, then it often causes intense pain from the undigested food within.
And if an arrow pierces the abdomen and becomes lodged there, it causes a tear in the viscus or hernia, and there is little hope of recovery unless the arrow is extracted.
If the arrow strikes the bladder and causes it to leak urine outside, and brings on severe pain in the patient, then you should know that it is fatal.
Similarly, the other parts such as the face, neck, and head, shoulders, elbows, spine, hip, leg, and foot, and similar parts of the limbs can be saved with great care when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a poisoned arrow.
And I will tell you about what I have seen regarding the nature of these arrows, so that it may be understood concerning their use in treatment.
The cause of which is that when an arrow enters the lacrimal duct of a man's eye at the root of his nose and is extracted from the other side, leaving the grays of his eyebrow intact, then he is healed, and there is no damage to his eye socket.
And another arrow was extracted from a Jew, which had entered his eye in the grays, leaving the eyelid intact, and the arrow was hidden and could not be removed from there, except for a small tip that remained embedded in his eyeball, it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, like a lion ferrule without eyebrows.
And the Jew was healed, and there was no further harm to his eye.
And he extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had fallen into the gullet, which was an Arabic arrow, and it is that one with the pointed end; and then I incised through it between two guidelines, and it was already submerged in the victim's gullet; and then I removed it gently, and thus the Christian was healed.
And he also extracted another arrow from a man who had fallen into his belly, and he thought that he would die from it; so, after passing thirty days and nothing changing regarding the man's condition, he incised through the arrow and disengaged it, and thus he was healed, without any further harm.
And he saw a man in whom an arrow had pierced his back, and the pain was firmly established upon him; so after setting fire nearby, he extracted the arrow at the root of the wound.
And he saw a woman who had an arrow pierced in her belly, and the pain was firmly established within her, not changing regarding her condition; and the woman did not lose strength in any of her natural operations.
And he sees another man whom an arrow has struck in the face, and the wound is deep, so he removes the arrow, causing little pain, but many similar ones.
And he extracted the arrow from the face of the king's prince who had been struck in the middle of his nose, and it had already declined to the right side a little, and entirely hidden was the arrow.
And you were called for the treatment of him, as soon as the arrow's wound had closed within three days.
And then he examined the arrow wound very closely; and then he inquired about it with subtlety, and did not feel it; but he felt a piercing sensation remaining behind the right ear, and then he hoped that this piercing was due to the end of the arrow.
And he applied a plaster to the place with an attractive and digestive effect, trusting that this location would become exposed for me to see the place of the arrow, so that it dried up over that.
And do not be alarmed if the arrow has not reached the exact location; continue applying the plaster to it for several days without incident; and as the wound heals, break up the abscess of the hernia over several days until you feel the arrow within its sheath again and bring it back to me.
And then you should focus on treating the acute corrosive wound with specific medicine for several days until a fire opens up, and you should gently try to loosen it, and cauterize the tip of the arrow which is adhering to the wood.
Then you should adjust the opening of the wound using that acute medicine until I visually see the tip of the arrow, and I will dedicate time to it for periods of four months.
And when the wound has inflamed and I can insert scissors into it, I will hold it and do not let go, until I find a way to extract it using forceps carefully, as will be described in detail at the end of this chapter, until I remove that; and then I will restore the wound.
And some doctors believe that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored, and they restore it so that the illness is solidified, and the disease is cured entirely, without any recurrence.
And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of certain arrows so that it provides rules and meaning regarding what has not been said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those in the narrative are not understood, nor do those comprehend the book.
And the skilled artisans speak a little about what is present and much about what is absent; they search for new operations and new instruments, seeking the descent of foreign causes from the art when accidents occur.
Therefore, you say that arrows are not forcibly ejected from the members in which they are lodged, but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place where they enter; or conversely, from the other direction.
And that which is thrown from the place where it enters, or is aimed proceeding in a fleshy part, and is thrown out.
And if you do not observe the time when cats are at their most active, then you must leave it for a few days until the flesh around it becomes weak and the attraction of it and its exit is relieved.
And similarly, if it is stuck in the bone and you do not observe its time, leave it for a few days until the attraction and motion of it ceases on certain days, and then it will be thrown out.
And if you do not observe its time for a few days, then know that you must pierce the path of the arrow at that bone in a subtle way as it travels, until the location is amplified by the arrow, and then extract it.
If the arrow is already embedded in the body and lodged in a nerve, you should explore it gently, and if you feel any response, pull it with some suitable instruments to facilitate its removal.
And if you cannot reach it due to the compression of the plague and the length of the arrowhead, here neither nerves nor veins are involved, then make an incision over the plague until it is enlarged and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
And if there are auricles attached that should be removed, then cut the flesh in which they are embedded from all sides with all the tools you can use; and devise a way to remove the flesh from the fracture of the auricles and their torsion until it becomes solid.
And when you perform the extraction of the arrow at any location, use torsion with your hand and forceps from all sides until it becomes solid; and carefully with the greatest subtlety to prevent the arrow from breaking and make its removal difficult.
And if you cannot reach that of your choice, then wait for some days until the parts around it can be separated; and then repeat the procedure when it is alleviated. If you experience discomfort from a blood flow, then administer what we have said for treatment in its chapter.
And observe your skill in incising veins or nerves, or strings, and administer remedies in every possible way to facilitate the escape of the arrow; do this with ease, calmness, delay, and firmness as much as you can and as recommended by others.
And therefore, contract the arrow so that the malady is according to the figure by which you must target the location of the arrow in it, as it is more beneficial. If this is not within your capability, then administer what is within your capabilities according to the figures.
Consider arrows that are shot in the opposite direction of another party, or that already have encountered some resistance from external parties, or make the end of the arrow flexible due to the pressure exerted by the upper part of the body and turn it towards [the target]; then focus on that; and cut it according to the quantity in which the forceps grasp; and shoot it, for it is made light for projection.
If it is held in the bone, then you use a sharp knife according to the direction of the arrowhead within the bone, and magnify it with your hand, and then extract it.
And if that does not heal within a few days, then repeat the procedure as often as necessary.
And if the shaft of the arrow is within the flesh, then push it towards the wound.
If the shaft has fallen and you wish to give impulsion, then insert a point and if it is hard, strike it with force so that it enters into the hollow of the bone in the arrow's head and then push it towards the wound.
If the arrowhead is concave, then push it with a strong force so that it enters within itself, for the arrow is directed away from that point.
And if the arrow is deeply embedded, carefully remove all the flesh around it where the true injury lies, if you can, and tend to that part as best you can.
If the arrow strikes the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close enough that you can feel the impact, and if it is possible for you to remove it without causing further injury, then do so and be careful not to cut into veins or nerves, and extract the arrow, and dress the wound as needed, and treat the injury accordingly until it heals.
Design of forceps for removing arrows:
Their ends should be shaped like a bird's beak, crafted with a serrated edge to grip the arrow firmly so it does not slip.
And these are made in various sizes, from large to small, according to the size of the arrow and its hardness, and the extent of the wound, and the tightness of the affected area.
in such a way with pressure, so that the arrowhead lodged within the concave is removed and it is pushed out.
On phlebotomy of veins.
The veins of phlebotomy, of which there are several, are as follows: two pulsating veins located near the ears, known as the temporal arteries; two found on either temple; and two in the two lacrimal bones, called the lacrimal veins. There is a vein prepared in the middle area of the forehead, and one at the tip of the nose; two veins are found at the collarbone; two on the lower lip; and two on the upper lip. These are known as the 'veins of the tongue'. These are the veins that are called 'venae adstringentes'. When the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are considered, one is a cephalic vein, which must be collected; and the people call it "the vein of the head," dense, and it is the median vein, consisting of a branch from the basilic vein and another branch from the cephalic; and the people name that "vein of the whole body," and the basilic vein is the one that stops in the domestic arm, and they call it "cualar," and the common people call it "vein of the belly"; and the brachial vein, which is stopped over the elbow, is that in which phlebotomy is performed, and it is that which appears on the skin through manifest appearance; and the temporal vein, which is between the said auricular and the smaller said vein, is only two branches.
And on the foot and leg there are three veins; one of these is left in the curvature of the inner side of the wild arm; the second is superficial, and its location is left where the domestic leg bends; and the sciatic vein, its location is left where the wild leg bends; and on the leg there are other veins similar to those.
The treatment of veins that are close to the auricles is for ancient cataracts, bleeding, and ulcers of the head, old evils.
And the quality of bleeding from these veins depends on what you have learned: it should be near the patient's head, and rub the patient's head on the occiput at the location of both wide-open veins with good friction; then tighten the patient's collar with a band so that both appear and their locations where the auricles are in two places securely fastened to the head; and seek as they say, and if you feel the pulse from those as they say, here it should be attempted.
Now take the cutting sword, and this one is sharp, and insert it into the vein in the groin until the bloodletting reaches the bone. Then raise your hand over the vein and bone, and cut into the vein with a sharp incision. And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, or slightly more; and make the cut as deep as necessary.
Then apply strong pressure with poultices and leave them until the wound is healed.
And it has already been mentioned at the beginning of this text the incision of those and their cauterization.
However, of the two veins and arteries that are near the temples, the jugular vein is an ancient and severe evil, causing frequent headaches and acute overflows in the feet.
And the quality of performing fleubotomy on those is according to what you have recommended: restrict the patient's movement until the two veins appear by direct observation, and demonstrate the pulse after their removal; and then you should be careful.
And then, lift the cord above the vein at its attachment as is commonly indicated, and insert the sharp phlebotomy instrument below, lifting the vein up; and cut it similarly as you have done with the other two veins; and allow the blood to flow according to the amount of your need.
And then, apply pressure to the compression of the patient, place the commonly indicated tool over the vein for an hour, and apply pressure on that side and poultice it, and tighten it with firm constriction, and leave it until it is healed.
And previously, the remembrance of them has been made, and of those, incision, and attraction at the beginning of the opening.
And thus, the application of phlebotomy to the vein of the forehead is appropriate for phlebotomy of the cephalic vein in ancient facial maladies, and migraines, and painful, foul ulcers.
And the technique of the flebotomy is according to what you have learned; so, the illness tightens its col with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument called the "scoop," the shape of which is as follows:
Stop the point at the prominent end of the scoop over that vein and strike it with a lean or other tool in its manner, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; then remove the puncture from the patient's flesh until it is healed.
And in some cases, the vein is opened with a broad flebotomy, but it is not appropriate that the flebotomy be of such acute severity as the others, but rather of a lateral extremity, and flebotomize according to the transverse, because the bone there is strong and would easily break during a subtle flebotomy.
But pay attention to the youth of the two veins that are like the tears of two wheels due to the friction and soot of the wheel on the feet, and to the diseases of the face.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the illness tightens the collar around it, then you make a cut in those veins, and stand over the top of it.
And the phlebotomy should be made according to the transverse direction along a little vein, as in the place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is fine, then only the end of it should be cut.
Then drain the blood as much as necessary, and press over those parts, tighten them for a night, and then open them up.
The phlebotomy of the nasal vein is effective for high fever and violent vomiting, and for facial illnesses and migraines and redness that occur on the face, especially when it has been long-standing.
And the quality of the phlebotomy for it is that the illness tightens its collar, then you take hold of its nose with your left hand, and take a fine, long cut, placing it in the middle part of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear sensitive here, and soon the blood begins to flow.
Ensure that you complete the phlebotomy slowly and let the blood flow as needed; then close it up after a night, because this way it is restored more easily.
The immediate aftercare of phlebotomy, for both the two cases, should include restricting activity, beginning leprosy treatment, and addressing any acute or chronic illnesses and corrosive ulcerations with potent remedies.
And the quality of the phlebotomy for these cases is that the patient strains as each one is left in their place with a bandage; and the practitioner stands over the patient's head, and the patient lies on their side.
Then, make small incisions in the vein with a phlebotomy knife; and remove blood from the vein as needed, according to its quantity or as required by necessity; and then close it up like the other veins.
And then clean the ligament and tighten both veins with a moderate strain so that the malady is not exacerbated, and place a bandage within the matrix until the pain is healed.
And regarding the healing of phlebotomy on the veins, it compares to small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, and the decay of the gums, and bad ulcers and fissures, as well as bad ulcers that are in the nose and around the eyes.
And the quality of phlebotomy for these is to cease the malady in front of you, tighten the neck of it with a bandage, then reverse the lips of it and observe both veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the indication of each is by the blackness of either, and this is because there are small veins around them; and then incise each through precise incision.
If there is doubt in your mind, and you do not know which one it is, then proceed to incision of the larger one among them, and from the pus that manifests from those.
And make it appear as if there are two veins in their lips.
The veins located in the tongue's base, when exposed, usually require a phlebotomy of the cephalic vein at the sides of the throat, as well as treatment for conditions affecting the uvula and mouth.
The quality of phlebotomy involves addressing the condition between your fingers and toes, lifting the tongue, observing beneath it, considering both sides—the vein and its opposite—and the color of each, which tends towards blackness.
And then perform phlebotomy on each one; be careful not to finish with your hand when phlebotomizing them, as those are arteries.
And your veins that are phlebotomized in the groin, through which blood usually flows in all men, the phlebotomy of them is done according to two manners, either by using a phlebotomy needle or olive oil with subtlety declining; or by cutting phlebotomy, and this is called phlegmasia, and this is the form of it:
Both the width of the vein and its location must be considered, and it is necessary to open the concave veins filled with thick blood, and those containing large clots.
And this fluctotomy is of smaller extent and has finer terminal points, and it is appropriate for fluctotomy of fine veins that contain subtle blood clots.
However, the jugular vein being one of three veins, when performing fluctotomy on this basilic vein, it is to extract the blood clot from the malady that has spread to the throat and neck, and from here it flows to the foot and belly.
And it is necessary for the fluctotomist, when performing this fluctotomy, to be very careful and cautious there, because if he leaves an artery, and makes a mistake in the puncturing of the fluctotomy, he will cut that artery and cause flow of blood, so it is important that he does not perform fluctotomy on that artery with a sharp instrument, but rather cuts it carefully with a less sharp one.
And if the basilic vein does not appear by clear indication, then you must know that you should leave that one and change to the other, or seek some of its branches; or perform fluctotomy in its place at the end of the arm, because it is manifest. And so too you must cut that one with a less sharp instrument as we have said.
If you wish to perform a flebotomy on the patient, then cover in front of the stricture of the arm that you touch the location within which you recognize the position of the pulse, and apply pressure over it tightly; then bring the arm close and sec the vein with a concave section for a flebotomy as we have said; and be careful to avoid striking the percussion on any space in the location of the artery.
And when you press, with strength the ligament, there appears an inflation in the location that you have pressed tightly, then that inflation is inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid that one.
And if you press and feel the blood flow in the flebotomy as with an ear of a child, and the blood is thin and clear, then know that it is from the artery's blood; and immediately cut and hold your finger over that area for a long time; and if the bleeding stops, as you have seen it stop, then tighten the arm and leave it.
And watch over the patient from their waste, and be very careful of them for a few days until they are healed.
If the stone cannot be removed, and you are not skilled in medicine for this case, then incise the artery if it appears to you; because the end of the stone is contracted and the stone is separated; or take a piece of fistic (possibly a type of plant or material used medicinally), and make that into a poultice, apply one half over the vein at its stricture with liment (bandage) and pulvils (medicine or herbs) within the next day.
And if the stone is separated, then it is good; but if not, treat that with the water as mentioned before in the location of the broken powder flow of the stone.
And the removal of the stone from him is difficult due to the location of the pain and the possibility of bracelet (bandage) tightness on his arm.
Regarding the dark vein, phlebotomy is a useful method to extract blood from the upper part of the head and leave it from the lower parts of the body; for this reason, it is composed of branches of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
And be cautious in performing phlebotomy on someone who is overly afraid of phlebotomy, for there is a nerve involved; and when you reach the point of phlebotomy and find the nerves, it will cause stupor, and healing will be difficult, and often not complete. This nerve causes sensation; if it is concealed in some men and is subtle and not visible, then you must pause the phlebotomy you are performing, cut off the vein with your forceps, and avoid damaging the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length.
The advantage of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and provides relief to ailments of the feet.
And in this particular case, if you want the phlebotomy to be performed with a phlebotomizer olive or phlebotomizer myrtle, it is because it avoids all veins, leaving no arteries or nerves intact.
However, in some cases, a strong pain may be felt in certain people when not phlebotomized in the first percussion, but do not pay attention to that sign of pain.
The first sentence translated into English is: "The first of these is what you must know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the preservation of health and in the hope of the patient, and it is performed on one of the veins located in the elbow, namely: cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and phlebotomy is done at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and during winter, proper diet should be followed, when signs of replenishment appear.
And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or, if before, after three hours from sunrise.
Phlebotomy may be administered when it is convenient and necessary, at any time of day or night, during any hour and any moment.
And it is necessary to know that children should not be subjected to phlebotomy until they are 13 years old, women who are pregnant should not undergo phlebotomy unless it is after the fourth month and before the seventh, and the elderly should not be subjected to phlebotomy if they have already passed 60 years of age.
And if anyone wishes to be freed from some condition in any way, it is necessary that he purify his bowels before performing the surgical procedure of flebotomy with a lion's claw, if there is a significant gap therein, so that the veins do not expel the excess fluid during the flebotomy of the purified bowels, which are clean, and they do not affect the principal members.
And let the patient not be subjected to flebotomy if they are ignorant of sacred rituals and gluttony, or if they evade illness or madness until this is rectified within them, or if they suffer from hydropic ailments, and more often than not, flebotomy should be postponed due to colic, vomiting, abdominal pain, multiplied thigh, leg, and foot issues, or any cause that dissolves vitality, whether it be in the body or the soul.
And it is necessary to consider the subtle balance of humors in relation to this, if the swelling is caused by excessive food and drink, and medications if it is possible for him.
And then immerse in water if no contraindications exist or if some exercise has been performed to reduce the inflammation.
And stop the phlebotomy at the patient's foot around the third hour, as we have said.
And pierce that foot, which must be watched on that day from all animal accidents, as in pain, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, when work and superfluous effort occur, or when there is heat and swelling similar to them.
And at his side, let the causes be present of which the use is customary among men for aromatics, odors, balms, and similar things according to the amount of possibility.
And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is soft rather than the hard cushion of him who was to be bled.
And then extract the arm, and with your hand, rub the flebotomator two or three times; then tighten the ligament with a strap and wrap it twice.
And whether the constriction is firm, so that the constriction is not equal, or the constriction is excessive, then flow of the sanie is prohibited; or whether it is for softening, then the flow of blood from the sanie is prohibited.
And then apply the constriction, ensure that whoever has been flebotomized rubs their hands together between each other until the veins are swollen and visible.
And then the flebotomist applies a small amount of ancient oil to their flebotomy instrument; they place their left hand's thumb on the vein, slightly removing the location where the flebotomy should be performed, so that the vein protrudes a little, and the pressure is relieved; for when you perform the flebotomy on veins that are thus stretched, after the flebotomy, they contract, and if they do not contract, those veins are narrowed.
And therefore, it is necessary that the flebotomist be skilled and adept in all these cases.
And after performing the flebotomy, if the vein is inflamed at once, then you are done; otherwise, repeat this another time, leaving that place slightly, or apply heat to it, if the location is not infected.
If the location is infected or the illness worsens, then leave it for a day or two and do not strain the wound, as it will cause severe infection, nor should you immerse it in water.
And then repeat the flebotomy if necessary.
And if the wound is small and the blood flow subtle, and you fear that it will not allow the desired amount of extraction, then repeat the flebotomy at that spot according to its location, and apply heat to it before making a new cut, as the wound is infected in many cases, and a small wound is sufficient.
It may sometimes be already inflamed, so do not pay attention to it, as it does not excuse any cause; and apply some oil to that particular part of the wound, because it soothes the body from pain. And it is better at this location than other oils, or any other oil.
And it seems that the application of oil in any form of vein-opening (fleubotomy) is a crucial step to prevent the formation of clots and pain in the body, especially when these clots are thin and easily moved, as they are subtile and can be turned around when treated at the right time.
And if a large inflammation occurs at the site of fleubotomy, due to the occurrence of various accidents, especially when it is not bleeding but rather a swelling, or in the perception of a small vein, then you should apply, and place a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly warmed, on that area for an hour, as it will dissolve.
And it should be done immediately after collecting the blood from that vein or another.
And if after some days there appears any discoloration or green color, do not pay attention to it; and if you wish, apply a poultice of olive oil and myrrh dissolved, or a compress of mint juice or warmth or anything similar.
And often, accidents occur leading to the need for flebotomy of the basilic vein.
And therefore place your hand over it, and if you feel any tenderness, apply your compression to that area; if the lump is bad and painful, then be careful not to press on anything that causes this, as strong blood flows from the sanitarian artery.
And apply plaster to the area where there is inflammation, so that the place is healed, and take care of the other treatment as it heals.
And take care to extract the blood from each person according to the quantity of their virtue and according to the dominant color appearing on the skin.
If the blood is black, leave it to settle until it becomes clear; similarly, if you draw out thick blood, leave it to settle until it becomes thin; and if it is agited, hold it back until its sharpness subsides.
And be mindful of one who is full and strong and requires blood extraction at once; in such a case, enlarge the incision on the vein and make the venipuncture wide.
And for one who is fearful, do the opposite and extract it in several attempts, ensuring the needle is narrow.
The best approach for venipuncture is to make a transverse cut, not a puncture.
And this method of flapping surgery is free from blood flow and nerve incision, and it is more laudable and more safe than flapping surgery according to length and breadth.
And to which it is usually prone to fainting after flapping surgery, and know that you cure that before the flapping surgery with a small amount of wine infused with mild herbs or simply scorched oxgall; and extract it from the blood in three or four strokes.
And if there is inflammation of the wound, then take before the flapping surgery pa (a small amount) infused in essenrop of myrrh or in essenrop of scented honey with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar, or in aromatized essenrop with a strong scent.
And if fainting occurs after flapping surgery and it is caused by a great deal of blood, then know that you should take in small amounts of beef blood and fragrant essenrop; and use the aromatics with alga, and cool your foot at that place.
And use other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter of fainting for evacuation.
And here he will extend his arm and dissolve the gangrened limb a second time, as in the case from which flebotomy is most effective for evacuation, and its virtue is fresh, which evacuates the small gangrene little by little, according to the amount of virtue in the continuous days.
If one wishes to extend their arm and dissolve the gangrene a second time, and their body is strong, then do this after approximately seven or nine hours from the first flebotomy.
One who wishes to throw the gangrene of the body in the opposite direction from which it inclines, should do so on the second or third day after it has extended.
A person whose body has much hardened gangrene, is acute and causes fever, should have the gangrene evacuated in one go, and a large quantity of it, so that the perception intensifies until fainting occurs, since you will have preserved all the conditions of flebotomy; and you must place your hand on the gangrened limb's pulse, to prevent death from syncope, as these attempts should be made when the flebotomist is ignorant or negligent.
And when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, after the orifice of the vein has already been closed and it becomes difficult to draw out the blood, press on it with vehemence and gently extend it.
Habitize the layman so that a second flebotomies can be performed; or otherwise, this should be done with the sharpness of the flebotomy instrument coagulating the blood in the orifice of the vein; or press on it with a lion's tooth hemostat, or one of sage, and apply light compression until the blood has completely drained.
If the vein is infected, leave it alone until the infection has healed.
And if it becomes necessary to evacuate the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then you may bleed him at that site or on the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called the "funnel of the arm" is punctured in place of the artery or vein when they are not accessible or concealed, as it is composed of those.
And the quality of the arteriotomy is that the patient inserts their hand into the water until the wound becomes numb and the vein appears clearly.
Then apply pressure to that stricture with a tight bandage; and perform the arteriotomy according to the transverse cut, not longitudinally or laterally.
And it should be an open view, and your arteriotomy must be such that you perform it over the joint of the hand a little.
And if the flow of blood is blocked, then insert your hand into the water and stop the blood from flowing in the water until you achieve your need.
If you were in the summer days, then you are excused from the movement of your hand in the cold water, and in winter, the body of the sun is most relaxed in cold water.
And the incision of this vein is much safer than that of all other veins, because it has neither pulsating blood nor nerves.
And the phlebotomy of the saphenous vein on the right hand is indicated for liver ailments.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that you tighten your hand firmly on it, as you have placed it in cold water, so that the vein swells and becomes clearly visible; then make a transverse incision; and if you pierce it from top to bottom, then it will not bleed again.
And be careful not to sever the nerve of the hand with the phlebotomy, as it is exposed due to the removal of flesh.
And then repeat the hand in the warm water and let the blood flow through that, for if you do not repeat the hand in the warm water, the blood will clot in the orifice of the vein, and it is forbidden to flow.
And once the blood is extracted according to the amount needed, you should place your hand over the vein with oil and salt, so it is not hardened suddenly; and be careful that you do this in a narrow space.
But the healing of the phlebotomy of that with the left hand, is it appropriate for the illnesses of the chest.
And do the same with the phlebotomy of him as you have done with the other.
And the treatment of the vena cava from the phlebotomy is for illnesses that are in the parts left of the body, as well as for illnesses of the mother, and to stop menstruation, and for illnesses of the lungs and ulcers of parts and clothes, old or new, and similar conditions.
And the technique of phlebotomy in this case is that the patient immerses their foot in water and friction is applied until the veins become visible; then a bandage is placed over the joint of the foot, and the location of the vein is marked so that it can be easily identified, from which it branches out into numerous small veins on the surface of the foot.
And therefore the phlebotomist should make a large cut or leave the leg in a position that facilitates the appearance of the veins, as this is better and more efficacious.
And if phlebotomy is performed on the foot, you must be careful of the nerves that are left beneath the surface of the foot, and place your hand gently as you perform phlebotomy at an angle, as if you were about to incise it.
And be bold with your phlebotomy.
If it is prohibited to urinate, then you should wash the foot in warm water and let the urine flow out until it is emptied.
And if the flebotomist makes a mistake on the first attempt, then they should repeat the phlebotomy in another small area, since the place is clean; and do not fear infection from it, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
And do similarly with the other foot equally.
And for sciatic vein, the place as we have said is beneath the talus, at the insertion of the wild branch.
And the healing of the phlebotomy wound is at the hip joint when it is for a blood let.
And the nature of the flebotomy is that the disease enters the body, and quickly and tightly extracts the blood from the vein on the inside of their leg with a long thin bandage, so that only this appears.
And so when it appears, you perform the flebotomy on that part according to each engineer's ability and according to the incision, which is best; either you make an incision there by incision or cut off that part by secation, since the place is clean.
It is a rare occurrence in many people; and if you find it, and it does not appear painful to the touch, perform a flebotomy on one of its branches, and it is that which appears on the back of the foot opposite the big toe and the little finger.
And be mindful of the nerves, and allow the blood to flow from the wound as much as you wish.
And then carefully release the constriction and place your hand over the site of the flebotomy, gently holding it, as it is said to be healthy.
About ventilation and the qualities of using those.
Ventilators can be of wood, or iron, or glass.
Ventilation is performed in two ways: one involves the incision and drainage of pus, and the other involves ventilation through incision without draining pus.
And this ventilation, which is through incision, is also performed in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
And the ventilators that are administered through incision and drainage of pus are in 12 places on the body, one where ventilation is paused, which is the last opening at the top of the head; another located in the middle of both sides of the collarbone; ventilators below the jaw, leaving the mandible outside the mouth; ventilators made of two spatulas; ventilators on the liver, over the end of the ribcage; ventilators consisting of two foils, each spanning two arms' length; ventilators with two pins; and ventilators with two cushions.
And venation should not extract the san (vein) but only from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for this reason, it does not catch the virtue through them, as is the case with phlebotomy; nor should venation be done with fire or hot coals in any illness caused by congestion within the body until it is completely evacuated.
If venation is necessary for illness or in continuity, we should begin it at the start of the month and end it at its conclusion, and perform it at specific times during the day and at intervals.
And therefore when in any case of those, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, they command that ventilation be done rather than waiting two or three hours past the day.
And the immediate ventilation of the neck is that when it gives weight to the head and what collapses into the ears, it is more important that this be a proper evacuation of all the body.
And this ventilation is in the location of phlebotomy of the head.
And it is not advisable to use what is of cold and moist quality, or in which catarrh is present, as it causes great harm.
And for this, it is not advisable to use those things, and on the heads of which painful conditions are present.
May he who is lying on his back be soothed; and for that reason, you must tell the blower to place his hand slightly on the parts where the suction cup has been removed, lest there be a lack of soothing.
The application of suction cups (ventozacio) on the knees is in place of phlebotomy of the deep vein and the basilic: and thereby it confers relief from asthma, constriction of the throat, scission of the air muscles, cough, and congestion.
And it is necessary that the suction cup on the knees be slightly removed, for if it remains in place, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
And the suction cup application on the head (alhagdahan) confers relief from accidental pain in the head and eye, migraine, inflammation, and tooth root pain; and it is in place of phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
And be sure to instruct the bellows-handler not to press his hand during the scarification so as not to puncture the artery and cause bleeding.
The bellows should be used to apply alcohol to the mouth, and it is effective for gingival corruption and similar conditions in the mouth, serving as an alternative to phlebotomy with a knife, which is done on both lips.
But the use of the bellows on both scalpes should bring about a headache, which is achieved by applying heat.
And the application of the bellows from both sides inside the armpits brings about the effect of phlebotomy on three veins, specifically the basilic, femoral, and temporal veins; these veins are chosen because they draw blood from all the more easily accessible veins in the flesh, as well as the smaller veins found among the larger ones, until the attraction is achieved for the three mentioned veins.
And instruct the bellows to not over-blower in the incision, for the area is denuded of flesh, leaving only nerves and arteries.
And it is a bellows which is blown over openings and applies pressure to hemorrhoids in the buttocks and to pus ulcers left behind.
And you should instruct the bellows to be a strong one, and of iron, for the area requires a firm section; and its powerful blows should be subtle and performed at an incision.
The smaller bellows used for minimal incisions produce a gentle flow that draws the blood from throughout the body, alleviating old pain in the joints and kidneys, and the bladder; they stimulate menstruation and relieve breathlessness and coughing; and they are employed instead of lancing blades for two phlebotomies or for hanging the patient, and also for two nails.
However, these humors weaken the whole body and cause fainting in many men.
And from the openings (or 'ventozas') of the abdomen, the healing is proper to the healing of the vents of both legs.
And the quality of the position of the openings is that it pauses the opening at the beginning visible and sucks gently for a short time, and does not prolong the position of the openings, but rather makes some lighter, and retains others tightly, so that the humors come to the place by natural occurrence. And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place already reddened and swollen, and the pain of the wound appears.
And then you scrape and repeat the suction little by little, and consider the disposition of the body.
For that man whose flesh is tender, take care to scarify him once and not again, so that the place does not become an ulcer.
And command the bellows to increase the scarification and make it deeper, and facilitate the suction with ease.
And if the swelling in the vein is great, then take care to scarify twice, for the first time opens the way for the subtilization of the vein and its liquidity. In the second, apply the scrutiny acquired from the extraction of the thick vein.
And if the vein is very foul-smelling, make the third scarification so that you achieve its final outcome.
Finally, when we want to extract the vein little by little or in small pieces, a single scarification is sufficient for us.
If we wish to extract a hard stone, we perform a thorough incision; and if we know that the stone is large, then we must make an incision deep enough.
And the term 'scarification' refers only to the depth of the cut.
And if the stone is large, hard, rough, and its pores are very tight, then the places where the suction cups should be placed must be softened, opened, and resolved; if it is in summer, you can use oil of aloe or violet, or pressed almond oil, or oil from the seeds of a dandelion; and if it is in winter, then use buttercup oil, or lilac oil, or chamomile oil, or mint oil.
And if the excess is thick, sticky, then use oil of ambergris, or balsam oil, or aloe oil, or anise oil, and similar oils.
If the leech is of ample size and has tender flesh, then it should be forbidden from oil, and at these places where leeches are applied, the leeching should be done with watery solutions, or with water heated by the sun, or with water from a cistern, or with wine, and similar substances.
And the one whose leech has a significant amount of moisture, washes their leeches in wine or in water mixed with myrtle and sumac berries, and similar substances.
And for those whose excesses are significant, wash their leeches in old wine or in water with sage, or licorice root, or chamomile, and similar substances.
And be it known that leeching should be avoided immediately before a bath; rather, it should be administered shortly after the bath, for one or two hours, and the leech should sleep nearby.
What is it that must be done to regulate the flow of blood after phlebotomy before venation?
When beginning the treatment: if the phlebotomist or the one who has been bled is irritable and has severe pain and inflammation, then he should take measures to counteract coldness, such as with milky herbs, and also use things like vinegar, alum, and lemon, and similar ones.
And they should abstain from their meals as well, such as poultry and meat from young animals, seasoned foods, and things similar to these.
And for those whose condition is severe, they should take in large quantities of warm beer made from fennel and aniseed, and sumac, and other sweet-smelling herbs between meals; and it is recommended that he limit his drinking and eating, abstaining from poultry, lamb, pigs, and small birds, and pigeon.
And during ventilation and phlebotomy, it is necessary to drink more liquid than food.
It is necessary to give some men a light diuretic such as altharac, or musk medicine which is masted, or alcelite before ventilation or phlebotomy, or afterwards, so that the main members are comforted and the pain is eased; and it is not necessary for them to take that scorching.
But the vents that are sacrifice should be vents that are paused over the liver, and on the belly and podagra, and on the navel, in places of the joints, and the opening of the anus, since these members do not suffer sacrifice upon them.
And it is not desired by those for the attraction of pain from a member, thus with paused ventilation over the breast in the malautia (illness) of the flow of pain from the pain of the nose; and they use that for it to dissolve the tight ventilation trapped within the member, similarly as paused over the belly and navel; since it rarifies the member and scales it off and removes the pain as it resolves the ventilation.
And now it is placed over the hemorrhoids when they occur in their seat or position, for by virtue of strong attraction, it improves the hemorrhoid and eradicates it from its place.
And it seems that when it is placed over the liver and gallbladder, it should be done with great caution in those enclosed areas.
And these vents (or openings) are managed with suction only, and sometimes they are managed over fire.
And sometimes they are managed full of hot water for the ailments of the gallbladder.
And this is so that the vent (or opening) is filled and pus forms, it is done with only hot water or water in which suitable herbs have been steeped.
Form of a ventose administered over fire: the size of the orifice should be two fingers in diameter, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the liquid should be the size of a palm; and in the width of it, at the place where it is in the circuit, half of it, the tube should be small according to the quantity that enters it with an needle.
Use a cloth soaked in vinegar, lemon, salt, and water, with thick margins, to prevent the member from changing position.
And place across it a piece of iron or wooden verge, where a candle is held over the fire.
And this ventose is larger than the one we have used before, and its size depends on the illness and the condition of the patient using it.
And the ventoses for children and the weak are different from those for young people and those with strong bodies.
And the quality of stopping this swelling with fire on the member is to extend the meche with fire from a decent piece of wood in front of a small candle of wax, and place it over the middle of the transverse spur in the exact spot of the swelling, so that the fire is ignited around the area to prevent burning the patient's body.
Once the swelling is thoroughly stopped over the patient's member, as we have mentioned, when the hot steam passes over that spot, the swelling will be quickly dissolved.
And keep applying the fire according to its manner, and repeat it if needed from that point.
A vacuum can also be applied to the pleurisy patient, without any transverse spur or point, and it should only be filled with water and stopped over the member.
And this is the form of it: And this bellows, the larger it is, the better, as it can receive a great quantity of water.
Chapter .xcvii.
Bloodletting is not administered in all members but only in those where it is not possible to place bellows, due to their smallness, such as the tongue and similar parts; or in a member devoid of flesh, such as the nose and its akin.
And the quality of using those that you have found bloodletting instruments that are in the infected water pools.
And it is appropriate to lay them in the water during the day and night until they are harmless, and do not cause any cause in the belly of those; and then evacuate the body at the beginning with fleubotomy and bellows; and rub the patient's member until it turns red; and then place a cushion on top of it.
And when they are filled and dressed.
And if it is possible to clean the area with a gentle breeze, it may be more beneficial for healing.
If not, wash the area with hot water and then apply warm compresses; it should be rubbed and pressed.
And if the fever persists and the swelling of the veins decreases, then you should immerse a cloth in hot water, and place it on top until the sweating subsides.
And if the fever has spread, you should apply powdered vitriol (a substance used for its astringent properties) or similar substances from stiptics, as long as the fever is drained; or place hot fava beans on the area to reduce the swelling, and leave them until the beans adhere to the skin, and the fever is broken.
And if it is necessary, apply bleeding, when it is possible to change those.
And if bloodletting is prohibited, then the place should be rubbed with a fresh wound or left with a needle in the place until it heals; and once they are healed, any sudden pain will disappear.
And when you want them to open, sprinkle some aloe vera, salt, or ash on it and then gently press.
Thus begins the process of recovery from the third stage: restoration. This chapter is mentioned frequently in medical arts; it deals with the restoration of fractured and dislocated bones.
Oh, child, know that those who boast of this chapter are foolish doctors and common folk, and those who at any time did not study the books of the Ancients or read even a letter from them.
And for this reason it happens that this manner of knowledge on Earth in our time is neglected; and you should not forget it at any time soon; nor have I devoted myself to it later, except for the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding, as long as I could extract science from them.
And I have dedicated myself to experimentation and study throughout the length of my life.
And here I have described in this chapter everything that constitutes my knowledge and about which I have gained experience; so that from now on others can benefit from it and be spared the trouble of expanding it; I have condensed it to its essence at the end of explanation; and I have presented it in the form of clear explanations at the end of description; and I have outlined in it various forms of the tools that are administered for treatment, as has been explained earlier in two preceding chapters.
First Chapter.
The sum and collections from the existence of bone fractures, of those whose mention is necessary before we begin the remembrance of wounded members and the various ones of each one. So, let us state in the prologue of this chapter the sums of the discourse; and the chapters to the understanding of which, at the beginning, the artisans are forced and obliged to stop on the truth of those; it is for you and for those who are prompt and know or learn this noble art from no one else but you.
And therefore, it is said that when an accident happens with a fracture or dislocation or twist or injury, you must immediately consider starting with fleubotomy or separating that part, or in most cases, if no other cause prohibits, with the debility of virtue, or as the situation demands, whether it is the moment of violent heat or violent friction.
And then, be content in your diet with herbs, fowl meat, and crabs; prohibit thick meats and any food that fills the veins with moisture, as long as you are careful from gangrene, and if you do not fear the effusion of matter into the member.
And then return the patient to their original position, as it was at first, by correcting what usually goes wrong with them.
And as the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary to abstain from foods that are rich in nourishing substance, of great quantity and weight, such as foods prepared with fat, and rice, bread, meat, beef, veal, fresh fish, large vegetables and similar foods, and at this stage a light and gentle diet brings about the coagulatio (healing) of the fracture more quickly.
And you should know that the bones in old men and the infirm are prone to crumbling and cannot be maintained or consolidated according to their nature due to the withering of their members.
Nature nevertheless adjusts and amends regarding the broken bone from any cause resembling gout in which there is inflammation that adheres and strengthens that part so that it becomes constantly glued together, until the end of strength and firmness, just as with fire at the beginning, unless some cause does not prevent it from performing its functions.
And for this reason it is necessary to restrict the patient's food, food that has weight and viscosity and bulk, as we have said.
And you should know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of members, for the fracture of a bone in the leg is different from the fracture of a bone in the head, and the fracture of a bone in the foot is distinct from the fracture of a bone in the arm, and similarly, all other members differ among themselves.
And now, I shall proceed to translate each line as requested:
A great variety of fractures may occur within it. And they are diversified in their species; for there is the curved fracture and another that occurs in them stars [bones?]; and sometimes it is fractured according to the length of the bone: these are the fractures of the stage and astels (a type of bone?) and additional ones proceeding and not, as it is made in the pain when it is prepared to write, and there is fracture by plague and disruption on the head, and small fissure fracture.
And every species has its own art or torment in restoration according to the memory of its distinctive location.
A sign of bone fracture. And this is how bone fracture is known: it is the curvature of it, and that prominence and estimation according to feeling, only when you compress it with your hand.
And therefore, if there is no deformity or injury evident when touching the bone and the malady does not cause great pain, then it is not a fracture.
It may be a deformity or a slight fracture, so you must use your hand and compression over all of it; then apply the remedies that come to mind at that moment, suitable for the location, and make it very tight due to the subtle strain.
And you should know that if the location is curved and does not split into two or any other thing that does not happen in it naturally, when the entire part of its counterpart is dislocated, then you must begin with your hour (presumably referring to a specific treatment time or method) to rectify the position, carefully applying cauterization where it has become infected.
If it has become infected with apostema, then leave it for a few days until the infection ceases; and afterwards, bind it in any way you can using materials that aid healing and prevent further damage.
And you should know that the restoration and stitching of an intestine is easier than the operation on bone where it has become infected.
And then, as soon as the memory of pain comes, it will strengthen itself.
If the bone is deeply infected, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two sides, either of the hand or foot; or use a cushion if the member is small; or use two bands or one band and a pad.
And your position should be such that you place the member in its natural position, while the parts are extended from the broken member; then perforate so as to make those additions return to their places, using whatever means you can in these locations.
And be careful, according to your strength, that you do not harm the patient with your operation or cause any injury; and perforate yourself according to your ability, applying one bone to another in its best form.
And be sure that at this opportune time you apply your hand to it, and if you notice any different cause, rectify it and swallow it down with the quantity of your virtue.
Avoid extreme stretching and compression, as foolish doctors often cause post-operative aphthae with their manipulations, or lead to contractions in the member, as we have seen this occur through the operations of their misguided attempts.
And the quality of the tightness of the member at rest is what you should consider, because you must know that the members that are torn are diverse in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small, like the arm and its bone structure, and resemble those, when you see that the envelopment should be of very thin cloth.
For those that are thick like the skin or leg, you should ensure in such cases a complete and hard envelopment, because the tight binding connects the large member and makes it firm from every side, so that nothing enters it.
Then begin, carefully release your grip, place a suitable pause on it, over the site of that fracture with three or four wraps depending on the member, and tighten your hand slightly on the ligament.
And then I apply that to the beginning of the part most superior of the fracture location, and tighten gently so as not to affect your tightness which you have strengthened the location of the fracture. And then I slightly elongate the envelopment around the fracture location, gradually softening the tightness little by little, until you obtain from the location a great opening.
Then I take another bandage and wrap it around the other side, over the fractured area, as a new envelopment; and I check the envelopments that are most distant from the fracture; and your operation is on the tightness of the envelopment and its softening according to what we said about the first envelopment.
And then I place between the wrapping bands of cloth or leather, which have been adjusted to match the curvature of the fracture, if there is curvature in it; and if not, do not place any cause on them.
And then place your hand on the other side, and wrap these sterile bandages decently around it, if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area, and apply pressure where the abscess is and where there is inflammation; leave it for a few days; and then tighten the bandages.
And the bandages should be of various types of canvas, skillfully made; or of wood; or of palm leaves; and their width should be according to this form and figure.
However, be aware that the bandage placed over the fracture should be thick and wide compared to the other bandages, and its length according to the measurement of the limb in terms of magnitude and smallness; then tighten the bandages on the other side as per your initial assessment; wrap it nicely from above according to the stricture we have mentioned, and remember that your stricture should be more pronounced in the area of the fracture, and the tighter it is, the further it extends from the fracture.
And take care that the threads are of appropriate thickness and fineness, and numerous; and if the threads are thick, as you have seen in certain operations where the thread of cords is twisted, it is a great error when the constriction is not uniform.
Subtle threads are not suitable, for you will not be able to achieve the desired constriction, and you will not realize that there is less than a finger between one thread and another.
And if the patient's condition is aggravated by the extremities of the bones, then apply constriction at these sites, using a thread or twisted wool between them, as long as it does not cause injury.
Sometimes fracture is like a plague, causing disruption in the chain, and you will recall it as mentioned in the second chapter according to its uniqueness.
And you should know that a completely severed limb is not immediately bound to a splint on the first day; this is because when the member is large, it cannot be immobilized with a splint right away but must await a few days, or seven or ten, according to your confidence in avoiding gangrene.
And this is the manner of splints used by the ancients to restore, which are placed over fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Method of splinting as a quick means of restoring a fracture, especially suitable for complex cases and primarily for women and children, because it does not allow heat or friction: take flour dust, the core of the flour that prevents the movement of the millstone against the walls of the mill.
And if that is not possible, then use a thin and flexible splint made from the husk of a seed, and do not make it too thick or rigid; and use it accordingly.
Another method of plastering to restore fractures and dislocations and twists: prepare a paste from asafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, all ground from dragon's blood, mirra and aloe vera in equal parts, alcohol in double the amount, and mix with enough albumen or egg white if the patient's condition allows; then apply this plaster, for it is of good composition and gently restores broken bones, and benefits many people.
Another plastering method that helps with fractures and twists: prepare a mixture of myrrh and white alum, dragon's blood, mirra, aloe vera, acacia, and Armenian bole in specific proportions.
All these ingredients should be mixed in a mortar with strong pressure, then strained, and combined with water or egg albumen, and administered accordingly.
A method for plastering and separating joints and bones from their locations, causing accidental pain in these and in cracks and fractures; take fine wool and immerse it in hot wine and oil, and place it over the area.
This plaster is not suitable for restoration, it prevents abscesses carefully and expels pain specifically.
Another method for plastering that restores closed bones: take leaves of the fig tree and poppies that grow wild; mix them all together to make a plaster.
A method for a quick plaster used after bone fractures and when you want an immediate solution for abscess swelling: take roots of aloe, chamomile flowers, violets, and whole grain flour; mix them all together and add hot wine; if the member is not burned, apply it to the affected area.
If it is scalded, then apply that with cold water from mint or cold water and use it.
Another method of applying a strong poultice for resolution after the first, when a hard abscess occurs, is to prepare from fennel seeds and balm, and melilot, majorana, violet flowers, chamomile, any other herbs; all are crushed and mixed with sage water or rosewater or vinegar, according to the quality of the member and the rest of its color.
However, Hippocrates does not say in his work that it should be placed over the affected member before its restoration unless a specific preparation of wax and oil is made, and he recommends a balance between thickness and thinness.
A guinea fowl can be used as a poultice over the broken member after its restoration and for causes of excessive heat, just as myrrh, ash, and similar substances are used for those conditions we have recommended.
A method of applying a plaster to an injury and alleviating pain: take half a pound of chamomile, and some nettle leaves or hen's feet, and other herbs, all finely chopped; mix them together, and make a paste.
The amount should be adjusted according to the extent of the sprain and its displacement; if there is no pain or swelling, nor is a bone broken, then it is not worth dislocating it, for you should not apply excessive force. And if a severe pain, swelling, or inflammation occurs at the site, then immediately remove or dislocate that part, and stop applying the plaster to it.
Take a piece of linen and a sponge from the sea, which is still moist, and submerge them in boiling water until they are hot; apply this to the area where the swelling and pain persist; let the member rest for an hour; then cover it with a cloth soaked in wine or rose oil, and wrap it up for another night, ensuring there is no risk of infection, and allowing time for the inflammation of the member to subside and the pain to be alleviated.
And then repeat that delicate constriction and apply a small plaster to it without tightening it with your initial restriction, and treat it gently until it heals.
And if the abscess, pain, swelling and all the other symptoms have subsided, and you feel the need for a plaster and constriction, then repeat the process as you initially began.
And if no such cause occurs in the member as we have said, then do not remove the plaster for three to four or even seven days; and sometimes it is left for up to 20 days, according to your judgment, based on the loosening of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and nears the coagulation of the flesh over that area.
And then adjust the constriction more than your initial constriction, and regulate the diet of the patient according to the healing process.
If you find the location of the fracture already dried and weakened, do not cover it, for then you know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching that part; so always moisten it with lukewarm water every time you touch it; and do this for all three days; slightly relieve the tightness, and by this operation direct the nutrition to the limb, and healing will begin.
But here what the foolish restorers of a limb fracture do another time when it is not restored at the beginning, according to its covering, and is restored according to its tortuosity, is an error according to their operation, and causes great fear, and if it were a skilled surgeon, he would enlarge the wound in his free moments and cure it by turning it over.
And you have not seen any of them doing this, so it is all the more reasonable that it should not be done.
**Section: On Fractures When They Occur in the Head.**
The fragments of fractures are diverse, and their shapes vary, as do their causes. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a blow that completely shatters the bone within its joint, leaving the bone separated, just as it is in a broken limb; this type is called compound. Other times, space cuts through a portion of the bone, slicing through its flesh and not extending the cut into the rear of the bone; this fracture is known as absolute levation.
And the affliction of these two types of fractures is either great or slight, and they can be caused by compression or traction; their cause is a blow or sudden impact upon a hard surface, and they resemble each other in appearance.
And this fracture is either penetrating, bringing the pancreas close to the bone, or it occurs on the surface of the bone. The affliction of these two types of fractures can be great or slight.
And when it is a fracture that is seized in the bone, in the delicate part of the hair root, and for this reason this specific type of fracture is called capillary.
This is a fracture that occurs either by accident or by the impact of a stone and resembles, when it happens in the concave part of the bone, what also occurs in the ery (ribs) when they are fractured due to impact, and it is the breaking of their entry into the depths.
This is most commonly found in the bones of children, as well as in adults.
And for all these types of fractures, the bones are often separated like stars. And then you should return to all of this in its place.
And I have learned all these types of fractures by observing their appearances and by examining their attempts, as well as the rotten flesh that is on them.
This capillary is known for being discovered over the bone when it is exposed, and it is cleaned, and pressed upon it, as the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, one must consider the beginning of the patient's illness, and if you examine their symptoms that indicate by their signs manifest to evil, such as vomiting from anger or excess, and extension, and loss of consciousness, and fainting, and acute fever, and excretion of pus, and redness of those affected, and similar symptoms in the major dispositions, it is then not considered healthy.
And if you perceive non-corrupt symptoms, then you begin the treatment of them.
The cause is when the affliction comes upon you at the beginning as it does, and this occurs in winter days, then know that you must study the bone's skeleton from the 13th day according to your disposition.
And if it is during summer days, then know that you must watch the bone against the 7th day, because what is left of the bone is corrupted by the pannicul, and accidents occur that we have discussed.
And if the fracture has already reached the pannicul covering the brain, and it is in small and torn pieces, then know that you must incise the fractured and torn part as I have told you.
And it is that you cut open the patient's thigh, and discover the bone according to custom and manner as possible according to the shape of the plague, and it should be lighter over the patient.
And if you accidentally injure yourself and notice bone fracture, pus or abscess, immediately oppose it with something that covers, and fill the place with bandages soaked in wine and rose oil, and allow the wound to rest until the abscess subsides and be certain of the flow of pus; then begin with the circumferance of the bone and removal of the abscess.
This is the second of two surgical methods.
And the one method is that you cut the bone with a straight saw, and this is its form: Then administer another saw slightly wider than the first; and this is its form:
Then administer a yet wider saw than the second one.
And you should choose the number of saws necessary, some of which are wider than others; and some are shorter, ending in a sharp point, made of iron or steel.
And use their help to facilitate the incision without harming the head or injuring that person.
And if the bone is hard and dense, be careful that you do not perforate its circumference before using the scalpel, which are called non-penetrating cuts.
And they are not called this way but rather because they do not reach the end of the bone in that place to which it should be brought, so that at the cut's edge or margin on that side which leaves the head sharp, resembling a small circle or margin, which prevents submerging and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take a great number of these cuts, each one adapted to the specific nature of each bone, provided that in all parts of the skull where the edge is sharp, you consider both its length and brevity according to the quantity of this sharpness on that part.
And this is the method for three types of treatments: When puncturing the circumference of a broken bone, place the treatment over the bone and rotate it within your hands until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the treatment to another location and place it where it best reaches the thickness or surrounding area.
And then you cut with scissors what is between any part of the bone, creating a thin gap that you can close with levitation, as we have said, in order to heal the bone, or with your hand, or using any other instrument that you have prepared for this purpose, such as pincers and fine forceps.
And be sure to take great care that the scissors do not touch any part of the healing.
So, once you have punctured the bone and it is separated from the healing if it continues to protrude, remove it, taking care to scrape and smooth it against the roughness of the bone with an instrument resembling scissors, but be sure that this one is more delicate and finer than the others.
And if you break any part of the small bones or joints, take it with ease, for this is what you must do with your instruments; then apply a cure to the wound using liniments and ointments as we have said.
And another method of operation is light, free from pain, which has been praised by the Gauls and lauded for great merit; this is how it is spoken of: It is necessary for you at the beginning to begin to uncover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most severe and evident, until you have discovered that part and paused with the tip of this cutting tool, which is lent and gentle, of which this is the form:
And the lenticular cut is round and does not cause any harm, while the acute cut is in two parts ahead in length, thus when you have done; that the lenticular cut be adjusted to the shape of the face of the acute cut that is incident on the bone.
And then carefully strike over the incision of a limb with a small mallet until you have completely split the bone, ensuring that the panicle (or membrane) does not tear in any way that you might fear, and if the medicant was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of his companions; certainly, he was asleep.
If, however, any cause related to the membrane of the bone arises in certain places, then make an incision on that part with a curved knife, and split it open easily as it is loosened from its attachment, for it is freed from its discomfort and pain.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the membrane, and what is detached or left on the bone is the face of it, containing roughness and subtle veins, then smooth those rough spots and eradicate those veins with delicate razors that you have prepared in various quantities so that you can apply to every part the most suitable ones from among them and the most correct according to how your operation unfolds with that broken bone and its shape.
And take care to administer in your treatment the reason why the bone begins to swell from those cuts, and then use it on the subtle pus of it, and do not stop doing this continuously until you reach administering the heavenly pus and the subtle pus of all these.
In any of the other small breaks or subtle cracks, take care to administer treatment according to what you find to be necessary for its rectification.
And it is cause that it is not maintained regarding all those which have been studied in that art. And let us focus on what we have written regarding major fractures.
And if the panniculus (fatty tissue) is retracted when you reduce the bone, then take a piece of cloth from it according to the size of the wound, immerse it in heated oil, and place that over the wound; and take another piece of cloth, either doubled or tripled, immerse it in vinegar and oil, and place that over the first cloth, gently pressing it so as not to harm the skin; and then apply a poultice with linseed oil, and do not strain it unless the wound requires more.
And leave this treatment for a day or two until you are certain of the healing process; then remove that and administer medicines as needed, such as raisin juice, flour of almonds, powder of herbs and aristology, and similar things to those.
And you should make this powder from the aforementioned medicines, which is sprinkled on the wound when dry; and generally, administer to that person all medicine of the right kind that helps and does not harm.
And be careful according to your virtue that the wound in your treatment is clean; and do not put any impurity such as ointment or other; nor should you add violence to it; for when it is attached to the panicle of the brain, it corrupts that and destroys it, and brings about a malignant evil to the illness.
And it happens in the head's bone when it is cleansed, and more so when the treatment of it is delayed, and becomes darker on its surface; and therefore consider carefully if it happens to the illness the accidents that we have said, knowing that it is harmful to all skill.
And if it does not happen due to a blackness caused by the medicine placed upon it, but rather due to that very medicine, then take some honey and finely ground olive oil in equal parts, and apply those liniments to the affected area; then place a cloth over it and keep pressure until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
You know that the nose is not broken in two places, but rather two fragments that are very close together, or one of those small bones, since it has two bones in it, and the fragment that remains is cartilaginous, not broken, and it does not suffer damage but rather inflammation, deformity, and sinusitis.
If one of the two fragments is broken, then you must insert a small piece inside its nose and hold that fracture together from within with the help of a suitable instrument, and outside with a bandage, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And this should be done for your ease, and be careful not to cause pain through your operation on the patient's illness.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and it does not heal properly, then cover it so that it is even with the edge of the crack where there is swelling.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then make it similar to this.
And open the fracture for restoration on the first day of its occurrence if possible; otherwise, gently apply heat or cold for eight days to rest the affected area carefully.
And insert a piece of clean cloth in the end of the nose if the fracture is in one part, or two pieces if it's in two parts, ensuring that the swelling fills up the nasal cavity completely.
And so I say some of the ancient remedies that the joints should be bathed in a border, and changed throughout the day, which is not seen by me; once I understood that the joint should be immersed in egg albumen mixed with flour powder; then apply the bath until the bone is fixed and the cartilage is strengthened.
And sometimes they are wrapped in the nose with lint wrapped in lion's cloth; and it is that you already have a broken nose, very painful, and the malady does not prevent inspiration.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do it this way, and if you wish, do it with baths.
And if another case of post-hemorrhage occurs, apply a plaster to the nose with wax or paste made from vinegar and olive oil, or with a mixture of them.
If you do not prevent the development of gangrene, then cover that external area with flour of sesame and powder of crushed herbs mixed with egg white, and place your hand over it, pressing firmly, and do not allow air to reach it for any reason.
If the bones of the nose are broken or cracked, then you must carefully cut them and extract the fragments with suitable instruments; then, using a scalpel, make incisions and cure it with what is appropriate and consolidate it, and apply suitable bandages.
And if an infection occurs inside the nose, then you must carefully cure it with warm compresses and insert platinum tubes until it is completely healed.
**Chapter IV.**
**On the Restoration of the Mandible when Broken.**
When the mandible is broken and the fracture is not severe, observe if the fracture is only external, and not divided into two parts and bent inward, then its judgment is light.
And if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left mandible, insert your right index finger; and with that, gently push the fragment of the fracture inward to facilitate its separation outside, while your other hand holds the part outside the fracture. Do this carefully.
And if the mandible fracture is already separated into two parts, then you must administer extension to both parts according to their correct alignment, whenever it is possible to achieve their reduction.
And if there is a concusion of teeth leading to their displacement, then use those of which you expect them to remain in place by means of gold or silver or silk thread; and apply pressure over the broken mandible carefully; and apply pressure over it with a doubled cloth, and a large sterile drape cut appropriately, or a piece of sole leather matching the length of the mandible; and then secure it as you are equipped for its ligature and as the application is appropriate, without damaging it.
And instruct the patient to rest and be calm, and withhold food from them until their thirst is quenched.
If you notice that the shape has changed in any way on the third day, then carefully and gently remove the bandage, correct what has been altered, and apply a powder made from wheat flour, or egg white, or sesame flour, as you have kept the skin moist with oil, and place a woolen cloth over it.
And after you have applied and adjusted this plaster over it, and the arrangement of the bone is not disturbed, leave it there until it heals and strengthens the fracture; for these fractures usually heal tightly within three weeks.
And if another acute abscess occurs, then follow the treatment described above until it heals, and thoroughly clean that abscess.
And if the fracture is a serious issue, consider whether it involves a broken bone or dislocated joints, then you must be subtle in treating those dislocations with what is appropriate for their removal from the instruments.
And if the openings of the wound are narrow, you should widen them with a flebotomy according to the amount of your need.
And once you have adjusted those dislocations, and they do not remain displaced, then with the opening of the wound widened, if it is necessary, place a plug; otherwise, apply pressure over that one of the splints appropriate to it, until it heals.
It appears that there's an incomplete sentence or section marked "Capitol .v." without preceding text for context. Without additional content, it's challenging to provide a meaningful translation or interpretation. If this is part of a larger text, please provide the surrounding sentences or context for a more accurate response.
On the restoration of the furcula (a term often referring to the splint or brace used in medieval medicine) when it is fractured.
When the bones of the joint are broken, the fork of the partition in front of the muscle is fractured, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Whether it is broken, separated, or separated into two parts that do not cause additional injuries; it is less prone to restoration; or it happens in such a way in it that it causes difficulties in restoring it; or the fracture is like a plague.
And for the operation on that one, when the fracture is its most severe, it is necessary to have two assistants present, so that one has the adjutor and holds the broken fork, while the other extends the leg at the partition.
Then reduce the fracture with the ties within it according to its form, and not in its prominency or convexity.
And if you need more extension, wait until the cushion of the patient is covered with cloth or wool, and its size according to the amount of your need; then extend and raise the fork and shorten the thread with your hand as you swallow the tear as required.
And if you cannot extend the end of the fork to the desired length, as it is bent on reaching its goal, then wait until the patient's hernia is lifted onto his chest, and place a cushion halfway in size over his muscle.
And the attendant should press the patient's muscle from behind until the fork's bone is raised and in its place, then you straighten the fracture and hold it with your hands.
If you feel any stiffness in the fork and it is uncomfortable, then wait until you break through it and extract those threads with ease.
And if it is trapped in the bone, you will make an incision of it with one of the instruments that you have prepared for this purpose, having previously placed the fork, the instrument used to dislocate, aside; and this is the shape of the instrument:
It resembles a cup in which this is the concave part; and its size is according to what you need it for, whether it's for a large or small bone.
Make the length of it according to what is possible for the operation; as there are two ends, one should be wide and the other narrow.
And if the wound of the disruption that you have made when extracting the fragment from the bone is wide and there is a safe space between the edges, then adjust both sides of the wound with stitches.
And if the disruption is minor or you fear a serious infection, use a clean cloth and poultice according to the extent of the wound's disruption.
And if an abscess forms, inject a mixture of hot vinegar and olive oil, and place a cloth over it.
And as long as the bone is not completely shattered; and so that you can see the injury each day, if the ligament becomes soft or you notice the star (scab) already formed, then you should correct it and tighten the bandage.
Then hold the patient's sleep (or rest) over their collarbone, and place a small cushion beneath it to ensure their sleep during the night; so that by that, the assistants of the patient from both sides are elevated towards that part, and thus the fracture of the furcula is raised with the muscle; or it is the patient's arm bent at the collarbone.
And do not loosen the ligament unless it happens to be in the adjacent or infected area, within 12 days.
Then renew the plaster if you see the state of the patient towards it, adjust in the tightness, restore it and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the furcula is healed and coagulated.
And it is tightened and supported according to the most severe in 28 days, and sometimes in some men it is done in less time than that.
**Chapter VI**
**On the Restoration of Shoulder Fractures**
The blade of the shovel is broken in the lateral part of the patient, but it is not completely severed, only the edges are damaged.
And therefore, when the part is broken — and it is broken in the middle part of the patient — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, you must prepare it and reduce it back to its natural shape with all possible skill.
Then place a powdery mixture of salt and honey on the wound; and apply a stopgap with a double cloth; and place a thin table knife beside it according to the entire amount of the shovel or a little more.
If the plate is concave in any part of the spatula, then you should fill that concavity with a soft material to level it.
And then tighten it strongly with the tongue, using a constrictive motion and maintaining the stability of the plate so that it does not move from its position.
And consider the consistency each day; whenever it becomes softened, repeat the process of tightening and adjusting the plate if it moves from its position.
And watch over the patient on their side.
And the plate should be restored in 10 days or 25th day.
And therefore when this number of days is completed, you will dissolve the binding, and know for certain that it is from among the bones whose origin is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the location of the infected bone and place a chain there, then split it open and hold it, and act as we have said regarding the fracture of the sternum's cartilage of apoplexy cauter if this happens here.
**Capitol VII.**
**On the Restoration of Fractured Bones.**
Sometimes the bone breaks in the middle of its location and it takes time for it to heal; more often, its ends are healed and fragmented.
And among the accidents of the bone when its middle part breaks, it declines to move inside and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, and severe vomiting; and it is manifest in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient be placed on their back, and a cushion be placed between their thighs; then press upon their muscles, and adjust their ribs to the two sides of the ribcage, delicately perform the operation upon them, and apply the treatment in every way possible that is appropriate for it, so that the bone structure returns to its original state.
Then apply a plaster and stopgap using a thin board of linden wood or similar, covering it with cloth; delicately wrap this around the broken bone without causing further harm; periodically adjust the bandage according to the curvature of the spine, and tighten it gently; constantly consider the bandage throughout the process, and when it softens, tighten it.
If it becomes necessary to trigger the discharge of any corrosion, pressure, or pain that occurs at the site, then cut and remove the bandage, and eliminate the plaster, correcting what has happened due to this in a manner conducive to the patient's healing; adjust the bandage as needed; and maintain stricture until it is healed.
Chapter VIII.
On the restoration of broken ribs.
You know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur lightly but in places where they attach to the spine; and the ends of their joints do not cause pain to those parts unless there is inflammation because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not concealed from sensation, you must inquire about it through its signs.
And the restoration should be such that it heals the fracture as well, according to its type, within the limits of what is possible; it should be swallowed, if appropriate, and then a plaster applied to strengthen the broken bone, if necessary.
If the fracture of the ribs is moving towards the openings inside, it causes severe pain and piercing for the patient, just as much as a puncture that occurs to someone who has pleurisy, and due to this, the rib fractures press upon the lung; it leads to difficulty in breathing, coughing, and severe vomiting; and this is a difficult cure.
And already the ancients have ingeniously devised that magical plant.
And of them, they say: cover that prevents the patient from consuming food that causes inflammation and gas, so that the belly is swollen and extended, and the rupture is pushed out.
We should avoid this at all costs so that it does not cause a slight wound to generate an abscess, if it happens; and if it already has, then help it immediately.
They also say that certain things should be applied to reduce inflammation and, immediately after, something that sucks out the swelling; and it seems reasonable, yet it is feared that the inflammation may cause excess fluid to accumulate due to weakness.
They also say: cover the area with cloth that has been previously soaked in hot oil, and place pillows between the ribs until it is filled, compressing it according to its shape; and it is treated for the patient's illness using both food and medicine for pleurisy.
And if the illness causes violent constriction that does not yield, and the bone punctures painfully, fear for the illness, then cover it, uncover the broken ribcage, and place your hand over the area to preserve the integrity, recalling the procedure that facilitates the extraction, and remove that.
And if the two lips of the wound are large, they should be sewed shut, and it should be treated with plaster until it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs inside, you should cut it open and apply poultices in warm oil over the area, and treat the illness with what covers the abscess from within.
And it should be elevated on the side upon which they sleep, until it is healed.
**Chapter IX.**
On the restoration of the fractured spine of the back and neck.
Sometimes, the bones of the neck can be fractured and their tissue damaged, resembling the vertebrae of the back. And if this happens to anyone and you want to know if they will recover, consider: if their muscles are already softened, stunned, and dead, and they cannot move or strain those parts, and when you press on them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle, they feel no pain, then you know that they will not recover, and in such a state of weakness, it is fatal.
And if they feel constriction and pain from pressing or piercing the affected area, then know that the bone's nerve is intact and that the ailment will heal with treatment.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck resembling this and want to know if they will heal, consider their weight.
When you notice that the body part has already become soft, apply heat to where it occurred in the joints, and when you sit on your legs, they gain flexibility and mobility is restored, but sometimes it happens that he lies down on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you know it is a serious condition, and therefore do not attempt to treat it.
If no specific cause occurs for those conditions, the mild cause is better and easier to treat.
And the treatment for it is that you make incisions at the relaxation of the abscess with a cauterized iron, or with oil from roasted sole, or with vinegar; place this on that area several times a day until the abscess of the cauterized iron is calmed.
And now, place a comfortable and firm bandage, tighten it around that area, and instruct the patient to rest and maintain tranquility, and not sleep on the side where pain is felt until it heals.
If a fracture of the shin bone or any other cause separates a part from the body, then cover it with a dry compress and place that bone; and adjust the two edges of the wound, either by suturing if necessary; and treat it with care to prevent the formation of a scar, as long as it heals.
If the last part of the tibia bone breaks and it is the end of the leg, then insert your left hand's thumb into the wound, and with your other hand, hold the broken bone in place as if possible; then apply a plaster and bandage over it, if these are needed, and tighten it.
And if you feel broken bones inside it, then press on that area, hold the affected part, and treat the wound with the treatment that precedes healing.
**Chapter X.**
On the restoration of the wide [or perhaps 'the wide one', referring to a hernia or intestinal protrusion].
The bones of the hernia are often broken, and when they break, the fracture is nothing but communication to the ends of those parts and are sharp in length and decline inward; and it causes pain for the patient in that place and punctures, and the leg is stunned when it is fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you place your hand over that area which is above the fracture, as the figure of it.
And if the fracture is at the end of it and only there, then you should envelop that part according to what you have been taught by experience in a manner similar to its natural shape.
If the fracture is in the long bone or it already declines inward towards its parts, then you should make the patient lie on their stomach, so that you can prepare for the restoration of that fracture. And so when you have bound it all up, apply the plaster to it, and then place over that a strip of wood or canvas, tighten it firmly with no fear of breaking or removing the stitch.
And bind the concavity so that it fills the space between them as they assume the position, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or side.
If there is a risk of infection after the extirpation of the abscess, cease further treatment and allow the abscess to heal until it is safe, then apply what was previously described; and then return to completing the healing process, tightening it securely as before.
And if there is damage to the bones or they are broken, then handle them as needed.
Chapter XI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the assistant (or possibly, the bone).
Adjutori refers to the area between the thigh and the top of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is to take a flat piece of rough wood according to this form...
And it should be tied at both ends of the ligament, and then suspended from an elevated location.
Then continue the treatment on a side; and pull out their broken arm over the wood until it reaches the middle point of its curve, where it is attached to the wood.
And then suspend it over some heavy cause, or the physician should extend this to the parts below; and the surgeon must put his hands on the fracture, until the fracture returns as it should.
And another method is that the patient be turned over on their back and raise their chest with one hand, while the other minister holds what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other holds the purulent discharge from below them; and each of them extends themselves according to their ability.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then tighten over the fracture with ligatures and over the other ligament as well; and each of the two ministers extends themselves in two directions.
And therefore, if the fracture is near the extremity of a muscle, then you should bind that half of the ligament over the tendon and leave the other half below the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the elbow, then you should bind the ligament at that location and over the elbow.
Immerse this in easy water and its work will be facilitated; and when it is immersed according to the depth and properly applied, tighten it carefully if there is no risk of ulceration.
If there is a risk of ulceration, leave the compression loose for the first seven days, and place a woollen cloth soaked in vinegar and rosin on it to stop the apostema, and then tighten it.
The method of tightening it is to place a plaster over the fracture, then wrap new cloth around the plaster; adjust the arm on this assistant, and keep your hand open over its muscle.
And remove the cloth and tighten it on the arm assistant to keep the arm in place without any movement if there is no cause for pain in the broken bone.
And then use stitches.
And it is that you place over the fracture that stem which is both wider and stronger than the other stems; and between each stem you set the width of your hand, and the length of the stems according to the break plus three parts from the whole.
And then tighten the stems with the tension or tightness that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is that the tension or tightness over the site of the fracture should be more severe. And the further away the fracture is, the less tension or tightness is required.
And therefore, depending on the position of the stems and the tension as we have said in the time when you restore the member to its normal situation, then you act accordingly.
And if you fear gangrene, leave off the tightness and the strings within on the seventh day as we have said.
And afterward, consider the dressing on all wounds for three days to prevent occurrence of pressure or inflammation; or restrict food from reaching the affected member due to excess tightness; and thus rectify everything as we have said.
If you are confident that no further cause will arise, do not loosen the binding but leave it for three days or more.
And the patient's rest from the malady should be on their back, and their hands on their stomach.
And place a hot compress filled with wool on the injured member, and consider at all times of night or day that the bandage not be loosened or dissolved, or that the dressing become soft; thus rectify it entirely according to your ability.
And now hold the patient's food according to the order we have mentioned above, so that the food is gentle at first until it begins to tighten; and then you will notice that the food becomes thicker in them.
The custom of the assistant and the leg support is that they should be tightened for 10 days, and you will notice that they become loose and should be given baths and treated with ointments that correct it.
And if the fracture is old and infected, then you should not loosen the ligament and stitches for more than one or two months.
Chapter .xii.
On the restoration of arm fractures.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the humerus; of which one is small, and is what is known as the little arm, and the other is large and is supported below the small one, extending upward.
And if the larger or smaller fragment of the bone is broken, they are usually split at the same time.
And when the smaller fragment of bone is broken above, its restoration is easier, and its healing is faster.
And when the bone fragment below is broken in such a way as to cause a fracture, it is difficult to heal.
And it is worse when two bones break at the same time.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller fragment above, it is easier for the doctor to restore it, as its small size allows for greater ease in realigning it before it heals.
If the larger fragment is what is broken, then it requires greater extension to correct it.
And if the two incisions are simultaneously torn open, be careful that you press the extraction with much greater force.
And be careful that you maintain the position of your hand for the restoration of it and the extension of it spread over a cushion, and the wrist of your hand should be elevated above all others, more than any other joint, and the pain should be centered on a well-prepared cushion.
And place another cushion in front of him at an elevated or upright position, so that the pain does not shift and work its way around.
Then have the minister extend the arm from the joint more below towards their hand or ligament, and another minister extends above it in a similar manner.
Then the doctor should align the bone within that reduces according to the best figure possible.
And if in the treatment of the bone there are adhesions, then you must completely remove all pain to its proper place with your virtue.
And if there appears to be a separation in it that affects the tendon and is not expected to restore itself, then you must finish with it and hold it as we have said above.
If the fracture is severe, having already reached this special chapter, then take care of that.
And if there occurs an abscess at the beginning of your restoration, then you must line it with a cloth made of oil and wax, acting with moderation between strength and gentleness, and tighten the cloth tightly over that small space until the abscess subsides; then remove the cerot and apply a plaster prepared from powder of fine clay, and place stars; and let the star be the one that is positioned over that fracture both further and stronger.
And you should know that the names of the bones in the arm are seen in the major arrangements, either in a single fracture or in two fragments together.
Then apply your pressure over the site of the fracture with greater force and intensity, and as the tightness around the parts above the fracture or around the lower parts of it increases, lessen the pressure slightly more gently according to how the patient's pain subsides at the beginning of the chapter.
And the bandages that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, and the thread used to tighten them should be of moderate thickness, as we have recommended.
And consider the member and its ligament over several days. And if any cause arises that requires correction, and as the pain occurs in the member, then cover it with a water-filled pouch until the pain ceases.
And leave the limb unrestricted until it rests, then gradually apply compression.
And if the compression is already softened and the bone has healed and appears like those before, then correct everything with your skill.
And consider more if the nourishment is blocked from reaching the limb due to excessive compression, then you must gradually soften that area and leave it for a few days until the nourishment flows to it again, and then strengthen it.
If the patient does not have any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to loosen it within a few days or around those times.
And hold the patient's hand with your skill to limit their restless movements, and make them sleep on their back.
And you should know that this fracture is healed in 30 days or 33 days, or even sooner in 28 days, and all of this depends on the arrangement of the parts and the disposition of the virtue.
**Chapter XIII**
**On the Restoration of Rib Fractures and Dislocations**
You should know that rib fractures and dislocations of the joints often occur due to sudden movements, and not because of their inherent weakness.
And when a rib fracture or dislocation occurs, you must ensure that the patient remains calm and lies with the affected area elevated, thus preventing further pain and discomfort. Then, place your hand over the area affected by the fracture or dislocation.
And then the physician should extend the broken bones and align them so that they are correctly positioned together.
And then you should apply a plaster and stopgap, lest an infection occur; and then place a bandage from above according to the extent of the area, and you have already wrapped that in linen cloth.
If the fracture is in the deeper parts near the belly of the palm, then make it similar to a piece of cloth, and command the patient to clench that on the fractured part of their palm; then wrap a long strip of cloth around it tightly.
And the bandage of cloth should be lifted, so that the body is applied to the palm; and then tighten it according to what is needed.
If the fracture is in external parts, then you should place a bandage on it and another bandage at the side of the palm, so that the hand is covered and directed; and then tighten the tightness, thus as the hand is moved to its normal position between the joints.
And if you experience a fracture in any of the bones of the hand, if it is the thumb, it should be splinted according to its position and secured tightly with the palm facing up, and if desired, place a small right-angled pin to elevate the fracture and prevent further damage.
If the fracture is in other bones of the hand, such as those in the middle finger, or index, or little finger, it should be splinted across the affected digit; or all fingers can be tied together according to their sequence, which is better; or a small pin can be placed over it, just as we have said about the thumb.
And consider, in your restoration, and return that, the order of abscesses, cauterize and oppose - with your surgical skill - what covers when any cause of those occurs, as described iteratively in its narrative.
Chapter XIV.
On the restoration of the broken bone in the thigh.
The bone in the thigh moves and breaks, revealing itself according to how it turns into the fracture and the surrounding swelling.
And the restoration of it is done thus: the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament left on the fracture, and the patient is laid on their stomach and face down.
Then the minister extends the ligament to its full length according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
If it is necessary to open the thigh, then its ligament should be extended towards the opposite side of the pelvis, so that the extension has room, and another ligament left on the fracture.
And if the fracture seems to be severe, then make the appropriate ligament fasten to the bone, and extend it to the neighboring parts.
Then the doctor should align both bones in their proper position as they reduce the fracture, according to the natural appearance of the bone, and the bone is united by a good joint. Be careful to apply poultice and compression, otherwise the member may become gangrenous. If gangrene occurs in the member, then leave it for several days until the gangrene subsides, and afterwards resume your treatment.
The compression should be applied as follows: wrap around the fracture a hard bandage, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap the leg until it reaches the thigh and the root of the bone.
And insert a long strip of linen between the thigh and the leg near the groin, bringing the ends of the linen from both parts superior to the two parts, and then fold over the leg and thigh what is superfluous of the bandage.
And then place your hand over the thigh at the site of that fracture as well, and use one stick over the bone of the leg.
And then fill the space between the thigh and leg with soft rags, so that the tightness is coagulated.
And then begin with a strong constriction around the middle on the site of the fracture using three or four turns, and as you move farther away from the site of the fracture, your constriction should be weaker and lighter and more moist.
And then extend both ends of the linen to the other parts until it reaches the toe joint, and tighten both ends of the sticks from the other part so that the ligament does not move from its place.
And then apply the compression over it, ensuring that there is no damage to the affected member, nor gangrene or inflammation and similar things; and if any cause of those arises, then pay attention to its detachment from the body, and rectify what happens immediately, as we have said before.
If there is pain in the bone due to pressure, then cover that part as best as you can; otherwise, make a cut on it and remove the offending part, and treat the cause that led to the remembrance of the pain until it is healed.
And in some cases, this fracture of the thigh is so severe that it cannot be aligned with just bandages, as we have said about the aid and in the arm.
However, in the restoration of it in such a manner, one should not cause the patient's limp; and if it is restored alone, another method should be applied to the other leg, as it is necessary that the affected limb walk on its own again.
And you should know that the condition is severe in 40 days or a month or two, and all of this depends on the diversity of complications and other dispositions.
**Chapter XV**
**On the Restoration of the Broken Rib of the Right Side**
You should know that the fracture of the rib on the right side often leads to prolonged pain, and this may result in frequent incidents of constriction.
If such incidents occur with the fracture, it is not only a crack or break in its parts, and this becomes a great pain or these pains, and all of this has been under observation.
And the restoration is such that it should be equal to what was broken in its parts, and it should be added and joined as much as possible by means of equilibrium and ease of fabrication.
And then apply a plaster and press upon that round mark, if it is necessary for it; tighten the bandage around it tightly as required.
And then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended in other fractures, thus with great care and similar to those that resist any accident that is suitable for it until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of the fractured leg.
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is thick and is called the femur; and the other is thin and is called the tibia.
And it happens in some cases of fracture that occur in the two bones of the arm, and for this reason restoration is made to them equally as restoration is made to the arm as a whole; and the operation on them is one.
And if two bones are broken at once, the leg is completely shattered.
And if the bone breaks subtly, the leg is shattered in different ways.
And if the bone breaks very thickly, it opens up inside, and is one of those causes that are not easily healed.
Then apply extension, compression, and compression of the joints according to that agreement.
But if the leg fracture is clean without movements, extension should be less and more gentle, and it will be beneficial to your virtue.
And in the leg is also a cause for operation on the arm, and when you tie the stitches and complete all the surgical procedure, you will take wooden splints from which the causes are suspended in single pieces, and they are made entirely of palm leaves; align them with those that require slight pressure, do not be harsh on the hands, and let the length of those be according to the length of the leg, and from the inside towards the outside.
And then wrap each drape around the limb in two layers according to its length, placing one at the joint of the leg from one side and the other at the opposite side, ensuring they cover the entire affected area of the foot.
Then secure the two splints at three points on each extremity and in the middle, as this structure prevents the limb from bending at the joint, maintaining a stable position.
And now a splint of wood is applied according to the length of the limb, securing it in place to prevent any further movement.
And it is primarily important that you do this in case of a fracture, especially when the pain is acute.
Then, each day, examine the limb and study its condition thoroughly, observing for any signs of inflammation or other similar issues. If any such causes arise, promptly treat it with the appropriate remedies until it is healed.
Capital XVII.
On the fracture of the talus and the bones of the foot and toes.
The talus does not suffer a fracture entirely; rather, it is the bones of the foot that sometimes suffer a fracture; and the toes of the foot rarely suffer a fracture, but they do experience wear and tear due to their position and use.
And if the bones of the foot do indeed fracture and those bones become dislocated among themselves, then the patient should place their foot on the ground in a way that promotes healing as they recover.
Then place your foot over what is elevated due to those bones, and apply pressure, and compress, and bind those until they return to their proper place.
And then apply a plaster and stop it, leaving the abdominal cavity of the foot on a small table with two legs.
Then tighten that on the foot with a descending stretch, since you have wrapped it with drapes and other causes of which you are in need.
And as the condition passes three or four days, then you will loosen the ligament, since you will find the bones entangled, or broken or dislocated, and the operation on those is just as knowledgeable.
But if someone says it is broken, then restore those, entangle them as they were and re-align them in your hands during the restoration of the said bones. Then place this broken bone straight according to its length and a little on the side; and then put the foot on this table which is already re-aligned, and tighten that with a descending stretch.
If what is broken off from the bones is two or three pieces or more, then you should place your hand over each part wrapped in a lion-colored cloth, tighten the table at the bottom of the foot, and stand on one of the table's heads to make an incision into the sole of the foot so that it has a good hold.
And it is also important that you do not forget to consider all the causes mentioned in other fractures from accidents we have discussed; and be wary of any new accident that may occur.
**Chapter XVIII**
**On Fractures of the Hip Bone, Shin Bone, and Male Genital Bones**
When the hip bone is fractured, apply compression with a bandage, incline the patient slightly to one side, and hold them in that position behind.
And then the midwife fills the cavity with hot compresses, applying them to the cavity of the patient as is hoped; and the woman is made to tilt her body slightly, lifting the legs one by one, until everything is removed from within, so that it faces the opening of the cavity as is hoped and the broken bone heals.
Then place powders on the patient's back, and when they want to urinate, help them do so easily, collect the urine, reduce it, and return it according to the manner in which you mixed it at the beginning, then return to their original position.
And do so for seven days or around those times, for that is when it is restored.
And if you wish, take a bladder of a sheep and place a tube of canvas over the patient's wound; then insert the entire bladder into the cavity, and blow air into the tube until the bladder is inflated within the cavity, for the fracture heals.
And then it is filled with a bandage and left for some days, as we have recommended, until it heals.
And when the bone of the thigh of a man or woman is cracked, then administer in its restoration and healing the same as we have recommended for the hip bone.
And what is right should not be overlooked in these close fractures and rarely does it fail, especially to those who have some knowledge and practice this my book; for that fracture indicates to you in the best dispositions for your restoration and tightness of the bone. And therefore understand well.
But in the case of a man's leg when it is cracked, take a hot compress from above and place it on the limb; then wrap it with cloth, and have it wrapped up, and leave it for three days or so until it heals.
Chapter .XIX.
On the restoration of broken bones when they are fractured.
It is convenient for one who suffers a fracture, especially if the bone is large, as is the bone of the thigh or of an appendage, or similar to those that you cauterize and cut immediately if the conditions for flebotomy on yourself or by testimony allow it, as we have said above.
And if the infection spreads to the sanium (fever), then know that you must cauterize it by binding it with cloth moistened in the third degree of heat, if another cause is not present.
Then begin to restore the fracture on the patient within a day or two, and do not prolong it, if otherwise there is no risk of gangrene.
If you experience an apothema (abscess) cautiously, then leave its restoration within the sixth day, until the apothema subsides, and do not touch it on the seventh, eighth, and ninth days of the month, for you might cause other complications.
If a bone breaks off prominently at an exposed joint, then cover and protect yourself from perforation as you strive to reduce and immobilize it with your hands in a way that facilitates easy and minimal extension.
If the extension is beyond your control and the position of the bone is against your hands, then reduce it using whatever tools you have at hand; a tool made of metal, with a length of approximately seven or eight digits (inches), and a width determined by the amount of damage, is ideal for this purpose. For this reason, a doctor must be prepared to use such tools in various amounts during treatment, depending on the type of fracture.
And it should be made in such a way that it has a little roughness so that it is not easily bent during the operation.
And it should have an acute tip at its end, with its margin in its extremities; and the top of it should be slightly curved, extending from within to the parts.
And this is the shape of it:
And it is called "volentary hernia" in Greek, thus it is a rare case.
So that the acute end of it is elevated above the prominent end of the bone.
And it should be done at once before the bone returns to its place, and no operation should be performed.
And so try to intertwine the ends of the fracture among them, and if the end of the broken bone is delicate, and you do not seize the instrument with good precision, then you must insert the end of that bone within the instrument's reach.
If you are unable to reduce the bone to its proper place using what we have recommended, then cut into it with a scalpel according to what seems necessary to you. Or saw that part of it in any way you can.
Then scrape that which is attached to the bone, with rough parts and small splinters.
And when the bone is reduced and the patient feels intense pain, you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and so do this to bring great relief to the patient.
When your restoration of the bone is complete, and you submerge it in a black stippling vinegar, especially in summer, do not place any cloth or other material on the wound, lest it cause decay and corruption.
And subsequently, during the final stages of bone restoration, uncover the wound and carefully cut away any remaining debris using scissors or similar tools, and apply bandages according to the extent of the wound.
And be extremely careful not to reinjure the wound at the site of the fracture, as unskillful doctors often cause complications, leading to death or severe corruption and putrefaction, which is unsanitary. And if the fracture's tightness is slight, flexible, different from the tightness of other fractures.
And if the plague is severe or a bad one, and you are afraid of further complications that we have encountered, and you feel pain in the area, do not press down on it, but rather wrap it tightly with a cloth of hard linen.
And when, after one or two days, the plague begins to generate pus in it, then remove from it the cloth that you had placed over the affected area, and apply some treatment, with which we usually treat plagues, such as a poultice or something similar to that.
And it is necessary that you remove the lint and consider the plague each day and evening until it is consolidated and stopped, and ensure that the affected member is prepared in such a way that the pus can flow from it to the surrounding areas with ease.
If the plague passes many days and is not consolidated or separated from the arm, then you should know that here are only temporary remedies to prevent the plague from spreading. And of those strategies, the ones that are separated and removed, and the ones that are not separated and involve placing members and causing pain, perforate you to incise those according to what is possible for you.
And if you encounter a wound or ulcer that is swollen or some other type of corruption and putrefaction, then you must stop each one of them with whatever you deem suitable for the cure of which a description precedes this in its chapter.
And regarding what I should say and you present your case: when the flesh is split open, it protrudes over the member as if it were the bone of the thigh and the joints, resembling those of the larger members, and do not attempt to remove it or extract it, as you may cause death; after leaving it alone for a time that it can heal on its own, perhaps 2 or 3 days, then attend to the wound if you see it, and if not, leave it.
Chapter .xx.
On the treatment of hernias that occur during the healing of a fracture.
Various complications occur with this hernia during the healing process of a fracture, especially near the joints, and it distorts the shape of the member; thus, it hinders the normal function of the limb.
Then consider if the hernia is recent and administer those medicines that have been found effective for it, such as aloes, senna, and similar herbs; take some or all of these, and apply those with a stypic quality, or alum, or vinegar, and press them onto the hernia in a stoppered manner, and constrict them firmly.
And apply a firm pressure that does not release it for several days; then loosen that and apply another, as long as the hernia persists; or lay a sheet of lead on it, since lead has the property of reducing anything inflated in the limbs.
If it is already decided that the stone has become hardened and narrowed due to necessity, then divide it by the most superior part of it, and incise the superfluous and protruding part, or quickly remove it before it hardens again; and treat that until it is healed.
**Chapter XXI**
On the restoration of a fracture: When it is restored, then wrap the delicate and frail member with a cloth according to its nature.
When a bone fracture is restored, and the delicate member is wrapped, it should not be done for trivial reasons: of which one is the abundance of solution of the ligament and of the binding made not according to rule; or because of excessive tightness of the ligaments that prevents nutrition from reaching the member; or because of too much superfluous obstruction; or due to improper movement at an inappropriate time; or because of pus in the body of the patient, and for the debility of it.
And the treatment for this is to restrict the patient's diet and make their heart tender while the pain multiplies; administer a bath; insert gauze and apply pleasure to it.
Then apply pressure to the member, so that the pressure draws the warm nutrient to it, continuing the application of cold water until the nutrient flows and returns to its natural form.
Chapter XXII.
Regarding the healing of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and surgery is forbidden from them, covering that which should be exposed.
When an incident occurs with a member already restored, then focus on healing it from tortuosity and distortion of the broken bone, aiming for the form of the member; however, do not prohibit the natural operation of the member, as long as you receive the permission of the one who considers that member newly broken.
Many times, one finds foolish doctors and healers who have practiced this on our land; and this operation is much despised, causing great fear at the sign of which it is fatal.
If the recent loss of mobility and weakness is due to waterlogged joints containing soft herbs, or if they are rubbed with leaves of oak and willow, and similar plants, and then a soothing plaster is applied; or if thick mucilage from willow bark is mixed with hen's eggs or olive oil, and spread as a plaster on top of that; or if fat figs are pressed between the feathers of a goose, imitating those used in certain medical treatments known as consolidants.
Sometimes, it is dissolved by continuous light friction applied to the most humid areas, and the affected member's movements are encouraged at regular intervals throughout the day.
If the deformity has already progressed and is severely twisted, turning into a stone, and its necessity for treatment arises from rust in the metal, then it should be observed that pus has formed on top of it and the continuity of the bone has dissolved, and what is superfluous from the pressure of this joint on the metal is cut away with delicate bone scissors, and relief is provided to that part which has been overstretched and strained.
**Chapter XXIII**
**On Dislocation**
Dislocation is the displacement of one of the body's joints, rendering it immobile and causing the shape of the affected member to be distorted, leading to severe pain and significant injury.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it should be treated as soon as possible to ensure the joint is reduced and restored. If treatment is delayed, the area becomes inflamed, making it difficult to reduce the dislocation.
And to prevent any additional strain or extension during the amputation process, as movements seen cause spasm and joint pain.
If this occurs, you will notice that you need to perform a flap operation on the patient's injury, and then place it in a position that relaxes the amputation; and the affected member should be soaked in warm water and oil, and then reduced with ease.
And all members should be treated with the liquid, from which the memory will return to its proper place.
And you have already arranged the joints of dislocation as mentioned in the fracture; starting from the upper part of the body, it descends to the lower part.
Chapter .XXIII.
On the treatment of a dislocated jaw, let us speak.
When the two jaws are dislocated due to an injury, it can occur in two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their position with minimal movement, or they are completely dislocated and swollen, preventing the patient from opening their mouth, and the saliva from the wound leaks out, and they cannot hold or close their mouth, and the tongue is wrapped around itself.
If the dislocation is slight, it may return to its original position on its own with minimal cause.
If the dislocation is complete and swollen, it is necessary to immediately administer a reduction of the swelling gently, without delay.
And the practitioner should have a firm grasp of the patient's condition, and the doctor should insert his finger into the opening of the dislocation of the jaw inside the patient's mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or he should insert two fingers simultaneously if the dislocation is on both sides, keeping the other fingers outside to which they can be attached; and he should order the patient to close their jaws gently until the jaw returns to its place.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially when both mandibles are permanently dislocated, then apply evaporation with hot water and oil, until a light reduction of both is achieved and do not delay the reduction of both completely, as we have said.
And so when they are returned and tied up, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not relaxed, then place a layer of soft cloth over it, treated with wax and olive oil, and this will facilitate the loosening of the bindings.
And have the patient lie on their back, with their head between two pillows, so that they do not moan to the right or left, and do not force them in any way; having fed them sufficiently, then cut their food into small pieces, until the pain is eased and the jaws are unclenched, then they may eat what they wish.
And this should be facilitated, and do not work on the opening of the mouth during eating, drinking, and excretion, until the jaw is unclenched and healed.
And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated at any time and not restored to their proper places, then fever and continuous vomiting occur, and the patient's belly is severely distended and he vomits pure bile.
And when you see this, you will know it is a loss; and often the patient dies within a few days of this happening.
Chapter 25.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the fork (elbow) and the extremity of the muscle.
The fork (elbow) is not displaced from the socket by its continuation in the arm; however, sometimes it is displaced towards the outside part, and this is indicated by sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient seeks relief on their bed and extends their arms. And then narrow the opening with your palm tightly closed, so it will return.
And then press down on that compress and poultice, and tighten it.
Apply the end of that which dries on the thigh, and continue it to that, so it is not dislocated in any day; then cover that it be reduced and bandaged as we have said and according to your equipment.
And then press down on that compress, poultice, and binding, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
And with this treatment, the cure is reduced to the end of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Chapter .XXVI.
On the reduction of a dislocated muscle.
You know that a muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is when it is detached from its origin at the joint.
And the second is when it is dislocated at the insertion of the muscle, and this requires treatment; and it is not dislocated at the rear joints by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front joints by the nerves.
And it is most commonly dislocated and comes out at the insertion on the outside, especially in those places where there is little flesh, it is easily dislocated; but in those where there is much muscle, it comes out with difficulty.
And often it happens to certain people through a blow or fall, and the muscle of the limb is inflamed from a severe contusion, and it is squeezed by what has already been displaced.
So now that you understand this regarding the state of being overexerted from him, and you begin to consider his healing process.
And the dislocation of the limb is known when it occurs in such a way that you must remove the covering; so that you distinguish between the displaced muscle and the healthy muscle, since you find among these diversities a manifestation; and you find in the top of the muscle a concavity and place the titillic after touching the top of the muscle just like if one were to press it, and the patient cannot return his hand to its normal position, nor move it without pain.
If it is dislocated in the foot or ankle, and you find evident touch, and it is not hidden.
And from this dislocation, gentle reduction is done when it is fresh and the illness is young.
And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the patient's hand to the parts above; then he applies gentle pressure from below, and strengthens the joint in its place, and the minister raises the patient's hand and extends it; and then he places it so that it returns gently.
It may be that what we have said does not return, and only from the beginning that the dislocation occurred, a few days later, it is necessary that the illness be bathed in hot water and administered herbs that soften and relax as if they were cut from nettle, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and be administered.
And then the patient should be placed on their back and positioned so that the dislocation hangs in suspension between relaxation and tension; then the doctor places his hand over the area of expectation, raises the head of the muscle towards virtue, pulls the patient's hand away from the parts below, and another minister holds the patient's head so that it is not pulled from the parts below, for then it will return to its place.
And if you wish, reduce the second in this manner: and do cause to be present a man who is taller than the hernia, and stands on that side, and insert his muscle between the hernia's touch and lift the hernia's touch above its parts until the hernia is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hernia's hand from the parts beneath his belly. If the hernia is lighter, then understand that something else causes it to be suspended, so that it becomes serious, because the displacement returns soon.
And it is reduced precisely in another manner: and this is that a long stick be placed on the ground with a head shaped like mortar, not too thick or too thin, and then the hernia is placed beneath; as it rests upon the head of the stick, the hernia stands according to the length of the stick, and then the hand from above extends towards the parts below the other side; and the body part from the other side is extended with force, because the joint returns to its place at great speed.
And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes mentioned, use this treatment: take a stick, its length should be about two arms' span, and its thickness should be four digits, and shape it like this:
Then cover the head with a round cloth to prevent the stick from touching the patient.
Then place yourself between the patient and the stick, extending your hand or arm over it within the space left, and position the stick on the assistant, arm, and end of the hand.
Place your arm on a scale at the correct distance, with your hand extended into the space left, and the other side suspended from the opposite end, so that the joint is within the desired range.
And when the treatment of the patient is completed in any way that is possible for you, and you see that you have placed a light, smooth woolen thread; then prepare a paste with powder from the mill, mixed with egg albumen over all the muscle, so that it is turned away from its original position, tighten the thread gently, place the paste over the thread, the patient's hand should be attached to the collar of the bandage, and left for seven days.
And it should be ensured that the patient's diet is restricted for a short time, as long as the member is comfortable, as it is lighter on the healing of him.
Then the diet should be gradually increased over seven or five days, and if there is no pain or discomfort, it means that he is cured.
But if the joint is dislocated due to moisture that occurs in it or other causes, then you should apply a hot cautery with three parts, as mentioned in the chapter on cauteries.
And if all this is done and after five days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the bandages and compression are reduced on him several times, and it is not held firm and he cannot raise that arm to its normal position, then know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are already damaged or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never stay in its place.
In case of dislocation, the foot and ankle or the joints behind should be reduced by pressure and extension of the muscles, until it returns to its normal position.
And both the compression and treatment should be applied to that other joint, and care should be taken until it is healed.
And if the healing is slow in the member and there is delay in its movements, then the disease uses hot baths several times until that gravity is removed and it returns to its original nature.
Chapter .XXVII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the hip.
You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; it is dislocated entirely, most notably from the front to the back, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from your sight or touch if some figure is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip, this becomes clearly evident to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor touch its muscle.
And take care to reduce the dislocation as soon as it becomes apostemic, because if you see it become apostemic, reduction is difficult and complete healing unlikely; especially when it's in the back parts, as it's worse than all other types of dislocation, causing greater pain, and often results in death.
And for the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce, his hand should be extended to two sides, and his arms expanded, and the doctor's hands are on his shoulder and under him, and he presses the joint with the fingers of both hands until it returns to its place.
If the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it by bending his hand with his other hand, until it strikes the shoulder with the tip of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply vigorous extension and strong motion.
And it is that two assistants extend the arm, and these two assistants hold this view so that there is no relapse in extension.
Then turn the arm over all parts, because it is wrapped with a long folded cloth on his hand, or ligature.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he applies some oil to it to prevent the causes that lead to its stiffness and facilitate lubrication of the joint, then vigorously massage the joint until it returns to normal.
Then return the intestine to its cavity, which is pressed upon that paste where there is stiffness and application of white of egg, and be sure to remove any tightness and descending, and let the arm hang from the collarbone, and leave it for a few days.
Then it becomes loose; and so if the joint is formed in its place, you loosen the ligament of it and leave that.
And if you see that the joint is not too tight, then you reapply the paste and ligament, and leave it for a few days until it becomes loose; then you loosen it.
If it occurs due to gravity during the reduction of the joint and its disposition is in movement, then administer humidification in a bath and subtle friction, and compression, as long as it is relieved; or apply heat over the affected joint, if it's a case of oily motion; and wrap it up, leaving that over the bone during the day and night. And then you wrap it up and immerse it in a bath; when it is dry, rub the joint with warm friction, repeating over the affected area until the pain subsides, once, twice, and three times. in the bath, until it is relaxed.
And if you wish, apply a hot, wet compress over the split in the cow's hide and wrap it tightly; do this several times, as it is moistening and returning to its disposition.
Chapter .xxviii.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which is the joint between the arm and hand.
In some cases, the shoulder can be dislocated, and its reduction is delicate, unlike other joints, but it is essential to act quickly in reducing it as soon as it is displaced, so that the location does not become stiff or that a fracture occurs in it.
And the reduction of the dislocation is that you place the shoulder joint of the patient on a table and make them extend their arm, and the doctor places his hand or palm on the vicinity of the joint, and gently pushes it back to its place.
However, it is important to consider that if the palm has already been placed on the patient's stomach, the patient should then place their back on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation was first noticed in the back of the hand, then the position of the arm should be inherently on the table so that the doctor's hand can work on the vicinity of the joint.
And so return as soon as possible; if not, tighten the compress gently, release the hernia, and leave it be; for if you do not act promptly, the pain will increase and you will not be able to reduce the hernia any further over time.
Although the joint may be frozen due to its stiffness, the disease does not have a clear cause; rather, the hand becomes softened and cannot grasp any object. You should know that the nerves are cut or torn, and there is no pain in it unless it is strained with a hot cautery near its attachment, which gives it some relief.
Therefore, when the condition improves, you should focus on the compress we have applied, leave it in place and tighten it for several days; then loosen it, leave it alone, and exercise your hand over it.
If the movement of it is stopped and some pain occurs, you can relieve it by applying a cold water compress and friction a few times, until it is eased.
Chapter 29.
On the treatment of dislocated joints.
Sometimes, the joints become completely dislocated.
And when a joint is dislocated, either in the back of the hand or on the palm, hold the joint tightly and gently push to reposition it, until it returns to its place.
Then support the head of the joint, suspend the affected part, and leave it for two days.
Then suspend it and extend it until it is right again on that very day.
And when night falls, according to that second account, do not stop loosening it during the day and exercising movement, and do so at night; and do this for several days until it is tight.
And if it is displaced in the mother's womb, attach that to that opening and do the first operation on it until it heals.
And similarly, do this when it is displaced in other parts.
Chapter .XXX.
On the treatment of dislocated spinal vertebrae.
When a complete dislocation occurs in any of the spinal vertebrae or those of the neck, it is often accompanied by severe pain, as the vertebrae are out of their proper position, and at such times, there is no cure, for death can result from the malady.
And the sign of this is that the removal of the disease is against their will, and they cannot contain it; often, certain members of them or both legs or both arms or one of these become mollified, or a spine from its place is removed, often times, and often times the removal of these to four parts is done.
Therefore, when it is removed in these behind parts, it is called gout.
The cure for it is that you consider whether the gout occurs from childhood, because in those cases there is neither a cure nor a complete healing of it.
In cases where you see it from accident or impact or something similar to these, the Ancients have already spoken of remedies in lengthy discourse, of which the most beneficial returns; but you have perhaps already been frustrated by that which offers little excuse due to its excessive use, for my close proximity to understanding has exposed and shaped me from various tools of that kind, by which I will demonstrate and space out this very issue.
And for those, only the one that occurs on the back itself is cured with this method.
And since the illness has spread over its face, close to the wall, and has extended beneath them great pain so that the chest of the patient cannot be moved.
Then take a straight stick, pause it upright, placing one end on the ground at the foot's extreme near the patient's head, and another stick, with its feet, at the other extreme of the foot.
And the minister shall hold the stick, not fixed in a pit; and another minister shall hold the other according to that form.
And then cover the patient's head and leave the thin linen bandage to hold them firm; extend the end of the bandage to the foot which is opposite their head, and tie it there; and tighten the other bandage over their hips, towards the back of their legs, and make it fast to their leg-bandages; and adjust all the bandages and tie those to the other foot.
And then the minister should extend the bandage towards the joint of the foot, and the two feet and the bandages on their places where they are fixed should not be loosened, but nevertheless they are not tightly bound as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength while he waits for it to return, or he may place them on a table, and then adjust the patient's feet on the table until it returns.
If it does not return in this manner, take a table whose width or length is three arms' lengths, and dig into the wall where we have said that the patient's condition is most severe. And then place the weight of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other extremity, pressing firmly until the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
And if you wish, open it by turning your hand; and since you are standing on the ground, hold the patient's head with two fists, the length of which should be a arm, and place their head firmly in the back of the punch, exactly with two fists; and this is the length that is between each fist and the thumb, and when you make a cut on each fist, it must be deep enough, and each finger should be held firmly on the ground so as not to cause any harm.
And make another round fist where the turn is, and twist it in both directions of the two fists.
And at the end of it is a punch where the fist is formed, the length of which is a palm where it is turned; and in the other two fists, they are similar to that.
And then tighten the ligaments you have straightened on the patient's foot in the wound from which the head of the bone is to be removed, and the ligaments you have tightened on his thighs in the turn where his legs are to be healed.
And then each turn should have a minister who twists the turn with his hand, and the doctor equally ties the spine as we have said.
And after the spine is returned to its place and the area is tied, cover it with a dry, clean cloth, then stop; then place over the plaster a table from which the width is three or four times the length of the affected area, and the length of it should encompass the spot of inflammation, and on the side of the spine.
And then apply the remedy we have mentioned, using subtle nutrition of the patient until it is healed.
And if any signs of recurrence appear at the site after healing, it is necessary to administer remedies that soften and clean the area with a long-term table treatment, which we have recommended; this is already being administered in the form of lead plaster there.
And in some cases, imminence occurs at the end of the spine, caused by dislocation; it is that bone which you should be most careful not to expose to this medicine, as it will severely cause death to you.
**Chapter XXXI.**
**On the Cure for a Dislocated Hip.**
You should know that the joint of the ankle and the joint of the muscle should only suffer dislocation, and not what happens to other joints with small removal and concavity.
And the joint of the ankle is dislocated in four manners, for it can be dislocated inwardly, outwardly, forwardly, or backwardly.
And it is most commonly dislocated inwardly, and rarely forwardly or backwardly.
The sign of the dislocation in the inward parts is that, when you straighten the patient's leg against the illness, it becomes longer, and the inside is more prominent than the outside, and the patient cannot bend their foot towards the shin bone; this is where the tongue of the muscle becomes detached from its attachment, so that the head of the muscle is already affected here.
And the sign of that which causes dislocation is when parts are separated outside, as the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
The sign of that which causes dislocation in the front parts is when the leg expands fully but does not bend in the knee; if it perforates and cannot be brought back to the front parts, then the patient's urine is retained and their testicles are swollen, and you should move the patient to a bed.
The sign of that which causes dislocation in the back parts is that it does not expand the thigh, nor can it bend the knee opposite to where it doubles up; the leg becomes shorter than the other, and the testicle becomes softened, and the head of the limb points to that place.
But the reduction of the symptoms of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already been reduced by itself or through your treatment according to its disposition, then it is not suitable for further cure; and thus there should be no further projection in its treatment.
Place it on that part where the dislocation is recent and it is one of the four types of dislocations, then cut when you return the joint and stretch it inwards and outwards, and turn it to the right and left, for the bones will quickly return and need no other treatment.
If it does not return in this manner, then prepare a strong support and extend the patient's leg from the affected side, or use a ligature, or a tight bandage placed over their thigh; another minister should extend your hand from above so that he places his fingers behind the patient's testicles; and nearby, tighten the ligature at the root of the issue, and have another minister hold the end of the ligature.
And extend it either from the leg or from within to open up the angle at the base of the spine, or from behind to the front of the back.
And make the extension of all these at once, so long as the patient's illness is raised to their chest and the intestines hang down.
And this type of extension is particularly suitable for all four (parts/ends).
And so if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; otherwise, it will be necessary to do everything that is appropriate for its cure.
In the reduction of the hernia, when it is dislocated and the dislocation occurs within the folds, the patient should be placed on their side; then the ligaments should be tightened over the root of the fold in the area between the top of the fold and the place where the hernial orifice is; and finally, the ligament should be extended from the part of the angular (or edge) to the highest point of the furcula (hyoid bone).
Then another assistant should firmly hold the patient's arms, press against the thick part of the affected fold, and extend it outward with force for its reduction, so that it returns to its place.
And this particular type is of a lighter cure by which this member is returned to its original state compared to other types.
If it is not strictly adhered to this method of treatment for all cases, then the two feet of the patient must be tied together with a light, loose ligature on both the ankles and both the toes.
And the length of each part should be such that it reaches four times the width of the other, with the affected leg extended more than the other by two times its width.
Then the hernia should be suspended over the top of the foot, and it should be in the lower part; and the length of it should be two arms' lengths from the ground.
Then command a strong young person to reduce the head of the hernia, and suspend it from another young person, while another young person gently presses on the hernia with firm pushes, for the joint will return to its place at great speed.
In the reduction process, when there is a dislocation to the outside part, ensure that the patient holds on to a peg according to what we have recommended in its immobilized state; and tighten the ligament specifically on the affected thigh of the patient and on their foot.
And then use two sticks as supports: one at the patient's feet and another at their head; and place a damp cloth wrapped around the middle of the stick on the affected leg to prevent the patient from damaging themselves while the stick is between their thighs, so that the extent of the damage to the parts away from the support is not pulled.
And each minister should extend their part, and the doctor with his hand guides the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, you should ensure that the leg is slightly extended, and according to this method, the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the affected limb, then with his other hand, he pulls it gently until it is restored to its normal position in the joint.
And if the dislocation is in the back parts, you should not ensure that the patient is extended on their side, but rather elevated above the ground; once you have verified that they are resting on a firm surface, just as we said about positioning them on two sides, and their face and limbs are slightly extended, as we also mentioned, there is no further need for adjustment.
And it is necessary to apply compression with a splint on the area where the joint is dislocated.
Therefore, after the reduction is complete according to need—and the sign of the reduction of it is not hidden from you, since you extend two legs from the patient and when you see those angles and the patient extrudes their leg and expands that as an excuse, then you know that the member according to need has been returned—and now you align two things and place a plaster and extract a bandage so that the width is not harmed in any of the parts; and keep the patient at rest for three days or four.
And then separate the ligament and plaster, and compare one leg to the other.
Now, if you see those angles in appearance, then you will know that the dislocation has already been healed, and therefore release the patient.
And if you see any cause for softening, then return and plaster that, extract it according to your initial stretching, and release it in three days.
And then, after that, he should be made to walk slowly for some days until he is strengthened.
**Capitol .xxxii.**
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: when it is displaced outward, inward, or to the side, and not at all in front.
And the sign of dislocation is that you order the patient to apply pressure on the affected area; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And the restoration of all ways of the shoulder is that you cease the patient's pressure straight away, so that he extends his limb if possible; attach the patient's back to their face, and hold their foot between your hands; then carefully attach the dislocated shoulder to your palms, and press those between your fingers over the shoulder of the patient until it returns to its place.
And the sign of its reduction is that their leg adheres to the thigh in a non-labouring position.
Then apply a plaster to adhere the leg to the thigh, and then bind those parts with bandages for three or four days, and then remove them.
And do not use the patient's mobility for some days, until they are healed and comfortable.
If the reduction of the hernia is not indicated, then administer a strong extension to the ligaments of which mention has been made in the preceding treatment.
Chapter .xxxiii.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the talus.
Sometimes the ankle bone is broken by a slight removal, and sometimes it is dislocated completely, and the dislocation is made either inside or outside the joints.
And the sign of the dislocation is that the bone appears swollen proceeding towards the part where it is dislocated.
The treatment for the dislocation is of gentle reduction, and it should be extended to facilitate the joints and be engulfed before it returns.
However, in the treatment when it is completely dislocated, it is essential to cease the patient's movement directly, and have a strong and capable assistant at the back of the dislocated part near its middle.
And then you should use your right hand to lift the foot from the superior part and your left hand from the lower part of the foot at the location of the ankle.
And then gently pull the foot towards your right hand with your left, and vice versa for two movements, then extend your left leg; press the foot of the patient against the bed frame with your right hand.
And do this twice as we have counted.
And on the third movement, push the foot against the bed frame while you are at the patient's side.
So if you return in one movement or two according to this method, and if you turn the foot inside out, it is good; otherwise, continue the operation over that area.
If it is not possible for you to reduce the hernia in this way that we have recommended, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and make a small hollow in the earth, and place the hernia there, and wrap cloth over it so that the hernia does not escape.
And then the minister holds the patient's limbs, and another minister extends the foot with its toes or the bandage lying on the top of the foot; and he/she extends each minister towards the extension of his/her part, and the padding between the thighs of the sufferer retains this, so that the body is not pulled away from its position after its extension.
And then the doctor will re-align the dislocation with his/her hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh away from the joint, so that the dislocation returns to its natural position easily.
And when the dislocation returns to its place and it is declared that the reduction is successful, then apply a plaster and reinforce those ligaments strongly, and tie the foot with the ligament to the leg.
And be careful of the nerves that are behind the sole of the foot, so that the ligament over them is not violent and damages those parts strongly.
And then leave it for two days or three; and if the inflammation subsides, remove that.
Then remove it on the third day or after, and forbid the patient from moving for ten days. If it is necessary to move that space, it is not safe that the displacement will not cause the disorder to dissolve and corrupt, and this will receive no cure.
And if an abscess forms during the cauterization, then apply what we mentioned in our previous narrative about treatment and immersion, in another place, for as long as it is necessary to heal it.
Chapter .xxxiiii.
On the treatment of joint displacement in the feet.
You should know that one who is dislocated should be immobilized with a slight extension of their limb; and what is not difficult, it should be done quickly.
If the dislocation is in some part of the foot, then you should immobilize the patient by placing their foot either on the ground or on a table, and hold it in that position as if they were walking.
Then you should stand by the foot, place your hand over it to protect the joints, and press gently with the foot until the dislocation returns, ensuring that what was dislocated is now aligned and does not reappear in the prominent location.
Then place a board under the patient's foot that supports the entire foot, which has two ends, and tighten it with a decent and firm strain for three days; afterward, remove the board and allow them to rest from walking for several days, until the swelling subsides and recovery is assured.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the types of dislocation that are caused by illness or fracture or any other injury.
When any of these causes occurs and you endeavor in the treatment of that and in the restoration of it, you often succeed in causing death.
And for this, it does not suffice that anyone presumes to know about the cure for it, but rather he who is skilled in the art, of long experience, mercy and compassion, gradually, without haste or presumptuousness; and that he uses cauterizing treatments at the beginning of medicines as much as necessary, leaving the judgment to the divine will, except for those whom you hope will be saved from death, or whose illness is alleviated, and in whom there appears some hope. And therefore, he should strive as much as possible to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, rather than applying cauterizing treatments.
And then, if the member returns to its proper place, administer treatment with a mild poultice and care for the sore as seems best for it with dry compresses.
If it is a dislocation and not a fracture, and it happens in separate joints, then you should open the skin over their joints, as we have mentioned for simple ailments of this kind in previous locations.
And be mindful and careful regarding the use of medicines in the body's vital systems, as my instruction has already preceded this. For what is better for you than your Creator, more permanent to your glory, and more beneficial to your true body in due time. Thus, these words from Albucasim are perfectly concluded, for which God be praised. Amen.
