Oh, my sons, as you have completed this book, the last of medical science, through the fulfillment of its end and due to its expositions, explanations, and declarations, it seems to me that you have fully grasped this treatise, which is a part of the most excellent surgery.
For surgery, considered the most excellent art, is scorned in our region and time, as its science is greatly neglected, and its practice has almost disappeared; it is only occasionally that one finds small descriptions of it in the books of the Ancients, which have led to confusion and error, as the understanding of its principles is closed off, and its power and skill are diminished.
And I have found it necessary to revive that order of this treatise according to the second way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that the forms of cautery tools and other surgical instruments be included as an addition to the declaration and as a preparation for the work, which is required.
But the cause why our skillful physician lacks complete knowledge in this our time is because the art of medicine is complex and requires understanding the development of the members and their forms, as well as their connection and separation; it demands knowledge of bones, nerves, and ligaments, and the names of each, and their extraction; and of the pulsating and static veins, and the places where they exit.
And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name is fitting, for in practice it is simple but mainly in the art of healing.
We have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book; for those who do not know what we have said about anatomy, it is evident that they are likely to make errors which will lead to men's deaths, as you have seen many people thus misinformed in this science gain knowledge only through experience.
Where you see a foolish doctor who has incurred a scrofulous abscess in the armpit of a woman and cut some arteries in her armpit so that much blood flows until the woman dies from it.
And I saw another doctor who put a stone from a man who had processed it in his bladder, and the stone was large, he came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the vesica, so that man died on the third day.
And you had already called for help to extract it, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the disposition of the illness, he would die.
And I saw another doctor who was paid handsomely by a duke from our land for surgery, and he took a black crack in the leg of a man who had a broken bone; because of the doctor's ignorance, he extracted the fracture over the wound, with poultices and bandages tightly stretched, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And then, according to his desires, loosen the bandages, rest for some days, and order us to loosen the ligament; and thus it is also done that the thing and the foot are healed and do not become infected.
And you have been called to loosen the ligament, and by doing so, you achieve calmness and thereby alleviate their pains.
However, if the corruption is already confirmed in the member and it cannot be restrained, then the corruption will continue to spread throughout the member until the patient perishes from the illness.
And there is another doctor who perforates a cancerous abscess, and it ulcerates for some days until the pus intensifies the malice of the illness towards its lord.
Which causes is because the sharp cautery is pure of melancholic humor, and then it does not cover that it will reach him entirely with a ferrule, but rather, it should be in the member which suffers that it be entirely removed.
And for this, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation of the body should be carefully divided into two parts: one is in the operation associated with health, and the other is in the work which is dangerous to major dispositions.
And you have already encountered this throughout all parts of this book where operations are described that contain error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to remember these things and lay them down, so that the ignorant do not dare speak and dishonor you.
And therefore, take up your weapons of diligence and protection from God, and your patients with ease and firmness.
And use the best means for the grace of God that lead to salvation and glorious success, set aside the terrible illnesses with difficult healing, and abandon your weapons of fear, so that weakness in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for more remains to your glory, both now and forever after in the memories of your sanctity.
They already cut open certain of their organs: Do not treat bad ailments with bad medicines, so that bad doctors do not become famous.
And you have already divided this book into three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, starting with the first part of the first chapter. The first chapter is organized on the feet, in the forms of instruments and the tools of cautery, and everything necessary for the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter deals with incisions and punctures, and also ventoses (suction cups), and plagues (perhaps referring to infected wounds or diseases), and the extraction of arrows and similar objects. It is entirely organized according to the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of twists and similar conditions; a capitulated order from within the foot, and of the shapes of instruments.
Understand what I have said about the quality of the youth of that cautery and the documents of it, and in what condition cautery is prohibited.
Therefore, it says that the discourse on the quality of cautery's youth and the documents thereof is a long and prolix speech, subtle for knowledge, and secrets hidden; and much has been said about it by many wise men, and there are disagreements among them, and to me, a small part of their discourses suffices, fearing prolongations.
And therefore it is said that cauterization will benefit every complete whole universally, whether it be of material or its material, except for two complexes, which are complexes with their own material.
In the complex with dry and hard material, it becomes disconnected; for some say that cauterization is beneficial to this condition, while others say the opposite, that cauterization is not appropriate for a disease caused by dryness and hardness, since the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it would be inappropriate to treat a disease that is dry and hard with heat and dryness.
And those who say the opposite state that cauterization is beneficial for all dry and hard diseases that are found in human bodies, since when you compare the human body and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find the human body dry.
And they say by way of argument that they have already experimented with this many times before to discover it.
However, it is not appropriate for anyone who has already been exhausted and practiced in the chapter of cautery for subsequent exercises, and who has known the diversity of the composition of humans and the disposition of their ailments within their bodies, the causes of those, and the accidents that befall them, as well as the passage of time regarding those.
In other complications, there is no cause for fear, especially in the treatment of cold and wet ailments, as all doctors are in agreement regarding these, and they do not disagree on the use of cautery to treat them.
And know this, my sons, that the secret of treatment by cautery with fire and the goodness of it, lie in cautery over medicinal fires, for fire is simple; its action only affects the member that is cauterized, and does not harm other members nearby, but rather with a small injury.
The action of medicinal fires reaches those members where it is applied, and strongly affects the diseased member that is difficult to heal, aiding greatly in its recovery.
Light, by its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not cause this but rather superfluity. It is already known to us through experience and the long study of the art concerning the truth of causes; for this reason, I excuse the length of my speech, and if it were not that this secret fire, hidden in your body, cannot be read at my leisure, I would have demonstrated by philosophical discourse the quality of the operation in the body and its expulsion through which you eliminate ailments, which would sharpen your minds.
And know, sons, that the times of the year when cautery and binding are most effective are in the springtime.
And you say that cautery is appropriate at all times, so that the damage caused by time is overshadowed by the healing of what is thrown off by cautery, especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, sharp and decisive, which do not suffer delay, for it is feared of those that come with evil, which is better than to permit further damage to enter through time.
And so you should not sit on your feet, or sons, for it is only the common people and foolish doctors who consider this disease, which is healed by cautery, to be entirely cured, and they pause at its consequences.
And the reason is not thus as they believe for it, because cautery is only a place of medicine that alters the composition and dries up the humors which are the cause that pain comes.
Yet, one may use cautery superfluously over medicine because of the desire for its power and virtue in operation and the greatness of their lord.
And it is possible that his illness may return at some time in the future, according to the composition of the illness and the location of his illness, and the virtue of him, and what is prepared within him from the addition of superfluities and humors, and what has been acquired by him through food and similar causes; otherwise, the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a few superfluities and humors, so with dental cautery for pain and similar things, it is possible that the same pain may not return in him, but this is done in small doses.
And it is often said in popular speech that the cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a right saying, not because those who understand it believe that it is a cure that profit from medicine or any other cause with cautery.
And the reason is to the contrary; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is not but when one administers methods of healing in some illnesses, and those medicines do not take effect, and at the end of the cause, one administers a cautery, and it profits from that. And from here it follows that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding of the common people and many of the folk physicians.
And the ancients said that a gold cautery is better than an iron cautery, and they did not say this but for the equality of the gold and the subtlety of its substance.
And they say that the place of cautery does not cause pain, which is not entirely true, for you have already seen and experienced that it only causes pain in certain bodies, and cauterizing with fire is good and better than as they said; however, when you make a cautery with hot gold, it is not declared to you, for the gold is consumed according to the quantity you want because of the heat of the fire, and if you place it over the flame, the gold melts into the fire, and sometimes some sheets fall into the fire so that the craftsman suffers from the occupation of that.
And for this, cauterizing with iron must be done more lightly and precisely to ensure the correctness of the operation.
You have already organized this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and you have ordered those from the beginning related to the feet, so now I will address what he wants from him.
**First Chapter**
This cauterization confers upon the servant the benefit of humidity and cold, two causes that are the primary source of many rheumatic fluxes, called rigor, from the head to the parts of the senses and of the ears, flowing abundantly, as well as during sleep, and pain in teeth and the throat, and generally for all ills that appear due to cold, similarly to paralysis, sudden weakness, apoplexy, and similar conditions in those ills.
The method of this cauterization is as follows: first, command that the illness be evacuated using a laxative on the head, for three or four nights, according to the severity of the illness, the age of the patient, and their usual condition.
And then he commands them to shave their head, and make that cut between your thighs on a stretcher, and place his hands on the patient's feet.
Then he places the edge of his palm near the patient's nose, between their feet. However, if the pain in the middle part of the body has been relieved, mark that place with a sign, and then light the olive-shaped cautery whose form is as follows:
And then he places that on the healthy place marked with a sign, descending in such a way that the patient's hand is slowly constrained, and you remove it.
Then he slowly lifts his hand and examines the place, and if you notice that any bone is exposed or there is any quantity of blood, lift your hand, and if it does not return to that spot or another, especially if it is cold, then it is as I have told you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it for three days.
Then apply pressure over the soaked area at the border, and leave it on until the burn scale falls off. Then treat the area with an ointment made of four ingredients until it is healed.
And it is said that when the plague opens the skin, the wound heals better and more quickly. Therefore, it is better and more beneficial.
They also say that the bone should be cauterized within the bone, and the cautery should be held until some part of the specific nature of the bone is hardened.
Then remove what is attached to the bone, and clean it.
And they said others that a pointed cautery should be used on the rear, as it first strengthens the bone deeply, and then relaxes it, and this is the shape of the small cataplasm: And they believe that from that place, the vapours of the head escape.
And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be treated until it is consolidated.
I do not recommend these two types of cautery to everyone, but rather only to certain people out of fear; and this should be avoided, for me, unless it is absolutely necessary, because the head has been deprived by the solution of its continuity, as we have witnessed in other members, especially when the head of the patient is of a frail nature.
And the specific type of cautery that comes first is most beneficial and safe for me, and it is from that practice that health comes to this work.
Second chapter.
On the cautery of the head.
When a chronic and persistent pain occurs throughout the head, and this condition prolongs due to disease, one employs various remedies such as bandages, splints, poultices, emplasters, herbs, cats, dog's feces, and similar things; but most importantly, if cauterization has already been performed using a hot iron that does not address any of the underlying causes, consider this: if the nature of the head disease is strong, and there is no significant external injury or great contusion, then another type of cauterization should be applied. And then cauterize the edge of the patient's scalp using a hot iron, where the wound is open. Cut the wound open and expose the amount of bone as we have found, then cauterize it with a hot iron at the rear part of the head in the area known as the vortex, which is the place where the wind is stopped. And apply your hand there, do not expose the bone, for this disease causes great pain unlike any other cautery on the head.
And you should describe this cautery in its proper place, because you know that the cautery which treats the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than the one which is applied to the middle part of the head; and this is its form.
Capitol terms. (Note: This seems to be a title or heading, not a sentence for translation.)
On the treatment of old migraines.
When a severe pain arises at the base of the head or extends to the inside of the ear, it is treated with medications that clarify the head, and other remedies which I have mentioned regarding the deviations of illnesses; and if these do not prove effective, cauterization on it is performed in two ways: either with acute medicinal fire, or with iron.
May cauterizing medicines that burn, you take a hot pad, and cut it off, excising the ends of them from both sides of the head. And then you incise the site of pain in the temple with a scalpel, leaving the thread there, as long as it is hidden.
Then you tighten it with a bandage for a descent constriction and leave it for three hours; afterwards, remove the hot compress, and place the plague on it for two or three days, and then apply a cold compress to the affected area until the pain subsides.
And then you apply that as a poultice until it heals.
And if you choose to do this with some burning medicinal remedies that I have written about in the two preceding tracts on burning medicines, then...
Apply the cautery iron according to this manner: the fire for the cautery, whose shape is as follows:
It is called a claw clamp because its head has the shape of a claw with some curvature, and in the middle part there is a small prominence.
Then apply pressure over the painful area, hold your hand—to prevent the skin from being burned—and slowly turn the iron at a controlled speed.
And if the amount of blood stuck by the specific condition of the vein is such that it equals or exceeds the capacity of the vein, raise your hand so that the artery beneath is not affected, preventing the flow of pus.
Then apply a compress with salt water over the area and leave it for three days; subsequently, apply a poultice with many herbs, and treat it with ointment until it heals.
And if you see, cauterize the end of the scalpel with a cautery, and be careful not to cut an artery in this recent wound.
Capital quarter.
On the cauterization of old wounds.
When you treat an old wound as we have discussed in the previous sections on disease treatment and it does not respond to treatment, and the pain intensifies due to the malady that is not being sufficiently addressed with either the initial cauterization with medicine or fire, then know that you should ignite the cuttle cautery until it turns white, indicating its readiness. Place your hand over the area once for a moment, then pause as you insert the arceria (possibly a surgical instrument) and penetrate into the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to be careful about the continuation of the jaw, which is badly affected by chewing, and that the injury does not adhere and the nerves which cause that pain do not go into spasm.
And if it is about the care and caution of the flow of blood from an artery that is blocked, because in the blocking of it there is fear, especially to those who do not understand what they are doing and are impatient; and let the operation on him begin at the outset.
And you come to the recollection of the regulation of the flow of blood in accidents of the artery according to their manner, at your place in this book.
And if you see that this disease does not respond to the cautery and you see that the patient's condition is tolerable, cauterize in the middle part of the head as we have mentioned, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you wish, apply the cautery as we have mentioned in the chapter on the stretching of archery with a cautery that has two points, this is the better and more effective cauterization.
**Capitol (Chapter)**
On the treatment of ear pain.
When there is pain in the ear caused by irritation and it is treated with lacrimal and other remedies as mentioned in the previous section, and if the pain persists, apply heat with a cautery, which is known as a "puncta," and this is its form:
Then apply the puncta close to the heat source, and it should be moved around the entire ear with a circular motion or in any pattern if the pain is in any part of it. After using the cautery for the initial treatment of the ear, slowly remove it from the area to prevent any further irritation.
And if the cautery with numerous puncta is applied all over the ear, and it reacts as expected, then treat the areas within that have been cleansed.
Chapter .VI.
On the cauterization of tortuous (varicose) veins.
The tortuous veins that are cured and treated by cauterization are nothing but the species (varicose veins) that come from flux, as we have said in the divisions of maladies.
Avoid cauterization of the species that should be treated by drying or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that species of varicose vein with squeezing and popping, and do not confirm your cure, then know that you cauterize the malady in three places: first, the root of the auricle, second, a small portion of its temple, and third, the conjunction of two lips.
And place your heated instrument on the opposite side of the ill-placed hernia, for softening occurs only in the part that appears whole.
And the method of cauterization is that you heat the cautery with a flame directly on the edge of the ear, then place a small amount over the temple, whose length corresponds to the length of your finger, and hold your hand over it until the quantity of the substance of the skin is burned.
This is the form of the cautery, and it is specifically from a knife, whose shape is presented in a flat manner. However, it may be even more subtle, as if you see it with your eyes, and take care to avoid excessive roughness on its surface.
And take care of the area that is exposed during the procedure until it heals.
Chapter .VII.
On the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and treatment with what we have mentioned does not help and the patient has no fever, then cauterize it in four places: first on all the corners of their head; second, make a cautery at the middle point of the head, as we have said; and third, cauterize the base of the brain. And the manner of the cautery is done according to what has been mentioned above.
And it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is most important; and then, treat with what you have prepared.
Chapter .VIII.
On the cauterization of oblivion done by flame.
You should give the patient hot drinks and pills in the beginning; the servants will rinse their mouths.
Then shave the patient's whole head and apply the plaster to their chest as described in the treatise on plasters.
And repeat this several times, as it is the manner of cauterization. And do this according to the order of those steps I have already mentioned.
And thus, if they are healthy, it is good; otherwise, make three cauterizations to them in the last part of their head, descending from the higher part of the head down to the lower part of the neck. And between each cautery, he should ensure the thickest part of the skin is touched, then carefully apply the cautery as the procedure dictates.
If the patient tolerates the pain, and the disease is in one place, then apply cautery to that middle area; but if greater aid is needed, cauterize both corners.
Ensure that the inside is healed; and apply the cautery olive according to the shape as given above.
Chapter IX.
On the cauterization of parasites and the softening of the entire body.
Understand that you should proceed in the softening of the head with jerks and according to what we have said; then shave the patient's head, and apply cautery to that middle area of the head with a cautery, and cauterize all corners of the head, and cauterize over the last part of it, and apply three cauteries over the spinal bones of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the case of a stiffening of the body due to excessive humors and the pain is tolerable but intense, apply four cautery points on the spine of the back, then apply cautery inside until the sudden movement of the patient stops, and raise your hand. Then take care that it heals properly; this is cautery with olive oil.
Chapter X.
On the treatment of epilepsy.
The epileptic should not be cauterized, but only that epilepsy caused by phlegm.
And therefore, it is important to purify the patient's brain at the beginning when they have fever and other treatments that we have mentioned in the previous section when the disease is severe and tolerates the delay of medication.
And if it is a child who cannot tolerate medicines, then administer warm broths and soft foods to them, for several days, to benefit from the nourishment of the food.
Then shave the head of the patient, and apply a cautery to that area with a cautery in the middle part of the head according to the previous manner, and apply another cautery at the back of the head, and over any corns on the head that have been cauterized. And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then apply cautery as follows, having paralyzed and relaxed the body over the spine of the neck and the spine of the back.
And apply the olive cautery as mentioned above.
If the patient is a child, then apply subtle cauteries according to this manner.
Chapter .XI.
On the cauterization of melancholia.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and excessive phlegm, cauterize them with the cauteries we have mentioned in the case of paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of fluid leading to melancholia, and the patient's body is humid, then give him a drink that purifies his brain according to what has preceded in the division.
Then shave the head of the patient, and make a decent incision on the circle (scalp) above it, and then pause to rest in the middle part of the head.
And the patient should feel calm, and be held from all sides.
And then apply the remedy; it is more worthy to be used before sheep shearing. And warm that above the fire with gentle heat for a measured time, which causes it to suffer less when placed in it. Then take the object in the middle part of the patient's head in the circle and loosen it so that it becomes chilled.
And do this to the patient once a week for a period of time, following his diet until he is cured; or, if you wish, make small punctures with a carefully arranged cautery, as I have described: this type of cautery moistens the brain equally.
Then apply that soaked cloth along the edges or in the colors of pigeon droppings.
Chapter .xii.
On the treatment of water retention in the legs.
When the beginning of water retention in the legs is declared through the signs that I have mentioned in the preceding section, it begins and causes the patient to drink a substance that purifies the head, and pays close attention to all moisture.
And have them soak in a bath with herbs for several days.
And then command the patient to shave their head, and cauterize the affected area with a hot iron at the middle of the head; and cauterize with two irons over two temples if it is the beginning of water retention in both legs, or on one side if it is the beginning of water retention in one leg.
Cut with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are left in the leg; and the cauterizations should be on that long according to the width of the temples.
And be wary of blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see blood flow from it, stop any further medication that is within your reach.
And come to possess knowledge that is derived from arteries, amputation of those, and the prevention of blood flow.
Sometimes, the neck is cauterized between two bones using two cauterization instruments, thereby producing a desired effect.
Chapter XIII
On the cauterization of ancient tears.
When the tears of the eyes are frequent and through the veins and arteries which are in the external manifest part of the head, and it is determined that this is a superfluity of fluid membranes, then cauterize with a cautery as we have reported in the chapter about beginning to heat water in the eyes, and cauterize in the middle part of the head and two cauteries on the neck between two temples, and two cauteries on the neck between two bones. And if there is additional need, then cauterize across the entire length of the eye's tail at the end of the upper eyelid with a small cautery.
**Chapter XIII**
**On the Cauterization of Nose Putridity.**
When treating the condition we described in the previous section and your treatment is ineffective, then prepare a mixture for the patient to drink for three nights; and shave their head, and cauterize with a middle-sized cautery or olive-sized cautery. And then apply cautery with a claw-shaped instrument on both eyelids, leaving the hairs intact.
And be careful not to burn that.
And this is the shape of the claw-shaped instrument for cautery.
Chapter XV.
On the softening cautery of the eyelids for the eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or moisture, apply cautery to that eyelid with a claw-shaped instrument; and this is its shape:
And if you, apply cautery to both eyebrows with a small instrument in the shape of two cauters, extending them from the temples. And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the swelling.
And do not press too hard with the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid is adhering.
Chapter XVI.
On the cautery of the eyelid, when the hairs turn to scabs inside and press on the eye.
When the hairs of the eyelid turn to scabs inside and press on the eye, cautery is performed in two ways: either by making a cut or using a medicated burning cautery.
If you are using a fire cautery, order the patient to open their eyes wide, so that they look at things with both eyes, and if you need to, place a bandage on them to prevent any further damage while the hairs fall out.
Therefore, when they are clean and prepared, place the patient's head on the bed, and then carefully inspect the soles of their feet, looking for a sign resembling a dead leaf, which is where the symptom usually begins.
And then apply a cold compress or a wet cloth on the sole.
And apply the hot cautery, which is shaped like this.
And cauterize along the shaped area, little by little, in repeated passages, until the surface of the wound is completely healed, just as if it were covered with a leaf of myrtle, clearly visible.
The sign of recovery is that you see the eyelid of the eye contract and the patient's hair stand on end at the site of the cautery on the sole.
And so raise your hand and place it there for three days, then apply a poultice to the affected area until the swelling subsides. And then apply that remedy until it is healed.
If it returns for any reason and the eyelid becomes softened, then do the cautery again on that entire area just as you did originally.
If the hair is in the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural position, sealed, and the hair does not produce any odor.
But the cautery with a burning medicine is what you order for the patient to remove the hair so that it does not grow back and is sealed; then make a cut in the shape of a fir leaf using a piece of cloth.
And then take a known soap and an active cause of one or the other, mix those good causes together, and make it into a paste so that it is not frozen; spread this from it on paper made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it on one or both wounds; leave the fragrant part soaked in egg white albumen, and the patient's head in the cold air.
And then stop talking about the medicine and apply a small amount, but not too much, so that the patient does not feel the bite of the medicine, for the bite is like fire in it.
And so, when the patient no longer feels the bite of the medicine, cease its use and apply a cold compress to the affected area; then consider whether the eyelid is lifted as it should be after washing away constriction by fire or incision, for that is the sign of healing; if it does not return to the application of this medicine in the place where it was not absorbed, do not worry, for your operation will succeed and the wound will heal.
And then apply pressure to the area until the pain of adhesion is eradicated, and care for it with a definite ointment or other treatment until it heals.
And it is necessary for you, in your operation, to have great care that no part of the medicine falls out of the eye, and if the eyelid becomes softened after a few days because of some cause related to the hairs in the eye, then continue your treatment on that place where the eyelid has become softened, just as you did at the beginning, and surround it until it is healed.
And this is the method of making an extract from myrtle.
And you know that the eyes of men vary in size and shape, and therefore your treatment must be adjusted accordingly.
And this way of treatment should not be hidden from anyone who is studying this art.
Chapter XVII.
On cauterization of a fistula in the tear duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula using the method we have described for these maladies and your treatment does not work, then know that you should cauterize it as follows: command the patient to hold their head in a certain position, and place some instrument between their teeth so that they do not move or agitate their head.
And then place a small piece of cloth soaked in honey or a mixture of feathers and dust on the eye of the patient.
And then shape the cautery as follows:
which should be curved, similar to the shape of a cane or a quill, at one end where the cautery is made.
And if you look, they penetrate into the other extremity. And if you want to get out this way, try it cautiously.
Yet he who is experienced is better at the time work.
And press the fistula if it is open, and try to clean and dry that part. If it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from that part.
Then place over it the hot cautery, and with your hand protect the part from the heat of the cautery at the root of the nose, so that your hand or the illness is not disturbed, and apply the cautery to the grey parts of the nose and burn that.
And so if at the beginning of applying the cautery it penetrates into the bone, that is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery once or twice, as necessary; leave it in place for three days, and then apply pressure to that area with a border and envelop it in a drying ointment until it heals.
If after passing ten days it does not heal, apply a sharp, corrosive medicine to it until the bone is exposed and then scrape it as seems appropriate in its chapter.
And there is another way to apply a cautery for a fistula, which some first described: enter the location of the fistula and burn it, then return to that small fissure from which it originated, and apply the amount of molten lead equal to a fingernail; hold your hand over it with good retention so as not to harm the patient because the molten lead does not reach the wound; cover the area where you place the cautery with alum or water, so that the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it through a marvelous cure.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cautery and treatment, it is good; otherwise, it will be necessary to administer a drain from the nose and reduce the fistula to the nasal cavity according to its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
On cauterization of the hernial orifice.
Various occasions lead to the occurrence of fissures in the lips, especially in children's lips.
Therefore, when you treat those fissures as we have said in the divisions and do not take advantage of your treatment, then use a hot iron in the shape of a knife according to this form that is shown:
And the concavity of it according to the thinness of the knife.
Place your hand carefully between those cracks so that the cautery reaches the depth of the cracks.
And then carefully remove the bandage once it has healed.
**Chapter XIX**
**On the Cauterization of Fistulas in the Mouth**
When, during the extraction of an uvula or in the palate or in the roots of teeth there is an abscess and it bursts, and it becomes ancient, and a fistula forms, and you treat it but do not allow healing, then you must ignite a cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, and insert that flame into the passage of the fistula, and with your hand guide the burning flame to its depth, doing this once or twice; and then care for it as we have said regarding treatment until it heals.
And thus if the wound is incised and healed, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to uncover the location and remove the corrupt bone as described in its chapter.
**Capitol XX:**
On the treatment of teeth and the softening of arteries.
When the arteries are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and these conditions are treated with medicines rather than surgery, then place the patient's head in a suitable position, and shape the cautery so that it can be applied to the tooth. Then place your finger on the tooth and insert the burning cautery into it, holding it for a short time until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth, which has been reached.
Then remove your hand and repeat the application of the cautery several times, as desired.
Then have the patient gargle with salt water for an hour, after which they should spit it out, as the decayed tooth will be secured, the softened gums will tighten, and the corrupted moisture will dry up.
Chapter .xxi.
On the treatment of tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to coldness or there is swelling or pus, and the treatment with medicine does not help, one uses cautery on that area in two ways: either with a cattle horn cautery or with a fire cautery.
Cautery with a cattle horn involves taking the horn of a cow and piercing it in the fire, then holding the cautery over the affected tooth, wrapping the cloth around the tip, immersing it in hot water, and applying it to the aching tooth until it is numbed.
And repeat this several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you see, dip a cloth or cloth in the wound on its side, place that over the painful tooth, and place the burning iron on it until the iron reaches the depth of the tooth's cavity.
However, cauterization with fire only addresses the outer layer of the wound or the skin, and it should not be too harsh or rough, nor should the heat of the fire reach the patient's mouth.
Then shape the cautery as needed, place it over the tooth, and hold your hand over it until the cautery cools; do this several times as the pain may resurface the next day or later.
And ensure that the patient opens their mouth wide with the help of the cautery, hold it for an hour, then spit it out; this is the form of the cautery.
And apply the cautery where you have seen the extreme, as much as you can.
And this is the shape of the catheter:
Chapter .XXII.
On cauterization of hernias.
When hernias are filled with fluid and humors that are resistant to digestion by medicines, and you need to expel them slightly, then apply the cautery directly to their form, having two sharp ends so that the fire from the cautery can reach both sides. You should place the glowing end on one spot until it has reached the desired point, and then move to another spot as needed until the hernia is removed.
And if the hernia is small, then apply the cautery according to its size, and then let it heal for three days, keeping a clean bandage on it until it has been completely healed by the fire.
And then apply that ointment and bandages until it is healed.
**Chapter XXIII**
On the cauterization of wounds and the constriction of veins.
When humidity appears on the pleura of the lung, especially when it is chilled by congestion, it is necessary to evacuate that evil at the beginning with medicinal purgatives, and then cauterize that part where the pleura is affected.
And be careful not to harm the pleura with the cautery or to inflame the patient's chest too much.
And cauterize that or another cautery on the joint of the neck in the last spine of the patient. The cautery of him is the same as the previous method.
And then take care of that as mentioned above until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
On cauterization for pulmonary disease and coughing.
When coughing and pulmonary disease are caused by excessive moisture, and the patient has no fever or phlegm, and the condition is chronic, then cauterize in two places on the furcula (breastbone) at the spots where it curves upward; also, make another cautery in the middle of the foot between the big toe and the one next to it; and use the cautery as mentioned above.
And if you wish, your puncturing cautery may be the one called a point, the shape of which precedes in the puncturing of earache pain.
And make points within these; and then carefully treat that with the remedies that are preceded so that it heals.
And already the cautery has three prongs for cauterization to that extent: at one time you can make three cauteries according to this form:
Chapter XXV.
On cauterization of the throat, which is the chief aid's responsibility.
When the chief aid's head is dislocated due to slippery humidity and does not stop in the hour of its return, you should reduce its dislocation until it is to its usual place, and with a slight movement, it is also displaced as it ought to be, as we have witnessed; first, reduce the dislocation, and then let the patient lie on their back or side; and raise the head that was in the opening within the throat to the upper parts above using your left hand, if the joint is dislocated inward.
And then apply the cautery, which has two points; and this is its form:
Then cauterize the wound where that one penetrates into the other side; and the shape of the cauterization will be when using three cautery points.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this rule, and that is the reason for the eight cauterizations.
Then place the entire cautery on the wound with salt, and make the patient lie in a tranquil state, and do not move the limb for some time until it is healed.
And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and it persists, then make this done, cauterizing over the muscle with a hot cautery or making pointed cuts with other cauterization tools, for the joint is confirmed and the moisture is broken and the patient is healed.
Chapter .xxvi.
On the cauterization of the stomach.
When stomach pain occurs with friction and moisture inside, causing the intestines to protrude, and if you continue treatment methods without considering, it will be seen that the illness is on its back, extending its hands and legs, and cauterize that part with three cauteries: one cautery leaving a mark on the foot about the size of a finger, and two cauteries on either side of the cost (rib) of the cautery, while maintaining the shape of a triangular cautery; stretch between those who are not aligned, as it will cause putrefaction.
And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And the shape of the cautery should be according to this form. And if you wish, cauterize with a larger cautery in the middle part of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach should be punctured at the point that this cautery scares: and you know how much to puncture the stomach with a pointed cautery, and then cauterize these points; and then take care of the cure that has been preceded until it is healed.
**Chapter XXVII**
**On the Cauterization of a Fetled Artery**
When pain in the artery arises from coldness or moisture or excessive windiness, and the ailment is treated as we have said, and you do not allow it to spread, then you should raise the malady over its base, and try three cauterizations with this form and this amount on the artery beneath the ribs; thus, he achieves the position of a reclining man.
And the space between each cautery should be according to its thickness, and the cauteries should be according to the length of the body on the right side.
And do not let your fear guide the cautery.
And if the amount of moisture adhering to the quantity of the nature of the cord is not properly adjusted, and if the illness stands on the patient's feet, or if it is not standing, then he should sit, whose parts have already spread out, and raise his arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a cutting cautery, when it is subtle and prudent in the art.
And be careful not to burn too much with the cautery, and fix your gaze on every part of the body so that all the body is numbed and reaches the intestines, for the cautery here is subtle; be aware of this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the perforation of an abscess in the leg with cautery.
When an abscess forms in the leg and you want to know if it is in the flesh or in the sheath of the muscle, if it is in the flesh of the leg, the disease takes on great gravity and the pain becomes acute.
And if it is in the sheath of the muscle, the pain is very acute and often exhausts the doctors in treating it.
Therefore, position the patient so that their neck is bent; then identify the location of the abscess, and apply the pointed cautery whose form was described on the previous page. And cauterize with these cauteries until the entire wound is closed, so that it heals properly.
And likewise, take care for the healing of other abscesses until they are cured.
And use only the cautery described in medical texts, from which most of the illnesses you know are derived; however, on certain occasions, this may be daring for this operation, but we must always prioritize safety and do what is best.
Chapter 29.
On the cauterization of pleurisy.
Ancient cauterization techniques for pleurisy, according to this method, involve taking the long, thin cut end of an aristological instrument and inserting it into the pleural cavity through a small opening, adjusting its thickness as needed.
Then immerse those in oil and heat them over the fire, and cauterize with a hot iron at the location between the continuation of the furcula (first rib) and the collarbone; use two small irons to guide, one slightly inclined downwards from the point where the beard joins, and two others inclined between the fifth rib and the cartilage, slightly towards the rear. Use another iron in the middle part of the foot; another on the stomach, and three more at the rear parts. Use an iron between the two shoulders, and two irons on each side of the foot, leaving the iron between the two shoulders for last.
And be sure that your hand does not touch the cautery, but in the open wound where the work is done.
They also speak of other ancient practices where certain men use hot iron cauteries that resemble rays and ignite this, then place it in the space between the ribs, in order to reach that place and cure it completely, as we have said regarding the hernia.
You should not be afraid of this piercing with cautery, as it often happens in the fissure place where healing does not occur.
It appears that the text you've provided does not contain meaningful content related to the previous lines, as "Capitol .xxx." seems to be an incomplete or irrelevant reference. The previous section discussed medical practices involving cautery and hernia treatment. If you have more context or additional sentences, I can assist with a more accurate translation.
Regarding the cauterization of the melse (melza, meaning "mucous membrane" or "mucus").
When treating the illness of the bowels with what we have said about treatment in division and you do not apply your care, use cautery on it in three ways, all of which are correct; one is to make three or four punctures along the length of the bowel according to the pattern of the cautery marks on the fabric.
And between each cautery, the thickness of a finger or slightly less, and the manner of the cautery is the same manner we have said in the fabric cautery completely.
And do not apply your hand with the cautery; let the illness be on their backs.
And another way of cauterizing is that you ignite the cautery having two sides, which we have mentioned in the chapter on the dislocation of muscles, and raise the cord which is at the end of the bowel where it rests on the left side of the patient's illness.
And let your elevation, by which you raise the spine according to the length of the body, be such that cauterization is done according to the extent of the body.
Then properly insert the two weapons, on fire, into that space where they penetrate the spine from the other side.
Then remove the cautery; and thus, four cauterizations are made.
And if you see, cauterize with a cautery that has three weapons.
Then care for the cauterizations so that they do not cause pain for too many days, as it is more effective than other remedies previously in the treatment.
Chapter .XXXI. (This indicates the continuation of the medical treatise.)
On cauterization of dropsical conditions.
Cauterization should not be applied to dropsical conditions but directly to the affected part.
When treating a dropsical condition using the methods described in the previous section, and if your treatment does not resolve it, you should apply four cauterizations in the area surrounding the affected part, as well as one cauterization on the stomach, another on the thigh, another on the groin, two cauterizations between the spine of the back, and one cauterization directly on the right side of the foot, and yet another cauterization on the stomach. And the depth of the cauterization should be determined according to the severity of the condition.
Then apply the cautery gently so as not to cause prolonged pain.
And do not evacuate the hernia with cautery alone, but add two intentions to it, and it will be celebrated with the aid of healing.
The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be according to the shape of that one used for the stomach, and it is that same one used for cauterizing the back, which is like an olive based on its form.
Chapter XXXII.
On the cauterization of the feet and other parts.
When the feet are immersed in cold water and become full of water, cauterize them on the top of the foot, between the big toe and the little finger, without pressing hard; then lift your hand and do not return it to its previous position, as the icy water may leak out.
This is the cautery according to this form: Then make two cuts on both thighs, and on each thigh make a cautery with the tip of the cutting cautery. And the cautery should be according to the length of the thigh: one on the outside and the other on the inside of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauteries.
And leave the wound open for a long time so that no water remains in it.
Then attend to those causes that we have mentioned.
Chapter .xxxiii. (Note: "Capitol" is likely a typographical error, as it is typically used for the beginning of a chapter in books, and the number system should be consistent with the rest of the text.)
On the cauterization of abdominal parts.
When abdominal pain is due to inflammation and moisture that resolves the channels, it is the digestive and retentive virtue located in the stomach and intestines, and it is treated using curative methods without causing further harm, sometimes the patient undergoes painful cautery to exhibit the virtue, then cauterizes a large cautery on their stomach as previously mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach, also uses circular cautery and four cauteries in the circuit of subtle embelics, or a subtile nail-like cautery; and cauterizes over a large alcatin on alozis, or uses two cauteries.
And if the excess moisture and illness tolerate it, then cauterize that on the penile region and intestines, firmly applying two cauteries over the stomach and near the inguinal region, for this is a perfect cure from which one does not stray.
Chapter .xxxiv. (Note: The number xxxiv is Roman numerals for 34.)
On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When they are in nature, old hemorrhoids that are caused by thick humors or corrupted moisture, and they do not yield to the treatments mentioned in the previous section, then cauterize them with three cautery tools on the pus left in the small of the back, and another cautery over the navel from both sides.
And if it is observed that the patient's stomach is cold and their food is not digested, and their face appears pale, then cauterize over the stomach with a large cautery as mentioned previously; also apply a cautery to the intestines, and another cautery to the anus with a claw cautery, leave the cauteries open for some time, and pay close attention until they are healed.
Chapter XXXV.
From the treatment of hernias, it is appropriate to remove them.
When you remove hernias, you apply the cautery that resembles a ray. Then insert that flame into the hernia you have removed and keep your hand over it until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
And do this once or twice, for if the hernias are too many, cauterize each one of them as we have mentioned, and then care for those with herbs until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on something, it is better to do so later in the healing process.
Chapter XXXVI.
On cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the natural openings of the body.
When nature does not adhere to the treatment we have described in its proper place, and the patient is frightened by it, then healing is achieved through cauterization.
So when one sees a fistula in nature that is old and corrupted by unclean humidity, it is most worthy to attempt its healing with subtle means, and then slowly introduce the quantity of the depth of the fistula according to the aforementioned subtle attempt.
Then apply the cautery that resembles a ray. And place that ignited cautery into this fistula, according to the quantity in which it intercepts the attempt.
And apply the cautery repeatedly until those corrupted bodies are burned through once or twice or three times, according to the amount of your need.
And be careful of the burning of nerves and veins; if a fistula goes to the bladder or intestinal cavity, be cautious in all those places; and do not perform this unless the fistula is in fleshy tissue and you think it is not penetrating.
And then take care of the area until it heals.
And if the area is sealed and all foreign matter has been removed from it, and it heals in this way for a long time, then you know that it is completely cured.
And if the foreign matter is not from inside the body, then you know that it is penetrating or in the vicinity of its opening, or it falls from those causes of which there will be a remembrance in that place.
Chapter .xxxvii.
On the cauterization of ulcers.
When ulcers cause pain due to cold or excessive heat, and the patient's condition becomes aggravated, it is necessary to cauterize them, beginning with the most severe ulcer using a cautery instrument of which you have need for its healing.
And we should strongly cauterize the second one a little later, so that three cauterizations will follow, and thus there will be fewer subsequent ones.
Chapter .xxxviii.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When the bladder becomes weakened and softened by friction and moisture such that the disease cannot retain urine, cauterize it in the area where the pus has formed, beginning at the opening of the urethra, and cauterize with a hot iron on the right side, and another on the left side.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the pus; cauterize it with a hot iron in the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And the hot iron should be driven in according to how it is processed.
Chapter .xxxix. (Note: The absence of a specific text means I cannot provide a translation for this section.)
On cauterization of the breast.
When fever and humidity are present, and for that reason conception is forbidden, the woman's menstruation becomes corrupted, and it takes longer to arouse them, causing pain due to their arrival; then know that the place should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; or with two cauteries, one on each side, or a cautery in the shape of a claw.
Chapter XL.
On the cauterization of the dislocated ankle.
When mucous humors infiltrate the area around the ankle, and cause its swelling, and a sign of it is that the affected part is prolonged over the other when compared between them. And the location of the dislocation is narrowed down to which boot it is in.
Then apply the cautery to the hernia at the opening of the anus with a circular cauterization, for you will have already tried to loosen the ring around the opening as it is turned, and thus the opening falls in the middle of the circle.
And the shape of the cautery mentioned above is also used in the cauterization of the stomach.
If this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three large olive cautery irons.
And make the cautery according to the intensity of the pain from all over the body, and be careful that it is sane.
Chapter XL:
On the Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein.
When pain appears in the lower part of the body, caused by cold and moisture, the disease is treated with the water we have mentioned and do not give any other thing, and this is ancient, then you should reduce the disease from thick humors with putrid pills or artificial pills or similar ones; and treat it with cautery.
And the way of the cautery on that is according to two ways: either cautery with medicinal burners, or cautery with fire.
It follows according to two knowledgeable ways, of which one is to cauterize it in the gap of the patient's anus with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make those sufficiently deep. And both the spaces between each cautery should be according to the thickness of what is being treated, and whether the cautery is olive-sized or large.
Some times, cautery can be applied to the middle part of the ankle for it to be four cauterizations.
And if you wish, cauterize the circle from which the shape precedes in the cauterization of the dislocated ankle, one that is circular and burns away the inflammation of all the tendons.
And this is the manner of cautery in chronic cases when pain is attached to the ankle and not spread within the thigh.
If it is spread within the thigh, then cauterize that as two cauterizations on the thigh over the place where you have turned the malady that causes the pain; and one cauterization on the shin bone four times a day from the outer part.
And if the cautery is cuticular, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the quantity of inflammation of the tendon.
And if the disease causes the pain to radiate towards the feet, then apply a cautery here where you see it needs cauterization with three or four or more points if required for that part.
And if the disease causes pain to remain in the thigh, then apply a cutting cautery here where it is felt.
And be careful in all cauterization so that you do not end with cautery on nerves or great damage, and thereby to yourself cause more harm than the disease does to the patient.
And you have already seen others of those who cauterize on the ankle and complete the cauterization, and a bed of fire inflated within that the growth achieved its foot, and fire pierced and corrupted all the foot. And then cause a strong acid solution of the belly, and thereby bring about death.
And if the pain is in two parts, simultaneously apply cautery to each according to this manner.
And certain wise men spoke of the cauterization of water cauteries, of which this is the manner: make it resemble a circular iron ring whose circumference is the width of a palm; and its orifice should be according to the thickness of a date palm bone or slightly more.
And within that circle there should be another third; and the space between them should be equal to the width of a palm; and these circles should have two parts; and the length of these sides should be a palm or two palms, and make on the edge of the iron circles a proper incision in the shape of them.
Then light it in the fire until it curls and sparks, and once it is paused over the part of water, place the patient on their side with the afflicted area above. And therefore cauterize that part with three red hot cauteries at once.
And then apply that for three days; then bind up the wound with a poultice and keep the ulcer open for several days; and then tend to it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasis says: O, my sons, of this kind of cautery we have used little due to the fear of looking at it, and because few of us have found those who look at it.
One should apply the best cautery to him who suffers from it, and find out the right place for it.
One should use cautery instead of medicines when, after making two circles with a perforated armature made of iron, you insert the guaffo (a hook or claw) into the door; let the length of the wall be such that its width is equal to two nuts or the size of those used.
And if the space between certain parts of the body is such that it corresponds to the thickness of the said part, they should be opened and left open, and they should hold themselves together according to this form:
Then place your hand over the part where the patient feels pain in the side, and take some cold water, forming it into two circles, and gradually decrease its temperature with fire, keeping it for an hour, and allowing the patient to endure the burning and compression—for that burning sensation is as if it were from fire—until the burning ceases.
Then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away the cold water from all parts of the affected area with warm water.
Then apply this for three days and place your hand on the affected area until the swelling decreases, and repeat this for several days, and it will cure the pain; this is best in youth.
And then attend to that wound until it heals.
If the pain is widespread in the thigh or leg, make him lie down so that water can be poured into him as has been done with the other patient.
And this is the manner of making water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Prepare a mixture of alkali and cause no extinction from both parts, cut them and place in a new vessel from which the opening has been perforated by a small tool according to the quantity that goes into it.
And leave the base of the vessel in another vessel filled with fresh water, and then place over it the mixture of alkali and causes, alive water, two fingers deep, and after you have compressed them well, let the hot water from the mixture flow down into the cold water in the other vessel.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another living cause and other alkaline renewals, so that it becomes a very powerful sharp substance, which is administered in many medical operations and in the cauterization of the other members, because operation uses fire.
And indeed, some of the medicines that are cauterized include those with a sharp and clean edge and cause a burning and pleasant sensation, thus they are mixed.
Now let me relate a tale of an ancient man who performed an operation and provided cure for pain in the kidneys and sciatica, and marvel at how wonderful it was considered to be. He claimed that no other treatment was necessary as this one healed completely with a single application; for he would immerse the affected part in hot water and it would heal from then on.
It is also important to consider the freshness of the herbs, and if they are not available, take a fig leaf; twist them with some salt and place them on the water where the pain is located, be it in the kidney, the thigh, or the leg, and heat them.
And it should be left for a duration of three hours, or for as long as the illness requires relief from pressure.
Then immerse them in hot water, and when the body is relaxed, place the stone on the affected area, as the pain will cease and healing will occur.
And be aware that one should not use cautery with these remedies unless it is for the purpose of releasing congestion from the body.
It may already be said that when the small vein in the goat's foot is cauterized, it brings relief; and the cautery should be applied to it in this manner: take wool and dip it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the bones.
And take a dried goat's vein and apply it to the inflamed area with hot coals, then place the wool on top and leave it until it is stretched. And then repeat this process, and do not cease to do so until the sensation of the bite enters the water and relieves the pain.
And this method of cautery is called the "ox cautery.
Chapter .xlii.
On the cauterization of joint pain.
Sometimes pain is felt in the back for various reasons, such as due to injury or impact, or from excessive evacuation, and for similar causes, through the infusion of foreign, irritating material.
And cauterization does not apply to any other kind but this specific one caused by the infusion of foreign, irritating material.
Therefore, in order to evacuate the malady, make pills that resemble them, which are placed on the side where the pain is felt, three lines according to its extent, and apply cautery on each line, depending on the quantity you see from the patient's tolerance and the virtue of the remedy.
And cauterization should be made with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four with medial claw cautery according to this form:
Chapter XXXIII.
On cauterization at the onset of gout.
This malady should be watched closely in young children; the sign of its onset in children is that it causes tightness in their small joints, raising and limiting their movements.
And it examines the last spinal bone of the back and the joints that already begin to overhang above the other spinal bones.
And so when you observe this and wish to prevent it, cauterize it with a curved cautery in the following shape: that takes the cautery across the entire span of the spine.
And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery in two or three lines. And the points should be appropriate among themselves.
Then carefully tend to the area as it heals, as we have said.
Be careful that a cautery is not applied to a swelling caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter XLIV.
On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And thus, when gout caused by cold is treated with warmth and the pain does not cease, then cautery may be employed.
It is because you cauterize the proper evacuation in the flow of the joint of the foot with various cauteries.
And take a olive-shaped cautery whose form is thus:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. If the pain increases within the toes or other joints and this persists often, then cauterize that over any toe with three or four cauteries from this olive-shaped cautery.
And if you find that these cauteries are sufficient for your needs, then cauterize accordingly and do not press too hard with the cautery against the skin, only focus on the specific area of the joint.
If the pain persists within the toe and its surroundings, then administer the cautery as we have mentioned in the previous chapter.
And if the pain is in the muscles only and is called tetany, then make points along the course of the tendons as they twist, in those two lines.
And if the pain persists in these areas, make points along the course of the tendons on each joint and on the pinched nerve of the hand.
And if the pain can also spread to joints or muscles, then apply a cautery to any affected areas on the limbs.
And do not remove the illness without proper treatment and receipt of medicines, for if good treatment is followed and inflammation is removed with this cautery, God will help.
Chapter XLVI
**On Cauterization of Fractures**
When you need to break open the angles and expose the hernias beneath the bandage at the groin, this is how you begin: ensure that you instruct the patient to stop eating on that day and use gentle causes to prevent the gap from widening in their abdomen.
Then continue to massage the patient between your hands on their back, and command them to keep their mind relaxed, so that the opening or appearance of the hernia or intestines may occur.
Then return the intestines to their place, and gently attempt to open up the gap in the pelvic bone; mark the end of it, which will be similar to a half-circle in the upper openings of the body.
Then prepare the cautery whose shape is as follows:
it should be sharp and have thin edges. And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then apply the cautery to that sign with your hand, holding the cautery upright, and insert it where you have achieved access to the bone of the thigh within the muscles; repeat this another time if you did not achieve it on the first attempt within the bone.
And observe wisely the setting of the hernia during the cauterization, so as not to injure that hernia and cause death or other great harm to the patient.
And be aware that if during cauterization you do not hold the bone, your operation will not be successful.
And be sure that the cautery of children is subtle according to their size and measure.
And then care for the site of the cautery for three days, applying borders until the fire scar is healed.
And then care for it as with other burns until it is healed.
And the patient should be made to lie on their back for 10 days until the site is sealed and the pain disappears.
And be aware that the patient should abstain from food according to the duration of their healing, which strengthens their belly, and that the intestine should not protrude due to effort in recovery.
And then, after about 10 days, administer the medicine properly and keep them on rest for another 40 days.
And he should reduce his labor and intake of food and drink, and avoid strong voices, for when one follows this regimen of healing diligently, they will be made whole.
And now I will describe the treatment for hernias in other parts of the abdomen, which begins with the formation of a hole, and if it does not heal, cauterize the hernia with a pointed cautery according to its size, and drain the fluid that has accumulated from the intestines; and then apply the treatments as mentioned earlier, without compression.
And it has been said by some that the hernia should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this method, as it is observed and tried.
and a line is made for the hernia's enlargement on both sides, then another line above it; and place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cauterization should be lighter and better done.
Chapter .xlvi.
On the cauterization of twists.
When pain in various members arises from a twist or blow and persists for a long time without yielding to medical treatment, then apply cauterization with a pointed cautery.
And the type of cautery should be according to the size and depth of the member, and its strength and position, and the location of the twist and pain.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cauterization, be satisfied; otherwise, repeat the cauterization; for usually those pains are punctures in members closest to that member, so you must succeed with cauterization within the time of illness.
Chapter .XLVII.
On the cauterization of leprosy.
Lepers sometimes need cauterization due to severe damage, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of the flame and melancholy.
And so if you wish to cauterize this, consider whether the leprosy is severe and if it responds to treatment as described in the previous division, nor does it spread or remain, but be wary of the illness that the corruption encompasses the whole body and all its parts; then cauterize that part on top of the head with a cautery: at the middle point of the head, and at the second part underneath, you can treat the forehead at the end of the hair; and both on two horns; and one behind, over the nape or serving it.
Finally, with your hand on the cautery, slightly press it against the bone where it causes a slight impression, and dislodge the scales, so that the expulsion of thick vapors is relieved; and cauterize over the flesh as needed.
If leprosy has already spread over the body and appears manifestly, then cover it with cauterization using those cauteries we have mentioned before; cauterize on the tip of the nose, two cauteries on each eye socket, two cauteries on both sides of the spine at the nape, five cauteries on the spine, one on either side near the coccyx, one over the coccyx, and two on each ankle, one on each toe, and two on each thigh and muscle; cauterize all the joints of the hands and feet, and on every talon of their feet, and around the fissures of their bodies.
And be careful of the nerves on the sole that you do not hurt those.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the thigh and another over the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
And you should know that the more precise the cautery, the greater its benefit and the more effective it is; also know that illness does not reside in the cautery, as it does in its parts, for this reason the body of the patient is already stunned.
And consider that the size of the cautery should be great or small according to the members and joints as previously mentioned concerning the kinds of instruments.
Then apply the cautery with fine flour mixed with honey and other remedies, as long as it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII
On cauterization for stupor.
When a member is paralyzed or numb and not healed through medicines, oils, and poultices, then you cauterize that paralyzed member with cautery according to the size of the member or the extent of its numbness.
And let your hot cautery enter slightly into the wound of the cord. Then apply that remedy until it heals.
Sometimes, cautery is applied to some parts which cause pain extending to the limbs and feet, and the spinal columns, and as a result, one can see the condition of the nerves that affect that member, and the pain subsides.
One must not attempt this unless one is skilled in the anatomy of the members and the exit of nerves throughout the body's movements.
Chapter .XLVIII (or .xlix)
On cauterization of ulcerations that are festering.
When the wound is old and does not heal with any of the common medicines, then apply a cautery to it with a pointed instrument according to the quantity of the specific kind of cord until the white and color of the wound are restored, and the color of the wound is changed.
And then prepare a mixture of flour from beans and lentils with rose oil and leaves of arnicagosa (arnica), or pigeon's blood or deer's blood, each one separately and all mixed together, and apply a cloth over the area until it is healed.
It appears that the text you provided is incomplete or lacks context for a clear translation. The phrase "Capitol .l." does not form a complete sentence or concept on its own. If this is part of a larger medical treatise, providing more context or the preceding lines would be helpful for an accurate translation.
**Cauterization of Cramps:**
When cancer begins to eat away at a limb, and you wish to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference as it revolves.
And the scholars say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of the affected area; however, I have not seen this, as I fear it might be an ulcer, and I have seen this happening a few times before.
It is instead more effective to cauterize it around the circumference of the limb in a circular manner, as we have said, or with multiple cauterizations.
Chapter.
On cauterization of abscesses.
When an abscess takes too long to heal, this may be due to its own excess or the state of the illness, as it is old and with little blood flow, or because of time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize around its circumference with multiple small punctate cauterizations; and then remove that, as it will slow down its maturation.
If you wish to make the incision with a cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the shape: and place it in the middle point of the prepared area until the wire penetrates.
And if the cautery is applied at that point which is most affected, in order to relieve the body of the arm; and then take care that it heals properly.
Chapter II.
On cautery for corrosion.
Corrosion is a wandering corruption of the member, which eats away just as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you encounter that corrosion in a location which requires cautery with fire, then heat cautery clamps, both small and large, as appropriate for the place where the corrosion is located.
And then apply the cautery from every side until you eliminate all corruption and do not leave any cause for it.
Then bind it for three days, and place your hand on the cauterized areas every third day with a mixture of oil until all scars are completely eliminated and all corruption removed.
Then cure it with a poultice of fresh meat.
It may be three days before the flesh grows healthy and free from corruption, which is good; if not, apply the cautery again over what breaks in the corrupted areas.
And sometimes it is treated with sharp medicine, for that is half the work of cauterization. However, cauterization with fire is more suitable for older patients.
And you have already described the cure for him using sharp medicine in the division, so take that which you will need from him when he is ready.
Chapter LIII.
On the cauterization of wounds and similar conditions.
Occasions where there are severe, ruptured wounds in the parts of the foot affected by malady, which is called a claw, and these wounds cause great pain; cauterization on such areas is performed in two ways, either with fire or with water-driven cautery.
The fire cautery is done by igniting the cautery tool similar to a tourniquet's pain, made of iron according to the amount contained in the wound from start to finish, and it should have subtle edges.
And then apply that fire to the joint, and revolve your hand with the cautery around the joint until the cautery reaches the depth of the joint. And leave that there for three days until it begins to throb. Then apply that compress, made of wild malvas (mallow) mixed with salt, over the affected area for one night, so that it is eradicated from its roots.
And then treat the area with a poultice of generative flesh (or healing ointment) until it is healed.
And if it is not cured, and outbreaks again on the surface of the body, especially in the joints and feet, then you must administer to those cauterizations with water, and take a small pipe of earth or iron or a pen-shaped instrument, and apply that over the joint; then immerse the tip of the pipe in little water, and place your hand, and revolve it with compression from your hand entirely, and continually turn the edge of the pipe along the root of the joint, and you will see the water being drawn out towards the root of the joint. And wait for the patient to bear the slight sting of the water for an hour, then remove that, because the joint will be freed from its roots.
And thus they do to those who have them, approaching another who comes over all of theirs that are in the body.
And they also take care of those pus that the roots of the clots have been eradicated with heat, which the flesh ingests.
Chapter III.
On cauterization of tremor.
When you encounter any tremor caused by irritation of the nerves or by fever from a contaminating cause, or by any other similar reason, you should know that you cauterize it with four cauterizing irons or with two on each spine of the back, between each spine placing one iron; and also cauterize on the patient's feet, and over their stomach, using olive-shaped cautery.
And the trembling of him rests and hastens the healing of the ill health that afflicts.
It appears that you have provided a reference to a specific chapter or section, "Capitol .lv.", but without the actual content or context of what is being referred to. In medieval texts, ".lv." could indicate the fifth chapter (in Latin, "capitulum" often refers to a chapter). However, without the preceding text, it's challenging to provide an accurate translation or interpretation.
On cautery for white accidents in the body.
When white spots appear on the body and form pustules consisting of corrupt, thick matter, begin by treating them at their onset with a subtle cautery or a heated iron, the tip of which is extended over the entire fistula; or with a long, thin blade; or with a lenticular cautery.
In other cases, cautery is also applied at the beginning of their expulsion in this manner; they are not broken, and the excess matter is expelled, healing those affected.
However, it may also be necessary to perform an evacuation through phlebotomy.
Chapter VI.
On the cauterization of flux of blood from a wound by incision of the archer.
Wounds caused by arrows that have been cut and infected, or when there is an opening due to the incision of a hernia or cautery on a member, then it appears similar, and it is difficult to contain that.
Therefore, when this happens to anyone, you should use your hand over the wound of the arrow, and press down on it, tighten those parts seen as open until the flow of blood stops, so that it does not occur again.
And then place the olive hot cauteries on the fire, a few large ones and many small ones, and blow on them until they become ignited.
And then take from those a small or large one according to the location and the wound in which an artery is broken, over which you have squeezed the pus as mentioned, and cauterize it until it is incised and that blood is stopped.
And if the blood is expelled from the orifices of the artery as you apply pressure and remove the cautery, take another cautery carefully from those that are prepared in the fire, and do not cease to do this again until the bleeding is stopped.
And be careful not to irritate the nerve here, which may bring about other evils for the patient.
And you should know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the bleeding, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: either with a cautery as we have said, or by extraction when it is not extracted, for when its ends are cut off, the extremities are burnt and the bleeding is restricted; or by binding it tightly with string or ligature, or pausing over it medicines whose virtue restricts the blood flow; and they should be tightened on a pillow or in a compression bandage.
He who administers a decent restriction of it with bandages or by the position of burning causes and similar ones, does not bring relief but only aggravates it.
If this must be done for anyone and neither the doctor nor medicine is present, then open at the indicated site on the affected vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction of it within that the flow of the plague is stopped; and regarding the hardness, it should not be resisted; and wash it with freezing cold water until the vein is frozen and thickened; and consider what cautery or medicine is needed.
Regarding incisions, punctures, blisters, phlebotomy, plaies, and their likes.
We have discussed in the first chapter all manner of illness where fire cautery is appropriate and medicinal fires are useful, along with their occasions and causes, and the instruments necessary for them according to the forms of cautery; and I have ordered the chapters on the treatment of conditions from the head down to the feet.
And in this chapter, we will proceed in this manner so that those who seek knowledge here find relief, as much as possible, on the subject of their queries.
And before you begin this, know, children, that in this chapter, the topic is fearsome, as it was first discussed in the chapter on cauterization.
And because it is important to exercise great caution, in the procedure discussed in this chapter, which involves drawing blood from the veins or making incisions into the abscesses, or draining pus, or cleansing wounds, or extracting arrows, or beginning treatments for stones—and all similar things—you must consider the following: And all of these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in most cases, death.
And I warn you that this should not fall on you who are in a state of health, for sometimes you must be aware of the ways of men, as well as the signs of illnesses. And it is from them that you will learn about their illnesses and they must be gently treated, for the urgency of their illness, and the longevity of their disease, and the severity of the illness itself, which means death.
And it is of these that one gives to you advice and says, "Hope for health," and their illness is destructive.
And therefore do not agree with anyone who comes to you with this manner; and let your caution be greater than your trust, and your greed; and do not presume any cause regarding it, but only through certain knowledge that verifies what is happening to you, and to which a laudable success has occurred.
And in the treatment of all your illnesses, use prognosis and indication of that which is turned to health, for it assists you in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
Oh, sons, may God inspire your understanding and do not let you stray from His guidance and protection, for it is in His hands.
And you have ordered this distinguished chapter into sections according to the preceding chapter on cautery, from the treatment of the head down to the feet, so that it may assist you in whatever you inquire about and need regarding this.
First Chapter.
On the treatment of water contained in the head of children.
You know that this illness often manifests in children during teething and when the blackness enters the child's head, it causes pain.
And in some cases, it must be perceived for an obscure cause that is unclear.
This disease may also be seen in children; and to all those whom I have seen die from it, I have observed this work done on them.
And you have seen that the head of a child, whose body was filled with water, and the head of him was always thus magnified so that he could not lay down on his side because of the size of his head, and more than that, the moisture increased until fire death.
And this moisture is either added between the flesh and bone or it is added beneath the bones on top of the skull.
For the operation on that one, if the moisture is between the flesh and bone and the abscess is small, then you need to make an opening in the middle place of the head with a fissure at its width, and the length of the fissure should be two fingers deep so that the moisture can flow out, and this is the shape of the spatula.
And therefore if the humidity is greatly increased and the abscess becomes larger, there are here two cracks according to this manner:
And if the humidity leaves the bone, a sign of it is that you observe the open seams on the head from all sides and the water is squeezed out when you press with your hand at those openings, but it should not be something you conceal. Cut into the middle part of the head, make three cracks according to this manner:
Then extract the incision to remove all humidity; tighten the cracks with bandages and plasters; drill into the wound from above with a needle and oil within five days, and then open it up and treat the abscess with ointment and compresses, and hold the head in an equal position; feed the patient dry bread with little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
And there is another incision technique which considers the size of the abscess and the collection of water, sometimes it appears at the back of the head or in front, or on the right or left side; therefore, pay attention to the incision where the abscess appears and the repletion of water, and do it as best you can.
And observe that do not incise the artery, and strive for flows of blood and pus from the infection and stop the patient's suffering through the flow of blood in the evacuation of humidity.
**Second Chapter.**
When there is an occurrence of sudden or severe pain in the ears or feet, and it is an ancient condition, and medical treatments do not provide relief, then the final cure lies in the incision of those two arteries.
And therefore, when you wish to incise those parts where the disease has raised its head, first rub the place with coarse cloth to expose the arterioles, and then tighten the collar of the diseased part with a piece of cloth; and consider where the pulse of the vein is; and the locations of each one above the places that are appropriately elevated, and they remain concealed in some people.
And then, with a gentle pull, you should stretch the arteria, and incise each one with the blade where the cut reaches the bone, and this is done according to the direction of the head.
And if you wish, insert the blade between the arteria and cut it at the points of incision on its sides.
And the length of the incision should be such that, when a vein is incised, the blood flow stops immediately, preventing excessive bleeding.
If the arrow does not appear at the belt, then measure from the auricle the quantity of space equal to three fingers, and then carefully make an incision and insert into the bone.
And what you get from the wound is a quantity of blood one unit, and strong leeching should not be done more or less, and all this is according to the amount that appears from the severity of the illness and the depth of the arrow in it.
Then consider the plague, and if there remains on the bone any cause of decay, you should incise it so that it does not develop gangrene cautiously.
Then strengthen the plague with poultices and bandages of linen cloth, and carefully care for it until it is healed.
Chapter III.
From extraction of the arthritics which are in the temples.
When ancient or sudden migraine occurs due to the humidity of the air and the quality of the tears in the temples, or an old headache that is similar to these, and it does not respond to medical treatments as described above, we have found relief in these ailments by extracting the arthritics from the temples, or cauterizing them as we have shown.
And the method of surgery and extraction of those is to address the pain that originates in the temples; understand the arthritics appearing in the temple where they are indicated by your finger, and it is hidden from most people due to its severity.
And if it is hidden from you, tighten the collar of the ailment with some cloth; then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the arthritics appear to you manifestly. And then you take the sponge in which this form is: And then you cut the cord as easily as possible to reach the arrow; and you open it where it is located and extract the foreign body with your fingers while uncovering that of the tunic which remains there, from all parts.
If the artery is thin, you wrap it at the extremity of the finger and cut a single part according to the amount by which its extremities are elongated and contracted, and thus prevent the flow of blood, for if they are not cut, the blood will not cease to flow from them.
And then, empty the vein of blood within three beats.
And if the arrow is large, you cover it in two places with a strong double thread of silk or with strings, and do not allow it to putrefy before the healing of the wound and cause the flow of blood.
And then incise the excess that is between two ligaments; do this at that time or another time.
And if you wish, cauterize the wound with a hot iron within the bone, cauterizing the ends of it once they are incised, and hold in place that piece of work.
And it is better work if the patient has fever or a condition of heat, as cauterization is one of those causes that help to eliminate moisture; thus, it is better in youth.
And then cover the extraction of the arteries that you have removed from their original position, placing them pause over it properly prepared, and apply to them a cure with dry medicines that make the flesh and the bones heal within a short time.
And if while you are working another complication arises in the form of bleeding from the artery, then hold yourself to restrict that blood, or use a cauterization, or whatever you place at the site of the wound, and strengthen your hand until the bleeding is restrained. And if any cause of those is not present to you, then hold your tongue over the area until the swelling is reduced, and strike the place with water of great coldness until the pain ceases, and apply pressure as necessary.
And what is put in place of extraction from the arrow, it is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades, since you have already cleaned the two wounds, and applying some heat, until they reach the bone and cut the vein into two places, so that what is between the extremities of it can be elongated, as they are not consolidated by all this cauterization.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And the sharpness of both blades is an example. But it may be that if the single blade has greater sharpness than two, it is better, because if it is very sharp, it does not cut the flesh with speed.
Therefore, when there is any swelling, the heat of fire is held within it and the flesh is slightly separated.
And this work is better than all other works and is most delicate.
And the space between two joints is the amount of thickness of that said.
Capital quarter.
On the treatment of acute and acidic heartburn in the intestines.
When it is acidic heartburn, and it is the intestines of those veins that are above the skull, and no medical cause for its cure corresponds to this, and the patient's face turns red and he feels a strange sensation in his forehead as if it were a walking of ants, and the feet of that person are exhausted, wet so that their skin becomes loose, and their eyelids are irritated by the intensity of the tears, the old remedies for the treatment of these conditions in this operation, I will mention this cure as follows.
And it is that you command the patient to shave the hairs which are on their forehead, and then inscribe three incisions equally distant along the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two parts: one incision is equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle part of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little more than the movement of the tears which are in the lacrimal, and the third from the other side.
And be mindful of the incision of the arteries which are in two parts, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jaws. And if the space of each incision is three parts, adjust it accordingly.
And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloth to absorb the blood.
And then insert the scalpel between the two sharp ends, which is the shape of the incision. What is part of the temples within the second incision. Excise all the cord that is between the two incisions on the phallus, and then make a midline incision within the second incision. And then strike with this scalpel into the first incision, or rather, use another instrument called a scissor, which has one sharp and one blunt side.
And hold the sharp edge against the flesh attached to the cord, and the blunt side against the bone, and use it within to reach the midline fissure, and cut away all vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
It may be continued the incision to this appear of the spine, and then make it in the middle fissure between the other fissures.
And as the flow of blood decreases, press the places of the frozen parts of the sanction.
And then place in each fissure a certain amount of warm cloth soaked in wine and oil, and make sure it does not cause any further infection.
On the third day, loosen the bandages and administer a large amount of warm water or tea, and then treat it with basilicum oil or rose oil and other herbs until the wounds are healed.
It appears that there might be a missing or incomplete sentence here. The term "Capitol" could refer to several things depending on the context, such as a place name or a specific medical term, but without surrounding text, it's difficult to provide an accurate translation or interpretation. If you can provide more context or additional lines from the treatise, I'd be happy to assist further.
On the treatment of bleeding from cathartic drugs and from the downward flow of fluids from parts inside the head.
When a sudden cathartic effect occurs and continues, it weakens the patient's veins, depleting their strength, and their eyelids become ulcerated along with their facial hair. In the region of the head, there is intense pain and the subsequent extrusion of materials, and at this point, you know that these symptoms are caused by matters and cathartics emanating from veins located inside the body.
And the best treatment for these conditions is as follows: instruct the patient to clean their forehead, then make an incision at the middle of the forehead, slightly towards the left temple compared to the right (beginning with the temporal fissure on the left side and extending it into the bone), and extract the blood from the temples which are more beneficial after chewing.
Dry all the pus with a sponge or clean cloth, and then fill between the two edges of the wound with fresh, clean bandages. And then sprinkle on them a dust mixed with wine and oil, so that it does not contract gangrene dangerously.
And when you open it and see that the gangrene has already decreased, then you know that the infection starts in the bone within it, and accordingly, treat it with a drying remedy that makes the flesh healthy again, just as if you were to mix two parts of flour and four parts of colophony, make a paste from them, and apply it to these sores on the native flesh.
Chapter VI.
On the treatment of what cats in the ears.
Any cause that cats in the ears is one of four types: either it is a mineral or a similar rock, such as iron or copper, or it is from a plant, like rye or fava beans, or it is a fluid-related cause, such as water and wine mixed, or any animal.
And so when a cat's claw or any other similar cause affects the ear, and the ear is painful and swelled, if the pain is intense, it sometimes discharges into some cause of polluted oil or pus, then carefully extract the foreign body and make the condition suitable to prevent sneezing. And then apply some soft cloth or wool to the ear canal and gently pull the ear away from the affected area, as heat and moisture are often effective against such causes.
If it is not removed, then use the instrument called a delicate epichirurgical gesture to extract it.
If it is removed with the gesture, fine; if not, then carefully extract it using an instrument with a slight double fold.
And therefore, if this is not forgotten, make a tube of aram and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal and close around the tube with softened wax and oil so that only the tube opens. And then, with a strong attraction, extract the foreign body that we have described.
If it is not forgotten in this manner, take a piece of hot metal or a specially crafted instrument with which the stones are gently extracted, place it at the end of the ray, and then wrap it around that part neatly and securely. And then insert that into the ear canal with ease and extract the ear from the moisture.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten regarding all the causes that we have described, then gently tie off that which causes gangrene or spasms.
And the method of cutting it is that you begin by making incisions in the vein affected by the gout and extract the blood according to the virtue of its quantity, then make a cease between your fingers and convert the flap back to its original position, and make a small incision at the base of the flap where the gouty matter has been previously pressed. And if the fracture is of a lunar shape that reaches the bone, and the bone is exposed, stop it with appropriate instruments if you can; then quickly treat the fracture while it is still fresh and cure it until it is healed.
And if the cause of the pain in the auricle is one of the swollen and inflamed fats, then administer treatment and extract it; but if you do not adhere to your eye's recommendation, then take some gentle, subtle suction according to this form: and administer the removal of that fat which has fallen into the auricle.
And do not attempt this when you think the affected area is already moistened by the patient's breath, hold it in heavy weights, or extract it using forceps or any such instrument, because this complicates its removal.
If water has entered the ear, which is the cause of the ailment leading to sneezing, and it fills the ear canal with some old wax, then press on that ear in which the water is, and if it is expelled through this pressure, it is good; otherwise, take a few small stones or beans according to their size, heat them slightly in the fire, and the patient should insert one of these into the opening of his ear and jump on one foot, pressing with the other foot on the stone or bean located inside the ear. So do not stop until all the water is expelled.
So do not stop until all the water is expelled. And already water has been drawn out thusly, taking paper or cloth, place one extremity of it in the ear and extend the other extremity towards the fire until the most part of it is burned.
Then take another cloth and do this many times until all the water is drawn out, and tear that from the tube as it is said of the water drawing stone.
In the extraction of a foreign body entering that ear, if it is small, it can be removed with the same method and similar care as we have said in division; but if it is of great size which causes appearance at the sense of the wound, then administer the extraction of it by hand and scissors, and the cause of it is more lightly considered from all other causes that catch in the ear.
But in the extraction of worms born in the ear, when you treat that with the water as we have said in division and in the treatment of distills and do not agree with your care, then watch that you protect the ear from the sun.
And therefore, if any cause of worms appears here, then extract them by delicate gestures or means, but if no cause appears, take a tube from narrow at one end and wide at the other, the form of which is like this. Then insert the subtil extreme into the ear according to the quantity of suffering from the malady; and then suck it with a strong suction, making motions as you do so, until all the worms are removed.
If you do not obey to the extent required, then cover and close the tube with wax as we have said; administer the distillers which have already been prepared in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillation.
And let your flow be the one that pours medicinal oils into the ear, with this instrument, the form of which is like this: And make a small, straight incision in silver or bronze, leaving a narrow opening, and apply pressure on it.
And therefore, it is used to fill the cavity of the hernia here, which is necessary. And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it around the end of the instrument neatly, then pour oil into the cavity of the hearing or any herbal juice, or whatever you prefer from these medicines into the canula — in the earlobe — then insert the ray under the skin and squeeze with your hand to create pressure until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels relief within.
And what is inserted into the earlobe should already be scorched with a small flame. And be careful that the cause you are distilling in the ear is not too harsh, because the ear medicines do not tolerate this.
Capital VII.
On the treatment of ear inflammation.
Sometimes, children's bellies can become inflamed due to their parents' undiagnosed or untreated ear infections, which can also affect adults. This inflammation can occur in the soft tissue of the ear or sometimes outside the ear canal.
And those that occur in the soft tissue, which do not comprehend (understand) the cause, are the most difficult to heal.
And in the case where you can identify the cause, take the affected ear away from the heat and observe it. And if you then observe an apparent bulge, open it gently with a delicate spatula, the form of which is as follows:
If the edge of it where the width is required, of which one part is acute and the other not; and the blade is of two lengths sharp so as not to harm the ear.
And so if the operation is for a bone grown in the ear or in the flesh, then you make those delicate cuts and incisions with great ease until all the flesh is removed.
And if the operation is on the edge of the ear, then take a fine razor and heat it slightly with fire, and then insert that into the flesh of the ear.
And so if you have sensed an operation that the patient finds easy due to the urgency, in order to relieve pressure, exert force on it easily; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
And then place on the ear a cloth according to the quantity of the width of the wound that you have wrapped in the Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some and immerse it in water, sprinkle over it every third day, and use it. If the ear has already been bandaged, then be careful not to pour out the liquid and replace it with other liquid that you wrap in cloth that is made of oil, as long as the abscess cautiously gives way; and take care of it so that it heals.
If a flux of blood occurs, immerse the exposed or drape in warm water, place it on the wound, and use other remedies that restrict the flow of blood, which is mentioned in the distillation treatment.
**Chapter VIII**
**On the treatment of athezel affecting the eyelids.**
Athezel that affects the eyelids of the eyes sometimes becomes moist, other times dry.
Therefore, you should have these herbs or garlic, and extract the juice from them, and then place it over the affected areas, pressing gently.
If pain accompanied by a blood flux occurs, then you should cauterize these with a fine, sharp cautery.
And the best cautery is to make incisions and cuts observed, returning when there is any cause for their reopening; and when cauterized with fire, those cuts are burned away and do not return.
**Chapter IX**
**Treatment for a severe condition that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.**
Observed motes or growths on the eyelids of the eyes due to some cause that resembles a severe condition in its strength and hardness, hence it is called grandiose.
And it is characterized by the addition of a thick humidity on both the lower and upper eyelids.
Therefore, the operation on them considers whether, when the growth is proceeding from the eyelid and is severe throughout, the cause of it is slight.
Therefore, open that narrow fissure according to its extent, and carefully extract it from every part until it is completely removed, and then suspend it and cut it off.
And if the hernia is large, then you should adjust it with sutures; and tend to that until it is healed.
And if it is small, then you will not suffer greatly from that place as the hernia's own healing restores and covers it.
And if the size is decreasing within the eyelid, you should expose the surface within, then raise the eyelid and suspend the hernia with a weight, other than what you usually use for the incision, and press it from all sides, and if the eyelid itself is elongated through the incision, this should not be noted for any particular cause.
And then make the incision, wash the wound with salty water; and treat the area with liquid until it heals.
**Chapter X**
On the treatment of an acute condition on the upper eyelid.
Acute inflammation is caused by the condition affecting the upper eyelid's tunic, and it tends to occur more frequently in children, leading to painful eyes and sometimes causing cataracts; and due to this, they cannot bear the brightness of the sun, as tears accumulate at these eyes.
And so you must keep those eyes covered over their faces all the time, and over their eyes rest the eyebrows, which have already covered inflammation, and the imminent threat of accumulation is apparent in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel acuteness within those eyes.
And in some manner of operation, if the patient's disease rests on their thigh, then drape cloth over them and make it warm, and form it into a circle according to the quantity that contains an arthron from every part, and place that over this one, and press with your hands all around for so that an additional amount is added in the middle of the circle, and finish in the middle of that moistened tissue by cutting incidentally through the fissure per its width, and the fissure should not be greater than the fissure made in flaubotomia.
Place the needle in the opening until you reach the hernia, for in the most delicate positions, hernia is extracted through a fissure according to the form of white grease.
Therefore, remove those cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers and pulled them out from the parts outside, and turn with your right and left hand until they are completely extracted.
And be careful not to press on the fissure so that the spatula does not reach the wrong place and cause damage to it.
If the artery does not appear open at the beginning of the fissure, then adjust in the fissure a small piece of facilitating material while it processes the artery; and then extract that as we have said; and place cloths from it in water and wine and press them over the area and apply those as powders.
And some put salt and press it into the cavity of the fissure so that what is removed from that moisture is drawn out.
And then care for it so that it heals.
If an accident occurs at the posthemic location with a cautery, then care for it using plaster until it heals.
Chapter XI.
Regarding the tactile examination of the wound.
When the eyelids of the eye are affected by the growth of natural hairs, which become hardened and cause discomfort, these lead to various diseases of the eye, with frequent tears, softening of the eyelids, and pain within, such that it causes the destruction of the eye, known as 'tactinir of the eye', and its cure is in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with acute medicines, as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization; or by incision and suturing; or through tubes, as I will describe.
And so you should place the focus of the disease in the eye; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, you are successful; but if not, insert a needle into that area where the thread attaches to the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through the thread onto the lid, close to the edge of the eyelid where the hairs are, and pull the thread away from its attachment on the eyelid, and turn it towards the inside.
And then carefully cut open the space between the eyelids, adjusting the hairs with a sharp instrument so that they do not interfere; remove the foreign body and place the eyelid gently using small cotton or cloth, and press firmly on the eyelid as if holding a leaf.
However, it is important to note that the shape may vary depending on the amount of swelling in the eyelid, as this varies among individuals; those with a greater amount of swelling will require a deeper incision.
Then cut with the scalpel along both lines that you have noted, starting from the lacrimal nerve on the outer side towards the inner corner of the eye. And if your cut is near the natural hairs, it should be as thick as a coin's edge.
And then apply the onion to one of the angles of the wound, clean it thoroughly, and secure the two edges with glue or fine wool thread, wipe away the blood, and let what is superfluous of the glue adhere to the two eyebrows for some hidden causes, if you wish to do so; otherwise, do not treat it.
And then remove the stitches of the wound after three or four days, and treat it.
And if you wish, leave the wound open without stitches, and treat it with what dries and constricts, because the eyelid is lifted due to the sealing of the wound and the addition of humors; but more stitches are better. And so I tell you the ancient practices of the taxanirs.
However, always consider the patient's condition, and it is good practice, and there should be no fear in it.
And there is another way to measure it, and that is to observe the shape on the eyelid, like a plum, and then lift the eyelid with three incisions, separating and bringing them together according to this form.
If it is not possible to do this, having the incisions, and this is not similar, then take a needle with thread and insert one in the middle of the shape, and then insert the other two near the lacrimal glands, the first closer to the larger one, and the second closer to the smaller one, and adjust between them so that the threads are equal, and then with your hand in the same elevation as before, lift all the eyelid as we have recounted.
And then adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures, and heal that which is clean.
If an abscess occurs after your incision or opening, fill it with wax similar to the abscess, and treat it with fire.
And in some cases, it is necessary for the eyelid that its hairs are changed, then use what we have mentioned about incision; more sutures are more artificial in some parts.
To cut with scissors is done in this manner: and it is that you convert the eyelid and cut out the figure within as I have mentioned; then make two scissor cuts or two thin blades of which the length is according to the length of the eyelid, and their width corresponds to the width of the space. And you have already cut into the ends of each piece, where the threads are located.
Now add each one with subtlety over what exceeds from the eyelid of the patient, and tighten the scissor cuts of each piece with a strong grip, leaving it for a few days; for the thread by the tightness will die and be rejected, and it will fall off once the body absorbs it on its own.
If it is delayed, then cut open the abscesses, and return to treat the illness until it is healed.
When it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the skin does not hurt.
And this is the form of two cans that you will make according to this form: and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter XII
About the elevation of painful hairs in the affected area with an agule when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are not natural, hard, and prickly in the affected area, then the operation on them involves taking a fine needle and pricking at those precise points with a gentle touch, and adjusting the ends of them carefully and precisely. And the length of the threads should be about the quantity of a palm.
Then, promptly, tie another delicate thread around it briefly, and turn the extremes of that if you wish.
Then, position the patient's head in the small of their back, close to the sun, so that your work is evident, for this is a subtle and delicate operation.
Then, insert the needle into the root of the tight hair, using the necessary skill, and cause it to penetrate the eyelid swiftly until you extract that from its natural place.
Then, pull the hair from its root and insert that into an alley, and be it one or two or three hairs, no more.
And then gently pull your hand over that space where the skin is pushed aside or stuck to the eyelid or the natural skin.
If the eyelid is not stuck to the skin but there is still pain, pull the eyelid gently towards the direction of the wound where it was previously stuck.
And examine the wound carefully, as you pull the eyelid and the skin away from it, making sure to remove any and all debris in the wound, and leave the closure for two or three days so that the skin attaches firmly to its place and a new layer of healthy flesh grows over it.
And if the skin is more damaged and you need to replace it, take a longer strand of natural hair, elevate it to that space, or leave it until it grows long enough to fill the gap, then gently lift it.
Chapter XIII.
On the treatment of a condition that appears on the eyelid above.
When you notice a condition on the eyelid, it is a contraction of the eyelid, either to the right or left, due to poor healing from an infection, incision, or cauterization, and it is called "leporina" (from rabbit-like). This condition, whether natural or accidental, occurs due to the scarring from infections, incisions, or cauterization, or resembling their malfunctions.
The method of operation is that you open up and separate the scar tissue, and place a pad between the edges, and hold them together with a piece of cloth until they heal.
And be aware that you should not use healing methods from the causes that cause drying and constriction, for if you do this, it will lead to a worse condition than ever before.
Use those of causes that mollify thus as fenumegrec, and soak in the water in which the seeds are high and ground from them, or vinegar, which is liquefied with any of the oils, and immerse the affected area in it, and treat it.
And the treasure of your healing is that you perforate with whatever tool is not solid according to the shape that you see at the beginning.
And this operation that we have spoken of is nothing but a correction of deviated bones that do not return to the form of the place according to what you see before.
Chapter XIII.
On the treatment of deviated bones in the eyelid below.
This inflammation which is found on the eyelid, properly called alkalation, is either of natural origin or accidental.
Accidental inflammation can be caused by plague, or incisions, or cauterization, or other similar things.
And the method of operation is that you take a needle with double thread, fix one end in the flesh, and pass the other from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, so that the thread passes through both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh apart with the needle and cut with a wide spatula. And so return the eyelid to its original shape as much as possible; if it does not close well, take a thread and tie it in the shape of a slit, and with this convert the eyelid, making two slits on the inside edge of the eyelid.
And the ends of the two slits at the two angles of the incision, which you have made where they meet, form an angle that, when brought together, forms a figure of their own.
And this figure is Greek letters: lambda.
And then close the flesh with the amount needed so that it covers the space left behind, which is what we call the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and bind them with woolen thread; and afterward, treat those with what we have mentioned regarding soothing medicines and blisters so that healing occurs.
And if further elevation is needed through slits, sutures, or cauterization, then ensure that you make the incisions flat against the hairs of the eyelid as mentioned before. And then separate the water between the two lips as we have said.
In the continuation of the discourse on the treatment of high fever when it is intense or subsiding, which should be the course of action, according to how the fever is prepared in the form of alta (possibly referring to a specific medical procedure or state), and that varies in diverse ways.
And the skilled artisans always prepare various methods by which it is possible for him to restore the figure to its natural state, or close to it, and treat that illness according to what suits him in terms of the operation and instruments in the best condition.
Chapter .XV.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or the cornea.
When this adhesion occurs in many people, it solidifies the eyelid from above with the white of the eye, restricting the ease of movement and its natural functions, so it is necessary to insert the tip of your finger beneath the eyelid and raise or extend it away from the eye.
Then, with a delicate spatula, incise the adhesion, not sharply from the cuts, rather bluntly a little so as not to disturb the patient during the operation, and remove the spatula that does not damage the eye with its sharpness.
And your incision should remove that adhesion with ease, so that the eyelid can return to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
Then, place the eye in salt water with which you wash it; or distill sun-heated steam dissolved in water into it.
And then separate the eyelid from the eye with a cool compress, place a woolen cloth soaked in alum on the eye, and on the third day use consolidating remedies until it heals.
Chapter XVI
On the knowledge of the structure of the eye and the prominence of the carnal tissue of the lachrymal glands.
You know that the eye has two manners of being, either it is nervous, resembling a delicate, hard glass, or it is non-nervous, resembling white, frozen moisture, which when pierced, is forcibly removed from its place and the point does not stay in it.
And both of these species begin with the major lachrymal gland, as it gradually covers the sight and blocks light and movement of the eye.
The method of operating in the incision of the hernia is that the patient holds their breath, then opens the hernial orifice, raises the upper eyelid with one hand, and with the other catches the edge of the hernia with a gentle traction, and draws it out little by little. Then take a needle and insert it into the edge of the hernia using a horsehair, goat hair, cow hair, or similar, and gradually double the end of the needle, placing it in the middle of the nail, then penetrate the needle through the nail, tieing it with thread; extend it little by little from above, and excise the piece of skin around the edge of the nail that is covering the pupil. And so you also excise the hair within the hernia's opening.
Then you make an incision in the membrane at the root of the tear duct using a thin spatula or small scissors, and remove the natural flesh of the tear duct so that making the incision does not cause continuous tearing.
And some times the ungual (nail) is extended or attached to the skin, as we have said, and then it should be carefully removed with a sharp instrument of which this is the form.
And beware that with the instrument do not touch the thin skin (tunica cornea), lest it break and the pupil be pierced.
After the incision, apply a little salt or a fine mixture of herbs to the wound and leave it for another day; then take care that everything is covered until it heals.
If the nail is not sensitive and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it deeply embedded in the finger, then you should look for other treatments for this type of nail, which is healed with medications and restored as if it were divided.
And if you wish to cut it (the nail), then open the wound of the patient and take a thin instrument with a sharp point according to this form: With caution. And if it happens that it is solidified and infected and penetrates into that wound, then it will exude from your body in the form of a strong foul odor or a putrid rogue smell or a salty discharge, and you should apply a poultice to it within the next day.
And then repeat the operation until all of it that is infected is removed, otherwise, take care with a cautery on the odor, for if you leave it, the infection will spread, and you should begin to treat the beginning of the infection until it is healed.
And then repeat your operation on that reason until it is healed.
The urgency of the lacrimal flesh, if noticed in the wound causing great pain, should be suspended immediately; then incise it from that one side, and do not close the incision so that tears do not flow out.
And then gently drain the tear duct until it heals.
**Chapter XVII**
On the incision of abscesses and that which is born from hardened flesh in the wound.
Sometimes in the eyes of certain people, there is born corrupt flesh that becomes inflamed and over-extended, covering or drawing near to the pupil, and pressing strongly upon the eyelids, so that it cuts off the sight, as if from a bulwark.
However, the operation on it is that the malady stops its head in the small place; then open the eye of that one and collect all that flesh with scissors as appropriate, or with forceps or baskets; and then make an incision into the flesh from the beginning until everything is finished with the knife, and take care not to lacerate the wound which you must preserve intact for your operation.
And be your incision sharp with which you cut these or scoop out the pus that we have extracted in the incision of the finger, or small forceps with which it is collected carefully according to the shape that comes close to this chapter.
So when your incision is complete and all that flesh is removed, fill the cavity with salt triped, or distil in it a powder of herbs similar to corrosive medicines, and place over the wound a clean cloth until it is assured from infection cautiously.
And if you find any cause of inflammation and it is infected with severe pain, and you fear infection cautiously, leave the wound and treat that infection with what gives relief to that inflammation, and then repeat the operation on it until it heals, and make similar incisions in the flesh that occurred in this particular wound.
You can, however, cover all treatment of the severe wound by either natural or accidental means, using iron, and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that the member is suffering from that operation.
Chapter .xviii.
On the collection of wisdom in the skull.
Wisdom arrives in the form of pain that is hard and stubborn within the skull, preventing any attempt to treat it, and the skull remains closed for many days.
Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the skull in which wisdom resides is strong and free from any other illness but wisdom; then you should gather that wisdom.
And it is that you command the patient to hold their head in a certain position, and then suspend those veins with a thin thread or two, according to your discretion; and let this thread have a subtle double effect as follows:
or two threads gently intertwined in the body according to this form:
And then, the veins, being squeezed by delicate forces and in a delicate manner, you must immediately extract the blood from them so that you can see if the veins have been revived from the hue and are circulating again.
And be careful not to squeeze the blood out at the ends of the spatula; if your operation is in the morning facing the sun, and you are strong in your operation, only cut those veins.
And when you have finished, you will distill the hot or cold salt into the blood to corrode anything that has been revived from the wound.
If it is not possible for you to collect all of this at once, then apply a compress to everything that alleviates the patient's pain, and leave it for several days until the pain has subsided and there is no risk of an abscess forming.
And then repeat the process according to the method that best suits its cure.
And this is the way of the forks:
Chapter XIX.
On the reduction of raised noses.
When treating a raised nose with cautery or sharp medicine, as is often done when it has been previously inflamed and not cured, then do not close it in the patient but rather make incisions over the abscess to drain the pus within, until the bone is exposed.
And therefore, when the bone is exposed and there is corruption or blackening in it, you should clean it with an instrument that has this shape:
And it is called an acure head, and it should be done immediately, and the head made round so as to grasp which part is punctured by the point of a limet or alkali by subtle puncturing (just as in the following form).
And place that over the corrupt part of the bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your small hand little by little until you know that corruption is gone.
And this should be done at certain times, and then restore the place with astringent and drying causes.
Therefore, if the place is consolidated and there is good flesh and the body is separated from the unhealthy part for forty days, and it is not renewed or inflamed, and no accidents occur to it, then you know that it is healed.
And if it is not in the above condition, but the fissure should be reduced to the shape of the nose, then according to this manner: and it is that you expose according to the bone by sharp chiseling or medical treatment, and when the bone is exposed, you take hold according to this form:
Let the end of the instrument be triangular, and the shaft of it first extended within the extremity in this way as often as necessary.
Then place your hand over it, and this is the position of the lacrimal; extend your hand a little further, and rotate your hand to the side so that it penetrates all the bone, and feel the pain as you press, as if something is coming out from within when you remove your hand.
Therefore, restore the area with astringent medicines that have been prepared accordingly.
Therefore, when the flesh is no longer inflamed and the area is hardened, the matter that was discharged from the openings returns to the inside, thus it is less severe on the illness.
Chapter XX.
For the reduction of the hernia's protrusion.
When the hernia protrudes completely and does not occur in a painful or uncomfortable manner, then you should relax the patient, and as you continue to monitor it, make cuts on the neck for drainage and use good sucking; and afterwards apply a dressing over the hernia made of catgut, aloe, and linseed, and tighten the bandage over the hernia with motes (probably small particles or materials).
And the way of the motes (or particles) is to take sheets of lion's fur, each sheet cut into four pieces, and make them into those motes.
And then arrange those motes one over the other according to the amount of hernia that requires it. And tighten those over the hernia with a firm, strong cloth; repeat the use of suction through the scars; and then remove the ventosas (or suction cups) and leave the hernia tight during the day and night.
If during this time the ligament softens, then it must be bound very tightly.
And at night and during the day, keep the ligament restrained as we have said.
And if the hernia has already been reduced, that is good, and if not, repeat the application of poultices, compresses, and vents until it heals.
Chapter XXI.
On the incision of the tunica uvaria's eminence.
When there is a rupture in the tunica uvaria and it becomes prominent, and you proceed to remove the eyelids as if with a grain of sand, shaping them in the form of a man, and you want to make an incision, then the operation on this part should be as we have recommended: insert the needle at the root of the uvula starting from below and passing through its upper part, and then insert another needle through which is passed a double thread from the lacrimal part; thus penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position. Then make an incision in the place where the double thread is, and lift that portion of the uvula along the course of the needle, and tighten it.
And then extract the needle and place it over the damp wool soaked in a mixture of honey and leather, and let it rest until the thread falls off on its own.
And then treat the wound with something that provides comfort until the plague is healed.
And sometimes, from the very beginning, gather around the wound a circular bandage with great tension, and then pierce it gently with a thin spatula that reaches the depth of the wound, allowing the albumin humidity to escape, and lower the bandage and adjust it little by little.
And then tighten it until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of eyes.
This disease called alcopati is not at all a healthy condition that resembles water flowing down and it is not that.
The method of operation is as follows: you cease the disease by targeting the affected area and right away, take hold of the patient's head in your two hands from either side, and pay close attention to where the health begins to leave the parts below, then tighten it so that it does not descend, stop the flow of blood, and observe. The disease source is thus revealed to him who observes.
And if it does not flow downward, you know that it is water.
If the flow of the health is not stopped as we have mentioned, then seize the disease between your hands and take a subtle cut there, and place it over the panniculas that surround a small part of the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunica cornea on the crown (at the site desired), until the health is expelled.
Therefore when it is forgotten, you distill the fragrant water that you have mixed with honey or water in which you have already boiled fennel and honey.
And then it is cured as the other causes are healed.
**Chapter XXII**
On the treatment of water descending from the chest.
We have already discussed the types of water in division and which ones are suitable for piercing, declaring that they should be chosen according to health.
Now you understand that you should sever the patient's pain between your hands on a couch and bind their chest tightly with a bandage.
And then gently press near the edge of their eyelid with your left hand if the water is on the left side, or with your right hand if the water is on the right side.
And then take your right hand and apply it with pressure if the water is on the left side, or your left hand if the water is on the right side.
And then hold the tip of the thumb near the edge of the eyelid, for its thickness against the white of the eye near the inner corner, and gently pull the thumb towards you while rotating your hand.
And then press into the eyelid, feeling that the thumb has already penetrated the eyelid due to the pressure.
And it should be noted that the measurement of the path of the thumb to the corner of the eye corresponds to the space from the pupil to the edge of the black circle, which is the crown of the eyelid; so you will see the pupil through the clarity of the transparent cornea.
And then apply magic to the place where the water is, and you throw it down a few times, and thus as the water descends, the disease over which his sight falls, will be affected by the magic in its place.
And then rest for a moment; so if the water has descended, you should rest again before applying the magic a second time.
And when it has risen and does not descend, then carefully extract the magic and slowly turn your hand, and dissolve a little of clear salt gem into the water inside, and wash the affected area with this liquid; and then place outside the afflicted part, or stop it, or wrap it in wool infused with rose oil and egg white and bind it with the water.
But for us and those of our time, it is better to use something other than egg white.
And if you do not obey your knowledge in the use of the instrument into the wound due to its hardness - which is one of the men whose wound is hard to treat -, then take the spatula, which is named 'alberid', the form of which is as follows:
And so pierce that joint, and do not stop your hand in the track, and it is only after you have made a subtle opening with your knowledge.
Then insert the knowledge as we have said.
And you must complete your work, prepared for the patient's comfortable sleep in a dark room where they sleep on their back at home, and all movements are prohibited.
And hold in the nature of it so that its nature is calm, and do not twist their head to the right or left at all.
And arrange the ligature according to its position within three days.
Then return it to that place in that dark way, examine the free sight, and make some judgments, and then return the ligature within seven days.
And do not cover this during the hour of treatment or, if necessary, apply infusion later. You should know that this is done because the water can slightly lift and violently tear due to its great strength and force.
If an abscess forms carefully, then know that you should open it after three days and correct the position of any deviated matter within it.
Now examine the wound and place your hand over the opening of it for several days; it exists in the dark place.
And gradually, it should be treated with that potent medicine and discussed regarding its causes.
And you should know that in alchemy, the student is not exempt from seeing certain things and, when you are daring with the operation, you must be careful.
And it has already been observed by some of those who are in the art, and someone said that fire should be made in the air with a perforated vessel through which water flows.
However, you should not think that this has been perfectly achieved in our land or is written in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the spices of magic, so that it may be about those who ignore those:
And they are made of iron or bronze properly, and their ends have this subtle triangular shape, the acute end thus as with that form.
**Chapter XXIV**
On the treatment of nasal flesh injuries.
When in the nose various attached flesh masses occur, of which some are caused by the growth of small pebbles or polyps; and this malady is called polyp because it resembles those feet represented [in diagrams]. And it is cancerous flesh, blue-black in color; and this is the flesh of a lion, not of a dark color.
Therefore, in those who have this lion's flesh, free from fraud or cancer, you should operate between the thighs with your hands, expose it to the sun, and cauterize the nose of it, and prick the small hairs on those parts. And then carefully extract it from the parts outside, and then cut what you have understood from those by a fine knife between the partitions, knowing that all the flesh is held; if there is any cause of which the separation is possible, then here use a sharp or fine instrument to separate it without any cause. If it is an infected or acute apothema (abscess), then apply what it covers; but if it is a malignant apothema, then cut and cauterize that part until the abscess is drained and all cavities are healed.
Then carefully make incisions in the nose, adding salt water or vinegar as needed. If the nose is open and during the process, humidity enters the palate, then you will know that it has healed.
If humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you will know that inside there is flesh filled with pus over the bones of the nose to which the abscess has not penetrated.
Therefore, you must insert a knife into the part which has any hardness, and cut through it with sharp movements, and between each cut, adjust the amount of force or gentleness, and operate on the disease by inserting one end of the knife into the flesh at an angle or for another reason possible to it.
And after this is done, it releases its scent so that it reaches the canals of the nose and settles on the mucous membrane, as strange sights often attract children to school, and it is a minor cause for anyone who wants to do so.
Then hold both ends of the knife, one end protruding from the nose and the other expanding inside the nose, and apply pressure on the flesh with a lock made of meat around the cuts, doing this until you know that the flesh is pressed against the cuts of the knife.
Then remove the knife and place a cold compress on the nose for several days or more until the swelling subsides and the pain is completely gone from the flesh.
And then, at the end of the treatment, insert a lead pipe into the nose for several days until it is healed.
If the treatment is complete, use that which has been explained.
And this is the form of the purging instrument, which distills oils and medicines into the nose:
And make it of silver or bronze, which is similar to a small lamp with an open top, having a small cavity, and appears like a miniature.
And if you wish, make a closed pipe with cane, and the cannula of the purging instrument be flat, open; it should have a handle at the rear end of it, which you hold when you suck oil or water from the suction causes.
It appears that you have provided a reference or a heading, but no text to translate. If you have additional content from the medieval medical treatise, please provide it, and I will be happy to assist with the translation.
They grow on the tips of the nose.
More often than not, a growth on the tip of the nose is a benign tumor, and its size increases and becomes noticeable over several days, at which point it warrants attention.
And for this reason, you should pay attention at the onset of its appearance, and remove it entirely. And then apply the cautery or medicine that burns over the area where it is located.
If the incision takes too long, it should be considered, and if it is smooth, hard, of a dark color, and has little sensation, do not touch that bone, which is called the "apostema crancos", because the pain experienced by the one who incises this apostema is great evil for him.
And if the apostema is not painful and has a bright color, and it is possible to make an incision in all parts, then evacuate the patient's malady and make an incision without fear, and treat the area with something that promotes healing and makes it firm until it heals.
Chapter XXVI.
On the suture of the nose, lips, and earlobe when the continuity is broken due to a disease or something similar.
You should know that when a solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, it causes little effect in that operation only in some people.
Therefore, when you perceive any cause of those, considering it a fresh plague or its infection, and then you adjust the two edges of the plague with sutures, and afterward, take care of that inner part so that it heals.
And if the edges of the solution of continuity are already separated and each is healthy, then you should take care to remove each part from its neighboring tissue as long as it does not get infected. Then, adjust the two edges with sutures and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood and treacle over those, and place a piece of delicate plaster or any other consolidative dressing over it, leaving it for two or three days, then remove that and replace the plaster, and take care with ointments so that they heal by themselves.
The method of sewing is that you add the solution for continuity with needles as we have recommended in the surgery of the abdomen, or add the solution for continuity with thread as it has been taught to you and done.
**Capitol .XXVII.**
To extract those causes that come in both lips within parts inside.
Often observed in many people within the parts between their lips are certain hard spots resembling dried fat from errors; some of them are smaller and others are larger.
Therefore, you should open the lips and crevices of each of those hard spots from every part, then return the sac containing the fluid, and wash it with wine and treat the area with water that has been warmed, until it is healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the removal of the flesh attached to the gums.
Often seen on the gums, which the ancients called alba, is a growth that you should remove with tweezers or cut with a knife, and let the healthy blood flow run through it.
And then apply to that place a sage poultice or other astringent or drying powders.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it secondly, and cauterize it, for the cautery will not return.
**Chapter 29.**
On the cause of toothache.
When, on the surface of the teeth within and without, as well as between the gums, there are hard, rough edges, bands, and some blackened areas that are inflamed and turn to a yellowish or greenish color, this causes corrosion in the gums and the teeth become loose.
And therefore, you must remove the malady between your fingers and place the end of it on a cloth, and pull out the teeth in which these hard edges and similar sand appear, without causing any further harm, and do this until they are free from blackness and yellowness and other discoloration.
Therefore, if something remains in the beginning of reason, well and good; otherwise, you will repeat the reasoning about those things on the other day and the second and third until it reaches the final statement in what you want.
And you know that teeth require various types of scissors and various shapes according to how they are prepared for your operation. And for this reason, the scissors with which the tooth is extracted from its place are different from the scissors with which teeth are cut between themselves, and these forms of scissors should be prepared as you will see soon:
Chapter .XXX.
Eradication of teeth.
Understand that you cure the tooth of its pain with all care and diligence in its complete eradication, as there is no cause for it to remain weak after its removal, for it is a noble substance within which excuses cannot be made for its eradication.
When the disease is forced to extract a tooth that causes pain, you must be certain which tooth is painful, since the pain sometimes deceives and makes one believe it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract the affected one, but the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, for we have seen this through barbers' operations.
Therefore, how must you be certain which tooth is painful, and since you know this, you must cut into the gum around the tooth with a scalpel in which there is some force, until it is completely detached from the tooth, and then use your fingers or small pliers, beginning at the smallest point, until it loosens.
And then use large forceps for a good grip or extraction, placing the patient's head between your hands that hold it firmly, and treat the tooth gently so as not to cause more pain to the diseased area.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten, take one of those instruments, place it there in every way with facility and effort the removal of it as it was done at the beginning.
If the tooth is broken or decayed, then know that you must cover it with a piece of cloth from that wound and stretch that thin wire to the end so that it is not torn in the hour of your constriction over those jaws.
And be sure to perform the scarification carefully in the entire circuit of the gums and watch closely so that you do not break or tear that split part of it, and return to the patient for further treatment due to the evil that is greater than the initial pain of it.
And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their hasty and rash attempts at removal, for they do not administer what we have recommended; indeed, you will often see that they bring great misfortunes upon men, which are much more difficult to treat, and the roots of their teeth completely crushed, or some of those, or some other bones extracted from the jaw, as we have witnessed with our own eyes.
And then proceed with the eradication of it, wash your mouth with wine or add salt to it.
And if there are discharges from the wound for some time, and as you observe more movements, cut off some amount of tissue and wash over the wound, and if that tissue does not stop the discharge, cauterize it.
The shape of the forceps should be subtle, as they are used to extract teeth at the beginning, with a long and thin end, a short handle, and a thick middle, so that they do not bend when used in such cases.
And likewise, when using forceps with thick handles that you do not want to bend when first applying them, they should have short ends.
And they are made of Indian iron with right-angled ends, and on the ends of those forceps are teeth that interlock with each other and begin to constrict firmly from close proximity, and sometimes the ends of those forceps have the shape of a bird's beak, which is curved, and they are very strong.
Chapter .xxxi.
On the eradication of teeth and the extraction of broken bones from the jaws.
When you need to extract a tooth that is stuck for some reason, you should place your finger over the area with pressure for one or two days until it becomes softened; then insert pliers or tongs whose ends are shaped like the beak of a bird called a crow or a glove, forming the shape of forceps.
The ends of them should be filed or sharpened with a file or chisel.
And if you do not obey these instructions regarding the use of pliers or tongs, you should then press down and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument which is called a small lever whose shape is as follows:
And take a thin but strong twig, small in diameter, and do not cover it so that it is not bent.
So if the incision is forgotten, this is it; otherwise, help me with these other instruments, of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument has a triangular end with some thickness.
The form of the second instrument is triangular with a very thin end.
And now, with this instrument, having two slopes, the appropriate form is as follows: and with other instruments used for dental extraction; for gently making an incision, this instrument resembles a large knife, and its form is...
From the rounded or pointed end of the triangle, which may have some thickness, but is not covered so as not to be squeezed.
And you should know that the instruments with many teeth are similar to other instruments.
The skilled and subtle artisans in this art discover by themselves what means to employ according to the nature of the operation and various ailments; for there are ailments to which the ancient ones did not give a name or create a specific tool because of their diverse forms.
If the jawbone or any other bone in the mouth is squeezed, then apply gentle pressure to it in its proper place using the tools and forceps we have mentioned for removing tooth roots, and assist with the maneuver that this shape demands.
And if there is any small defect, tighten or hold it with the mouth so that nothing evacuates or leaks out until all bones are completely healed; and then restore the area with suitable medicine for this.
If there is a small hole in the bone, quickly remove any debris from that hole and its darkness, and treat it until it is healed.
**Capitol .xxxii.**
On the care of the prominent teeth among others.
When the teeth are prominent in an unnatural way due to their shape, particularly in women, and especially in very young ones; then consider this: if it is not possible to extract or clean the tooth, you should extract it; unless it is not attached to another tooth, then you cut it off with this instrument which has a very sharp pointed end, similar to the tusk of a pig.
And your incision should be made in such a way that it takes place over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and no other teeth are affected by it.
And if the prominent tooth is exposed and needs to be filed down, then use this iron file from India with this shape:
And all this should be of Indian iron and the margin precisely; and it should have small pointed points as if made with a lime, whose teeth are slowly filed day by day with ease, so that there is no other tooth like it, which would corrode and destroy. Then take lines at the end, and carefully those with other types of scissors.
And if it is a tooth whose loss causes the tongue to bleed, then you must file that space between the extraction of that fraction until its roughness becomes smooth and stopped, and apply pressure so that the tongue does not tear nor the speech be corrupted.
Chapter .XXXIII. (Note: "XXXIII" is Roman numerals for 33)
On the restoration of lost teeth with gold or silver wire.
When teeth are affected by sudden impact and removal due to percussion or extraction, and the condition cannot be strengthened with conventional treatments using styptics, and your care has not been effective, then consider those who will be tightened with gold rather than silver thread, for silver turns black and soon disintegrates, but gold remains unchanged forever.
And the thread should be of such subtlety and thickness according to the amount that can fit between the teeth; the technique of the repair is that you take the thread and wrap it twice around two healthy teeth, and then, as it grows, curve the thread in a twist between two damaged teeth, or if only one remains, make sure the fabric reaches the healthy tooth from the other side. And repeat the stitching within the gap from which you began, strengthening your hand with ease and skill so as not to damage it.
And it is your duty to tighten the string around the teeth so that it does not come loose.
Then you cut off the excess ends of the thread using forceps or scissors and insert them in certain places with your fingers, and then guide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so as not to cause harm to the tongue. And then fasten it tightly with a strap as if it were a Roman belt.
If it becomes loose or broken, strengthen it or them with another thread in the same manner for as long as necessary.
And this is the way to arrange the teeth and the correction of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, just as you perform these manipulations:
And when it is done that a tooth or two are returned to their proper place in their locations and they are healed as we have recomposed them, and they continue to ache.
And this can only be done by skilled artisans and wise ones.
Sometimes it is caused by some reason related to the bones of a cow, and it is made like a tooth from them, placed in the same place where the tooth was missing, tightened as we have said, and remains and serves as such for a long time.
Chapter .xxxiv. (Note: "Capitol" here might be a mistake, as it typically refers to the end of a book or a legislative body; the correct term for a chapter number in this context would be simply "Chapter X.XIV.")
Regarding the knowledge of the ligament which is found in the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament which you see leaving the tongue on certain occasions is either naturally attached or accidentally caused by a disease that has already healed.
And the operation on them is to open the mouth of the hernia, eliminating its presence in the thigh; raise their tongue, and then cut through that nerve ligament according to its extent until the tongue is freed from its attachment.
If there is any hardness or tightness, and this is due to the healing of a disease, then you apply oil and cut through it according to its extent until you sever the ligament and dissolve the knot.
And be careful not to cause any rupture in the tissue of the flesh, and cut through its rear side so that pus can flow out.
Then wash the dressing of the incision with water or wine or washed water; and place a cushion under their tongue; it is necessary that the patient keeps their tongue raised at night so that it does not adhere again.
If a blood flow occurs, apply vinegar to the site; if the wound bleeds, cauterize the area with a hot iron suitable for this purpose. And then apply that cure for the other causes as well, so that it heals.
Chapter .xxxv. (Note: "Capitol" likely refers to "Chapter" in this context, as it is a common title for sections in medieval medical treatises.)
To extract the ranula (a type of cyst), use a knife.
Sometimes, the tongue becomes infected and resembles a small, firm object, preventing its normal movement; it swells so much that it fills the mouth.
And the treatment for it is to open the patient's mouth wide, facing them towards the sun, and consider the abscess.
And if you notice a thin, dark, hard mass that the illness does not affect, do not touch it as it is brittle.
If it turns white and is moist, then insert your thumb into it, cut off the thin layer, and divide it completely; if you have fresh wind during your operation, then place a clean bandage over it, using vinegar to stop the bleeding.
Then return to your work until you have completely treated it, after washing it with vinegar and salt; and take care of the other treatment for this until it is healed.
**Capitol .xxxvi.** (This seems to be referring to a chapter or section number, without a direct translation.)
On the extraction of the abscess from two ears and that which is nothing in the throat, and other abscesses.
When inflammation occurs in the stomach, there are glands that are gathered together, which cause external symptoms and are called two auricles; if you treat them with what we have said in the previous division and it does not heal, consider whether the abscess is hard, of a dark color, with little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
And if the disease is of a dark color and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron due to the flow of pus; instead, wait until it matures, and either you will extract it or it will break open on its own.
And if it is of a white color, soft, and the root is thin, then that must be cut into.
And the operation on it is that you consider, in view of your operation, if the abscess has rested completely or if it has decreased in size; then stop the malady facing the sun, and place the head of the patient in a low position, open his mouth, and have the servant press between their fingers the tongue of the patient gently with an instrument that has this shape.
And whether it is made of silver or bronze, it should be fine and sharp.
So when you have pressed the tongue against that point and observed its usual behavior, take pliers and grasp it at the base, then pull it out of the body as much as possible. Another thing that pulls some cause from the tunic, then slice with an instrument of this kind:
Another thing that pulls some cause from the tunic, then slice with an instrument of this kind: and it is assembled like forceps, however the ends of them are curved, so that the edge of each of those is on the right side of the other, very sharp, which is made of iron smeared with wax.
If this instrument is not available to you, then use a scalpel of this shape: sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
And having made one incision, make the other according to this same manner of incising, and then close the wound with clean water.
If blood flows, cure it with a decoction of poppy seeds or laurel leaves and similar things until the flow of blood is stopped and proper care is taken so that it heals.
And sometimes in the gullet there are other apoplesses besides these two, and make incisions into them according to what you have said about making two incisions equally.
And you have already treated a woman with an apostema that was born in the throat of her, an apostema that tended to a dark color, with little feeling, which had already closed the throat of her, and the woman was breathing heavily, and she had forbidden herself from eating and drinking water, and she would have died if more time had passed, even one or two days.
And the abscess had already grown so much that it had caused two ridges to form, which will heal through two openings.
Therefore, you should listen to them first and stay in one of their houses, take out the abscess, and throw away a significant portion of it. Then, identify the exact location from which the other discharge originates, and press firmly on it. Take hold of their tongue, and then place the abscess in that spot.
And then you should make a large incision, and instead of blood, only a little pus will flow from it. So the condition of that woman is severe, and she will soon begin to drink water, then eat food. Therefore, you should not repeat the incision on the abscess for a long time, as it will just form again in the same place, prolonging the suffering.
Therefore, you should prepare and apply a poultice to the patient, and then additionally use heat; and afterward, walk around and do not be unclean, for God willed it of you.
It appears that the text you've provided lacks a complete or coherent sentence for translation. The phrase "Capitol .xxxvii." suggests a reference to a specific chapter or section, but without the actual content, it's impossible to offer a meaningful translation. If you can provide the full sentence or paragraph, I'd be happy to assist with the translation.
Regarding the knowledge of when it (the hernia) appears.
When catarrh (accumulation of mucus) occurs in the hernia, and it is prominent and long, then it is called non-perpendicular; and if it is in the groin area, thick and round, then it is called a bubble.
If it (the hernia) is treated as we have described in the previous section, and your treatment does not agree, and indeed, you find that it has become prominent already, and it is subtle, then you should understand that those which are rounded additions need to be addressed; and if it is of considerable length, and it bleeds, either dark red or black, and it is not painful to the touch, then you should fear the incision, for there is danger in this condition.
And when you examine it according to the manner I have said, in terms of its whiteness and length, then dislodge the malady, press the tongue with your instrument that shapes and cuts the edge into a new one, lower it and incise it with one of two instruments that are called for in the incision of two veins.
And be mindful not to incise it unless it is appropriate according to the natural term of its addition, for if you incise it too much, you will alter its course.
After the incision, use what we recommended for the incision of two veins and dress it so that it heals properly.
If the patient is afraid of the incision due to fear, use cunning in the cauterization process to alleviate their concern; the method of the cautery on it is simply sharp water, and this is how you should proceed: place the head of the hernia in a suitable position, press the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, take some of the water we spoke about in the chapter on cauterization, apply it to the living wound, do not make it too thick or too thin, and fill the concave part of the instrument that has this shape.
Let the external part of the cavity where the medicine is placed be similar to the curve of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on the wound, and let the patient lie on his side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person is eliminated by the internal medicine, so that no further cause descends onto the throat of him/her and it heals.
Then apply your hand to the medicine, and extract it over the uvula for a space of about an hour until that part becomes darkened and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take hold and wrap that over the edge of the wound, immerse the cloth in the medicine, insert the wound into the cloth through a tube above, so that the cloth adheres to that tube, and do this as many times as necessary until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, then let it rest for three days or four until it dries and falls off.
And if you need to repeat the treatment, do so, and with the cautery abstain from the area around the grape (i.e., the affected joint) moistened with oil, purify it with that which is in the circuit of its medicine, wash it with warm water, treat it externally with embrocation, and internally with diuretics until it is healed.
And this type of treatment is far more effective than incision and is less fearful.
At times, gout is cured by water that is subtler than cautery or incision, as it is treated with sublimation in this manner: take calament, hyssop, oregano, rue, licorice, camomile, broad (mallow) and similar herbs, and combine all those causes, or some of them, into a single mixture, and submerge them in wine; the mixture should bubble; then let the wave be gently stirred appropriately, and in the middle of the wave place a tray, on which rests an instrument made of silver or iron according to this manner.
And insert the end into the patient's mouth until the vapor raises the uvula above the soft palate, until the uvula is completely obscured.
And then repeat this process on all the hardened areas, but be careful not to do this treatment while the patient is eating, as it would be too aggressive on the hernia, and you must not do that unless you have properly diagnosed the hernia.
If you do not have this instrument, take a cane and, at the end of it, make a hook with hot iron, so that it closes the patient's mouth, as the hook of hot iron prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter .xxxviii. (Note: "xxxviii" is likely indicating the chapter number, not a translation.)
On the extraction of spines and other substances adhering to the skin, and from other causes.
Other motes or debris may adhere to the skin, or spines in the feet, or from any other cause.
Then, you should extract what is visible from these, using your finger as an instrument solely in front of the light, so that you can clearly see what is in the mouth.
And for what is not visible and is hidden in the mouth, you should make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, since the strong cause attached to the mouth will be forgotten through vomiting; or make them swallow a piece of napkin or shredded lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of dry sea sponge and mix it strongly with salt, and then make the patient swallow that, for when it reaches the place where there are spines, it will be forgotten. And take a snake, open it and tie its entrails to a table and carefully extract them; or take a pig, cut it open and carefully remove the entrails.
If we do not remember those causes that we have mentioned, use a lead instrument in this way:
And make it sharp, like a nail, and at the end of it is a hollow cavity that you insert into its mouth easily.
And he raises his head and looks at the touch of his throat bone, so that he understands it as if an bone or a spine pushes him, or something like that, which the doctor puts his hand on.
However, if that evil pain enters more, by the knowledge of the place where the cause is attached and it pushes down, and pulls his hand with the instrument on him, according to the amount prepared for it, until it is forgotten.
Chapter .xxxix.
About the extraction of blood from the esophagus.
When treating blood in the esophagus as we have discussed under remedies and not with drugs, consider the sun's heat on the patient's throat, so that you may move his tongue with an instrument which we have recommended.
Therefore, if you find the blood, extract it from a small or subtle place with careful movement.
And if it is not possible for you to extract it from there, then take a concave needle and insert it into the patient's esophagus, and place a heated iron in the concave part of the needle, and do this several times (until the blood has stopped flowing and is no longer in the esophagus), and keep the patient well hydrated throughout the day.
And then take a vessel filled with hot water, apply its mouth to the affected area, and wash it; do not allow any cause for concern or worry over the water, as soon as you feel the warmth of the water, move it elsewhere with your hand.
But if what we have recommended is forgotten, then fumigate the patient with spices or herbs using the instruments we have prepared for suffumigation of the throat.
Do this, as it suits the case.
And there is another method of treatment by suffumigation: take a vessel in which there are burning coals, cover it with a cloth, and place the opening of the instrument over this; then apply the suffumigation from above; have the patient breathe through the end of the tube, and close their mouth to prevent the suffumigation from escaping, until you know that the suffumigation has reached the lungs, for the lung blood will soon be cleared.
And if you do not eat, repeat the process of fumigation more often, avoid bad habits, consume salty and bitter foods, do not drink water, and it is necessary that at this point, this regimen be completely abandoned.
And this is the form of the instrument used to extract blood from the gullet when necessary; it resembles tongs, albeit with some curvature. which is placed on the gullet, and its end resembles the beak of a crane, which is smooth, in which case, when it grasps any cause, it does not let go.
Chapter XL.
In which is the summary of the discussion regarding heretical beliefs and their section.
The apoptoses are special spots, of various manners, as we recall their memory, each one in this book.
And they differ in piercing and cutting them in two ways: one is for the specific type of apoptoses themselves; and another for what we understand about their humidity.
The second way is for the places where accidents in the body occur, for the aposteme occurring on the head is different from the aposteme occurring on the buttocks; and the aposteme occurring in the fleshy part is different from the aposteme occurring in the joint; and each of them has its own treatment through surgery.
Some types of apoptemas cover those that do not need to be pierced but rather allow for the maturation of health in those or their completion.
Other apoptemas require piercing when they are crossed and do not mature according to their completion; also, there are apostemas close to joints, where if an apostema appears near a joint, its presence prolongs the condition until you can address what is in the flow of that joint, and it strengthens the corruption of the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that member; or it is an apostema close to a major member, and if you delay piercing it within its maturation period for the member, it will cause issues for the entire member; or it is near the buttocks, so piercing should not be done without complete digestion, but rather the one near the buttocks, so that it cannot extend into the parts inside the buttocks and form a fistula, or be left in an unfinished state within the term of the condition. Maybe you already know the time for drilling the fistula, and that's when it matures.
And you know that it has matured when the pain ceases and the fever abates, and there is a reduction in redness and pulse, and the head of the fistula becomes more pronounced, and other signs.
And you should know that the drilling should be done at the site of pus accumulation beneath the fistula and also from the pus coming from the healing of the lump.
And the drilling is always done through the thickness of the flesh or the body, if the fistulas are in the thighs or feet, and in places of ligaments, of the nerves' cords, of the arteries; and finally, in all similar places where there is no reflection; for in those that are reflected, use drilling according to that particular member.
When the abscess is in a fleshy part, it is better to wait until its digestion is confirmed by the second complement, as we have said; for if you puncture it before that, it prolongs the course of the pus and severely damages its edges and depth.
Sometimes abscesses should be perforated according to the extent of the flesh or body part's need, or based on what member requires it.
And be aware that you should make small punctures, and in large abscesses, a larger perforation and wider cuts according to the diversity of the abscess' size.
And other types of abscesses where it is necessary to open and drain them, when done correctly, are like those that occur in cases of gangrene and boils; just as they do in many instances of doubt and bumps.
And those who make incisions with a saw have three angles; and of these, one is cut as if with the figure of a myrtle leaf, another with the apices of the joints.
And of those in which circular and lunar incisions are made, they resemble these.
Those who have no such apices as the joints of lions should make their incision only superficial or flat.
And how, when the apice is thick and has collected much pus, you should make an incision there and not cut out all the pus at once; after removing a part of it, wait until the next day and then remove another part, increasing gradually according to the degree of inflammation until it is completely drained.
And especially if the patient is very frail, a pregnant woman, a small child, or an elderly person, because the animal spirit moves quickly at the exit of pus, and often they die from the malady, and you must operate on them.
He advises great caution in this chapter, and he directs you to clean the wounds where you make these incisions, considering whether the infection of the ulcer is mild or a broad section; then administer medications from him or some other remedy; if the ulcer is large, and the openings of the incision are numerous, ensure that you apply pressure to each wound until they heal together.
If a piece of the ulceration detaches from the flesh or if it is concave in the circumference, then you must carefully close it with thin thread or cloth, just as when you use bandages or tweezers; keep it moist and tighten it after three days; and treat and heal it with suitable remedies until it is sanitised.
If there is a flow of pus during your operation, then you must administer warm water and vinegar, mixing them with cloth, and place it over the area where the pus is flowing; repeat this several times.
If the flows of blood persist, know that you must administer treatment and care, and use the powders recommended in various parts of this our body and its divisions.
If it is during winter, and the affected area is rich in nerves, know that you should apply poultices of wine and oil, and place them over the affected spots.
And if it is summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you should place poultices soaked in water and oil, or wine and oil, and change them every other day, as we have said, and know that you must loosen the apostema, clean the area, and administer the treatment that best suits it until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of apostemas universally, but according to the distinction I have already mentioned, we will speak of every type of apostema and how its cure should be administered in each case.
Chapter .xl.
On the section of apoplexy that occurs in the head.
In the head, small apoplexies occur, which are of different types with coats that contain them; and their species have different names.
And from them come drops, and those contain moisture similar to lime. And those that contain moisture similar to dew, and resemble them; and those are the ones that are rocky, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those [apoplexies], there is no fear, as the removal of those does not cause harmful resistance.
And the procedure for cutting these is that you expect them to take the shape of the instrument which you will use, called an entrome, as you know it contains.
If what is described here involves humidity, then cut along that as a section according to its length by making a superficial cut in this form:
And it begins in the section of line B within line G. After the humidity is evacuated, you scrape that part which contains that humidity, and do not leave from that any cause for concern, as you have seen no other cause.
Then immerse the affected part in Egyptian (or any) ointment if present, and otherwise in water and salt; fill it with that plague and leave it for another day, as this corrodes everything that breaks through that film.
And then apply the Egyptian ointment repeatedly to that part according to necessity, as long as you are confident that there is no other cause for that skin condition; treat the disease with the ointment until it is healed.
And if there is an abscess with fat nodes, then incise it according to this form: Make a section in the shape of a cross, and open it between the two lips of the section, then remove that part entirely, and use your virtue to extract the tunic that contains it.
If it causes you discomfort, then do what I have told you at first.
And similarly, treat the abscessed section with softening agents as we have told you; and if the abscessed section is softer, it is because it has little pain and little moisture.
And sometimes there are certain conditions of these abscesses which are in the head, especially in old women, and they enlarge the abscess so much with a hard, sharp, white discharge that it cannot be drained, and if anyone were to touch it, he would become infected.
In other cases of abscesses in the head, different from those mentioned above, which appear on the scalps of children and require shaving the hair around them, all these should be sectioned through superficial incisions.
And stop the perforation of those in the lower part of their discharge, so that the matter from the infection is not spread to lower parts of the body.
Then take care of those who need it according to the treatment prescribed for them.
Chapter .xlii. (This appears to be a section header, indicating the beginning of a new chapter.)
From the section on scrofula that occurs in the collarbone.
Unlikely motas (nodules) or bumps occasionally occur in these areas, namely the collarbone and armpits, as well as in the angles (of the body), and sometimes they appear in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the collarbone are nodules generated among them, and all scrofula from those comes from their own tunic, just as with the nodes and bumps on the head, when they have been corrected.
The types of these scrofula are nodules, some of which are rocky hard, others contain moisture, and the malignant ones do not obey treatment.
Therefore, in the one where you feel good upon touching, of which the color that appears is specific to the color of the scar, and it is reduced from every part, and not attached to the nerves of the collarbone, nor to the veins, nor to the muscles, and it is not swollen, then you should incise it at the dry surface of the affected area, from the area next to the body, within the lines G. and B., and remove it entirely from the part, and cut away any small edges or nodules if necessary, as we have said regarding the bumps on the head, extract that little by little.
And it requires greater caution that neither the vein nor the nerves be cut.
And the knife should not be too sharp or fit your hand too tightly, or disturb the patient, and you should only cut what is necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery, it would prevent the flow of medicine, worsen the infection, and leave that area in a state of discomfort until the inflammation subsides and the wound begins to heal. When the pus is drained.
Therefore, return to your operation until the task is completed.
Then carefully examine the aforementioned small lumps and, if any are found to be caused by a different condition, cut them out and clean the area.
And if it is at the root of a great scrofula, you must be careful not to pierce that scrofula from its root. You must also be careful not to break that thin, tightly folded cloth and ensure it does not tear on its own.
And then fill the wound with warm honey, which you have already applied in the Egyptian manner, and tend to it.
If you pierce the scrofula completely, be careful to close both sides of the wound and apply a poultice immediately so that no excess discharge occurs.
If you notice that there is excessive discharge due to the size of the scrofula, be careful to identify and pierce the root of it, drain it, and then apply a suture and treatment as described.
And for those scrofulas containing humidity, make a superficial incision here where you see the site of the abscess in the body, and apply the incision to that which is filled with pus at the bottom of the body, as we have said.
And then apply the incision, using certain medicines and similar substances, so that it corrodes what is broken down by corruption. And when you see the wound already cleaned, then you apply a medicine made from generative flesh until it is healed.
Chapter .xliii. (This appears to be a heading or title, indicating the beginning of a new section in the medical treatise.)
On the section of the piloth (or surgeon) regarding the treatment of an abscess caused by an injury to the gullet.
The ancients used this section in the epigastric region, and they have not seen anyone in our land who could do it.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those.
One must be careful in men, understanding that the extraction of the epigastric region should be avoided, as by doing so youthfully, all the veins and the most significant parts of the malady are here.
In those who have aphthas in the mouth or throat or between the teeth, when the malady is not in the intestines, one must understand how to avoid the extraction of epigastric regions to escape the destruction which is caused by perforation.
Therefore, when we wish to do this, one should inscribe the epigastric region with three circles within the circles of the epigastric region, or make a small incision in the middle of that space between two circles for quantity, making the incision in bone, not in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for incision because it is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels are open.
And if the doctor is cautious, you must ensure that he extends the cord of the gouger slightly, and then cuts the cord until it reaches the channel, but avoid the vessels of blood if you get hurt from any cause.
And then, he should insert the knife according to what we have recommended; this means regarding the section of the channel for the flame that is positioned here, which is from the matter that is out of place and by the removal of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, when the time is right and the perforation is feared, add two layers of the wound's cord, and use that only to remove the cartilage.
And then, administer medicines that help the flesh heal until it is cured.
And Albucasis says that the essence of what we have discussed is nothing but to see that some of these symptoms have already weighed down the patient's condition, and the disease has entered into death, and the breath of the patient is cut off at the place of the malady through some respiration, so that he may be saved from death.
And for this, he will keep the wound open until the evil of the disease is consumed; and the evil lasts for three days; so now you will command the wound thus, and cure it until it is healed.
And what I have seen for myself, is that a servant cuts with a knife and makes an incision in the patient's throat, and they cut off a piece of the lung tissue, and I was called to heal it; and I looked at its condition as if it were the cry of someone dying, and I uncovered the wound, and I searched for the source of the infection that had come from the wound.
Therefore, you must confess that neither a vein nor an artery has been injured, and the wind is blowing from the wound, and treat it as if it were on fire until it heals.
And do not cut into the servant unless it is necessary in your voice, and after some days return to the improvement of their dispositions.
And now I say that in the section of the epilot (possibly referring to the appendix), there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
Of the section concerning the abscess that occurs outside the wall of the abdomen, which is called a hernia of the abdomen.
This abscess, called hernia of the abdomen, is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it is more common in women.
And it can be divided into two manners, either it is natural or accidental.
In the natural, there is no cure for it.
And the accidental is divided into two manners; one is similar to gout, and the other manner is an apoplexy caused by the obstruction of an artery, which is fearsome. And one should not make assumptions about it with iron except for the one who seeks it. And you should examine it and investigate it as I have said, and if it appears similar to gout, and is not suspended from any of the veins, then you puncture it thus like a nodule, and extract that which causes it to hurt from the flesh and bursas; otherwise, you should scrutinize its entire being, and pay attention to the place in need of cure until it is healed.
Chapter .xlv.
On the section of the removal of nodes.
The nodes have various types and I have already described all their kinds in the previous division.
And it is important that I explain the difference between a node and an exitus, so as not to doubt.
Therefore, you say that an exitus (a discharge) is a sign of heat, fever, and violent pain, until the ebullition (suppuration) of the superfluity ceases, and putrefaction takes hold, which stops the fever, pain, and heat.
A node, however, is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and has the character of that lion which is taken out (of the body) by itself.
And according to the color of the body, its beginning is like a cease and is done thus with void, either greater or lesser, and they are according to two species, as if they were fat and contained humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I have said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a hernia, that you expel this and inquire about that at the beginning of the storm which is called intramuscular, according to how its form will come in the chapter which is appropriate to this.
And this is the way of inquiry for abscesses and all hernias, that you take this instrument and intrude that into the place which is most humid that you find in the abscess, and you will turn your threads into it little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the wall.
And then you will close your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and you will extract the instrument and consider what has remained in the track of it.
And if the current humidity is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then incise it with a shallow cut as I have said in the other apothems.
And if there is no humidity left from the intrusion, then you know it is grave.
And dry it with a section having the shape of a cross according to this form: Thus taught, lift it up and extract the stone from all parts with ease, and examine the skin or sac over it, if possible, and pull out that stone from its place.
If it is broken during the operation, it may not be possible to extract that stone, and you should act accordingly, and carefully extract it from within as long as it does not break any further.
If due to some cause, whether little or much, the intestines return according to nature.
And if you notice that any part of the intestines has become blocked, complete the disorder with some sharp corrosive powders and strengthen the inflammation, and apply a hot poultice over the one that is most infected, and treat the other from another cure until it heals.
And if it is not large, then you cut both lips of the hernia and treat it with this mixture that it incarnates.
If the vein is pulsatile against it, or not pulsatile, then you cut and apply to the place of inflammation a tri-folded cloth with vitriol and leave that tight for two days or three until the pain subsides and the swelling of the sanc; and then return to dissect what is broken from the node.
Chapter .XLVI.
On the forms of tools necessary for incision and perforation.
Of these are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three kinds, some are larger, and of these there are middle-sized ones, and of these there are smallest ones.
The form of the large instrument is this:
The form of the smallest instrument is this:
They are made of iron, of aluminum, and of suitable material for the extremities, in a way that suits the instrument to the apertures.
And these are the ways of the experienced ones, who are called alchemists, and one of them is known as the 'herbalist'.
And there are three parts of the spice, one part is greater, another middle, and the smallest.
The form of the experienced greater part:
The form of the experienced middle part:
The form of the experienced smallest part:
So, these are to be used by those with apertures, ruptures, fistulas, and hernias, so that they can enter between the bones and other causes.
And thus are made round, thick, golden needles, also with large ones sewn, from citron erams, or iron erams, or silver erams, and the best are those made from citron erams.
And the experienced ones use black plume, which they say are opened by these to be reflected in the cavities of which there are reflections, which are reflected back to their lightness on those reflections.
And there are three kinds of them, some being longer, others shorter, and others of medium length, according to the width of the fistula and the tightness of it.
Shape of the experienced great plume:
Shape of the experienced shorter plume:
Shape of the experienced smallest plume:
The shapes of the pricks are of various spices, some being simple, with only a curve, and they are of three kinds: large, few, and medium-sized.
And of their body's humors, there are three kinds.
And of those, there are two curves, which are of three kinds.
They have three curves, which are of three kinds.
All of these are necessary in their place.
Shape of a single small curve, shape of it:
A large half-moon has two curves. A half-moon shaped object has two curves. A small half-moon has two curves.
A large half-moon has three curves.
A half-moon shaped object has three curves.
And these are the forms of the scalpels that are dried and sharpened to cut through nodes and apoplexes, and they are of three kinds: one is large, another medium, and a third small.
Large scalpel form:
Medium scalpel form:
Small scalpel form:
The ends of these have sharp blades, while the other ends are not sharp and are not curved in a way that would cause injury to veins or nerves during incision; and for these reasons, the condition improves with treatment, and after the node's excision, the patient experiences less pain and greater comfort due to the appropriate adjustment necessary for the excorvation of the apoplex.
And these are the forms of almighty weapons, and they are of three kinds: great, medium, and small, as you can see.
They are made of iron and look like a ray that also makes alcohol.
And at the extreme end, there is a pointed spatula hidden, which goes into the wound from within and without, as you wish, so too sometimes.
The forms of spatulas, which are hidden among these times when piercing the apostemes and do not perceive them as malautes, are of three kinds: great, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of the windpipes through which the air flow is blocked, and there are three types; large, medium and small; the forms of it:
They are made of citrus skin, round or slightly elongated, and they are delicate.
And it is necessary that these types of windpipes be large, medium and small, so that they can obstruct the flow of air at the right speed in case of need, and when they are not used for treatment at first.
I do not recommend using them to block air in all parts of the body, but only in fleshy areas, just as with the scales on the legs and thighs, and on the armpits, mamilla (breast), abdomen, and groin, similar to their appearance on fleshy parts.
And some times these instruments are made like small scalpels from bone according to this form; for the incision is made when it is cut by phlebotomy, or a vein or artery incision.
And some incisions are made round according to this form:
Chapter XLVII.
On the care of the nipples of men, which are assembled (or connected) with women's breasts.
Some incisions show the breasts of certain men to be swollen due to sleep, and upon waking, they are even more swollen, and the breasts of women are assembled and become prominent.
And for those who wish to do this, they should make an incision in the middle of the moon (scrotum) according to this form, from line B to line G, and then remove all the grossness, and fill the wound with incarnate medicine, and sew together the two lips of the wound, and heal what needs to be healed.
If the nipple recedes from its attachment and is softened by its magnitude, as it should be in women, then cut it in two pieces, one above the other, resembling half moons, each containing the end of the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form of the line .B. and .G. And then excise the cord between the two lips of the wound, stop the discharge, and apply what has been said about sutures and powders, as necessary for the healing, until it is cured.
And if you do not perform the incision properly for the restlessness of the patient's condition and the flow of pus, then fill the wound with hot liquid and leave it until it corrodes what is broken from the grime, and then treat that until it heals.
**Chapter LXVIII**
From the piercing of abscesses that come from beneath the skin.
These abscesses that come from beneath the skin are due to scrofula, hard swelling, which contains a puss-like material.
And of those (abscesses) that contain humidity, those with humidity should be incised during the waxing moon according to this figure: from the line marked G to the line marked B. And once all that is in the abscess has been evacuated, you should seal it with a bandage and check it again the next day.
And keep the bandage stayed and treat it with suitable ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the kind that occurs in the lymph nodes and in scrofula, then you should incise it as we have said regarding the incision on scrofula generally.
If the plague has spread so that it causes putrefaction, then apply cautery to it as we have previously mentioned.
**Chapter XLIX**
On the sectioning of abscesses that occur through arrow wounds or veins.
When an arrow breaks through and the wound is solidified, one then observes the appearance of abscesses and the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are caused by an artery or a vein: for when the abscess is from an arrow, a long accumulation occurs in the anterior part of the body; and when you press the abscess, you feel a whistling noise within it.
And that which is from a vein is rounded towards the manifestation of the body.
And cutting into this abscess is dangerous, especially in those that are left with open wounds, and in the angles, and in the collarbone, and in many parts of the body; it is very large, so great care must be taken to avoid its treatment, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, should be avoided.
Place a poultice on the affected area due to inflammation from archery wounds, cut in the middle section along the length; then open the cut with scissors and remove the arrow, and cleanse the wound until it is exposed.
Then take the needle and make it penetrate between these two parts, and split the arrow in half at two points—which causes you to extract two arrows from the temples.
Then apply the pressure to the area between the two ligaments with a spatula until the swelling goes down and the abscess is dissolved.
Then administer treatment to the area where pus has formed until the ligaments fall off, and care for it with suitable poultices until it heals.
And if it is an abscess caused by vein section, then you must have your hand over the abscess at the closest point possible to prevent further spread, and insert the needle into the area where you have placed your hand, making it penetrate; and pull on the thread in a double motion until you extract it from the other side, and tie off the abscess with suitable ligatures as I have mentioned regarding the grapevine ligament on both ends of the thread.
If you fear that the thread might break, insert the needle again at the same place of the incision of the first needle, and tighten your threads in four places.
Next, dry the wound in the middle part of it; then, when the swelling has subsided, you make an incision to remove the excess skin, and leave what is attached to it.
And then place the poultice you have soaked in wine and oil over it, and administer the treatment that is done with heat and cold until it heals.
The final stage of the wound, which occurs due to nerve damage.
Thus, when a wound occurs in the rear and in the veins, and appears to be like a wound occurring in the nerves due to their compression or excessive work, or similarly.
And it is done most effectively in the areas of the assistants or the legs, or in any place where the joints are afflicted.
It is a severe apoplexy, resembling the color of another body, and it is in its most vital dispositions; when it is suddenly tightened by violence, the patient feels the illness as stupor.
And it is not an apoplexy of the chest, and for that reason, the patient is left with the belt loose; he is afflicted throughout his body, and he does not move towards any part in front or behind.
Therefore, those who have it in the joints do not know that it is infected with iron, because how strongly they will experience contraction.
One should tighten the belt around those who have it on their head or forehead with a cloth. If it is a minor abscess, then cut it open with scissors and incise it at its base.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, cut it out, and close it; adjust the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
Chapter.
On the section of the abscess that occurs due to an incision on the belly.
Some people also suffer from swelling in the belly and other parts of the body, which are called fungal infections due to their resemblance to mushrooms; their roots are fine and the heads are large; and their lips are intertwined, and they are often small but can be magnificent.
And you have already seen one, and in their belly were two parts that functioned similarly, and there was no difference between those white ones, of small size.
And the lips of those [parts] were everted and split open, and moisture flowed from them continuously.
Therefore, you should cut these open and compress them on the foot, one weighing 18 grains and the other 6 grains.
And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider when the illness is humid, and the color of the flesh is white, moist, of subtle texture; then you cut them with a broad knife, and bring the cautery near to them over fire, for you must drive out the humors as seen, and if the humors remain, cauterize that part.
And if the patient is afraid and anxious, beware of sudden cuts with a knife; instead, take some fresh lead, tighten that bandage in the manner we have said, and leave it for two days.
Then adjust the tightness of the lead thread; therefore, do not stop tightening the large lead until it is completely severed and falls off by itself through its work.
If the part is of thick texture, there is no cause for fear or anxiety in its incision, especially in those located in the abdomen.
It is possible that you cut away the bulk of it, and then cauterize that so it does not return.
And then take care of it until the disease is healed.
And be careful not to attempt to incise that which is of a dark color, with little feeling, and moves slowly, for that is absolute cancer.
And now let us recall certain things concerning this illness.
Chapter .lii.
On the cure for hernia (or "eminence of the navel").
Hernia (or "eminence of the navel") is caused by various factors: either through fissures in the abdominal wall over which the intestine or hernia protrudes; or because of a sac that forms due to the flow of blood or air, as described elsewhere; or due to excessive gas accumulation within.
If it is indeed due to a fissure in the abdominal wall and the protrusion of the hernia sac, then the appearance of the hernia may resemble the patient's skin tone; and it causes severe pain, and can present itself in various ways. And if it is for the exit of the hernia, you observe the position of that mass which we have mentioned, with greater or lesser intensity, and when you press on it, you find it occluded, then return; it is very strong in its place, and a great deal of effort is required for the introduction of water and intense work.
If it is due to moisture, you will feel a hard mass and it is not occluded when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted or ruptured.
And if it is due to infection, then these signs appear: the abscess becomes black and declining in color.
If it is not due to flesh, then the abscess is hard, thick and firm, and it forms according to a certain quantity.
If it is due to wind, then the touch of it is hard.
And the operation on it is that you consider when the prominence of the navel is due to a hernia, or vein, or from airiness; then you must abstain from treating it, for there is fear and danger as it is taught in the chapter where I have spoken about hernias by rearcidity and vein.
If the prominence of the navel is due to an intestine or hernia, then you must order the patient to take a deep breath and lie down; and immediately make an incision around the entire navel at the place where you have detected the attempt; and extend the size of the hernia above and below with great care; and then close the wound with a strong thread or catgut in a proper manner.
Then open the middle of the hernia extended over the ligament and insert your finger in that point to explore the intestine; and if you have tightened or guarded it by the ligament, then extract it carefully and push the intestine back inside the abdomen.
And if you have found the fabric, then take that oily substance; and cut away its excess.
If it is contrary to your skill or vein, then circle around that spot, and return to your operation; take two needles and insert them into those two strong threads, and put two needles into the loop which you have made around the abscess in a crosswise manner, which will cause penetration; and then tighten the abscess in four directions over the needles.
And if you wish, leave the needles and let the location heal until the flesh is extended and falls by itself; or cut that when it has thinned out and can be removed, and then care for it with something that covers the burns until it heals.
And if the protrusion of the navel is nothing but flesh or due to moisture, then cover as you have done with the abscess, removing the sanch or moisture which you find there, and treat it with something that covers and consolidates the area.
Chapter .liii.
On the treatment of cracks.
As we have discussed, in the previous section, of the types of cracks and how they are treated by medicine, and that it is inappropriate to treat them with iron so as not to ulcerate; we have also spoken about cracks arising from the excessive use or lack of care in their treatment.
And the ancients said that sometimes cracks are in places where it is possible to completely remove them, such as in the groin or in other parts of the body, and at their beginnings, especially when they start small.
But when it is old and severe, it may not respond to treatment, as I have neither seen nor heard of anything that has been successful in such cases.
And the operation on him is when it is located as we have said, you should proceed and remove the disease and purge of black choler some times, and then bleed that, if a manifest repletion is found.
Then prepare the patient for the preparation in which the operation will take place, and carefully clean the wound that covers it; and thoroughly search from all sides with a good blade to ensure that no cause for concern regarding the roots of the disease is left. And stop the bleeding, do not abruptly remove it, press the places, and clean the abundant blood with your hand or an instrument that you can use among the available instruments.
If it seems contrary to you to make a large bloodletting incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize it until the flow of blood stops, and carefully care for that with other healing methods as long as it heals.
Chapter .liv.
On the treatment of hydrops.
We have already discussed, in the previous section, the types of hydrops and their symptoms, as well as the medicinal treatments for each type.
And that which is cured with iron is only the species of altitis alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympanites or the species of hypostasis, for that is mortal.
And when you have already treated this species of hydrops tympanites with medicines and do not confirm your treatment, consider this, for if the patient's condition has already been weakened or it is another malady, other than that, just as in those cases of lung or abdominal problems and similar to these, then be careful not to treat them with iron, for fear of making things worse.
If you examine the disease of an exuberant growth and it is nothing but dropsical, neither old nor young, then the manner of treating it is that you raise the growth between your hands, and apply yours to press the patient's belly, drain the water from the opening left by the hair, and take a sharp spatula according to this form:
it should be of two sharp parts, long one with a pointed end just as with a spatula; however, make it neither too short nor too long, so that in the operation on that, it does not enter into the cavity, and you hold it.
And consider whether the generation of dropsical is from the cavities, for you will see that by cutting through the section away from the navel, about three finger-widths on either side, to the right and left of the hair, you open it up.
If the generation of hydrops is due to disease of the tissue, then your section should be to the left of the navel by three finger-widths.
And if the generation of the hernia is due to weakness, then your incision should be on the right side.
And be sure that your incision is on the side where the hernia occurs, so that the excess does not flow to that place again.
Then thoroughly pierce the hernia with the instrument, insert your hand into that incision, and lift it up with a spatula between the hernia and the skin, and extract it; if its size is like a thumb or smaller.
And pierce the skin again, until the spatula reaches the desired location, which is the place for the water. Then extract that, and insert an instrument with this shape: It resembles a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or iron or bronze, and in its initial part there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other; and at the end it has an incision according to the shape of a plume, thus:
And at the end of it there is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the water, it will immediately tighten around the instrument, thus draining a significant amount of water in a short time; if you do not drain enough water during that time, strong pain may be caused to the patient due to the resolution of their animal spirit, or it may lead to death.
You should drain according to the quantity allowed by the virtue of the instrument and according to your understanding of the patient's condition based on the strength of their pulse and the goodness of the instrument.
And after removing the instrument, retain the water which causes it, for it is often held by the tension of the string which blocks the hole on top of the container from which you have just extracted it; I advise you to pierce that according to that manner.
And then repeat the procedure on the other day if the patient tolerates it, and extract small quantities of water from them for several days in fear, and be careful not to remove too much water.
If you are concerned about the illness and drain a large quantity of water, then treat that as a burial in sand, and immerse it in a bath, and wait for a long time in the sun; and treat that with drying medicines until it is healed.
And apply cautery to the stomach, and the intestines, and close off the water passage, as I have described above.
Chapter XV.
On the treatment of children who have not yet developed the ability to control their bladder functions.
Some times, a child is born from its mother's belly with the head of its mixture not pierced (or it is too narrow or not in the right place).
Therefore, one should perform the perforation of it as soon as it is born with a delicate, moist sponge according to this form:
And then, with a delicate lead clamp, you should hold it in place, for three days or seven.
And as for urination, it should be done after relaxing the bowels and bladder. Then return to its place.
And if you do not hold the lead in place, it is possible that the urine which has flowed over this area will not be sealed by this closure.
However, if the opening is too narrow, it should be treated with a lead clamp, as we have said, for more than three days until it widens.
When those in whom the urinary tract is out of place are treated, it is said that this causes it, for those who are born with a defect of the bladder are obliged to go to the bathroom inside them due to raising the bladder with their hand above them; and it is not a hereditary condition, so much so that the sperm cannot reach the mother correctly according to its right path, and it becomes a disease caused by movement.
And the method of surgery in this case is that the patient lies on their back, then extend the head of the bladder with your left hand while vigorously extracting it, and incise the top of the bladder at the place of the urethra with a scalpel, as if you were making an incision with a pen, or any other instrument you prefer, so that the middle part of the bladder comes out in the shape of the bladder head and the defect falls into its proper place.
And be careful in your operation to remove the stone, for it may happen that you cause complications; hold onto it as you cut the kidney stone, and heal the wound until it is completely cured.
Chapter .LVI.
Of the albat (foreskin) that occurs on the prepuce at the head of the penis due to corrosion and blackening and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Motas (small) veins occur on the albat (foreskin) of the penis, and an inflammation of raw and tender flesh is evident.
And of those, one is malignant and another is non-malignant.
Non-malignant, consider that you suspend it with a subtle hook and remove that which remains; then place a pressure on that side using Egyptian ointment; and afterwards, treat it with fine ointment until it is healed.
And if the albat (foreskin) is malignant, then it should be tied with a string, and you must administer cautery near its incision and cut off its root.
If the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis has one edge inside and the other outside, then you must wait until the inner edge adheres, but immediately treat the outer part, because if you cure that first, the foreskin might still be pulled.
And we have also observed accidents in the genitals and foreskin, black and swollen, so take care to clean everything that is already discolored or corrupted or rotten; then apply a line of this mixture made from flour of chamomile and fennel seeds crushed and mixed together.
And treat it with the other cure until it is healthy.
If there is a need for bloodletting, then apply cauterization monthly according to this form:
The cautery that is most helpful has two dispositions together, it is for the flow of blood and for the plague when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the foreskin is corrupted and completely destroyed in that moment, then you must insert a bronze tube into the inner part of the foreskin so that the malady urinates through that.
In the adherence of the foreskin to its head (and this adherence occurs only in those whose foreskin is their own, and circumcision is not required on them; and when adherence occurs due to disease or abscess), then you must scrape with an obtuse spatula until the adhesions are dissolved and the head of the foreskin is completely freed.
And if it is difficult to loosen them gently, then you must scrape with a spatula the head of the foreskin and the prepucium itself; this is because when the prepucium is thin, its fragility allows it to be slightly perforated.
And then carefully separate the prepuce from the head of the penis with a sharp instrument, which has already been soaked in warm water to prevent adhesion again.
Then apply a cooling treatment while ensuring it is consolidated.
Chapter VII.
On the purification of newborns and the treatment of what happens to those of circumcision.
Circumcision is not a cure for all ailments, but when it is of our own making and done by our own will, and when it concerns children, it is necessary that we give preference to this better operation and method, so as to avoid any harm to their health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of their free lands, since they do not use it in their laws, and only do so because we have acquired this by experience, which is why I have observed most surgeons and barbers to use circumcision and purification with a new knife and claws; and they use lint made from silk and incisions made with the fingernail.
And you have already tried all these methods and do not find any better way out than by cutting, lancing, or binding, as with the ungual (finger) nail, where the pain of the wound drives you to another incision and certain danger. And the purification that is performed by cauterization, which is digital (using a hot iron), as the blacksmiths do, is not safe for the incision of the end of the manly member, because the heat goes deeply into the wound.
However, in the operation with the iron, too much heat causes damage and corrupts your operation. And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and in many cases, it does not require purification in such a way that I have seen it.
Through the operation that is performed with scissors and thread of silk, I have discovered by experience its goodness, because the scissors are of a proportional incision, so that the sharpness above corresponds to the sharpness below; and therefore when you apply your hand, both sharps are in harmony and proportion at one time; and a compression of the silk forms a knot of all parts, from which no error arises.
And the first manner of the operation is that you must keep the child mostly still if it is one of those who struggles a little, do not do anything but tie the silk to its hernia just once, and let it enter into the other day.
And then do everything possible to make that child happy in all ways, as it receives its intelligence from you. And then make sure to be among your most prepared assistants, and do not be scared; hide the scissors in your hand or place a cloth over your foot so that the child does not see those or any other tools.
And then insert your hand into the patient's anus and blow into the rectum, pull it until the tip of the instrument reaches the end, and clean that which has been added to it due to impurity.
The shape of the forceps for cleaning, this is the shape:
The extremities should not be of equal length, and the others should be such that the axis of the foot is not straightened, but the length of both legs should be as acute as the length of two handspans.
For the mistake in purification lies in that the strong reading escapes the inherent code entirely, or a part of it must be cut away for the incision.
Therefore, consider extending the one from your hand to your finger in front of the placement of the spot and incise it according to this equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, take a hook and incise that.
If it has passed three days and they say that it is swollen from the fiery spot, then you should leave it until the inflammation has subsided, gently extract what remains of the ulcer, and incise it as best as you are prepared.
And observe the head of the hernia, as it may not be accessible.
And therefore, treat that part which the plague has solidified with powders, as we have discussed in the treatise on powders.
If it is incised from the cord in the proper manner and follows the guidelines, it will not be noticeable.
And apply treatment to that part as we have said for it to be healed.
Chapter .LVIII.
On the treatment of urine retention in the bladder.
Urine retention in the bladder is caused by an enlargement due to stones or infection, or by a blocked or full bladder, similar to what we have mentioned regarding treatment methods in the previous section.
And if nothing has dissolved as we have said, then the cause of the disease must be removed by an instrument called a syringe, which is shaped like this: Both silver and thin, with a tube as thin as a hair from a lion's whiskers, similar to a palm and half its length, with a thin reed at its end.
And the method of urination is as follows: take the urethra folded and tied at the tip of the penis or forepart, and insert its extremities beyond the glans, and cut it with scissors if there is any excess cause from the foreskin, but more carefully insert it into the cannula with force, and then enlarge the glans with a clamp and albumen of urine.
And make incisions on the patient over the spots affected, and open the bladder of the patient and the scrotum with oils mixed together, such as olive oil and water.
And then insert the glans into the opening of the scrotum until it reaches the root of the scrotum; and fold the scrotum over the opening of the foreskin; and press the glans from within; and press it until it reaches the bladder, and make sure that the pain is directed to the source of the illness, and do not follow this order, but rather place the meat in which it deviates from its normal course.
And then gradually extend the urethra, little by little, as the urine dries out the passageway.
Then extract that and use a catheter for urine treatment, do not cease to do so until the bladder is emptied and the patient's condition is improved.
**Chapter LIX.**
Of the quality of bladder cleansing with a clepsydra and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
When bladder ulceration or abscess, or a severe infection occurs there, and you wish to drain water and medicines from it, use an instrument called a clepsydra, and this is its form:
but at the extremity of it is sealed, completely closed. And there are three parts to it: two from one side, thus as often.
In the beginning, there is a build-up, which is what it is driven by, and according to its quantity, it accumulates, until some cause throws out moisture from it, then it is thrown out, and when it is expelled long, as it were, a clamp is used on it, to which naphtha is attached, as in sea battles.
So, if you wish to prevent moisture in the bladder, insert the tip of the clamp into the moisture and throw it away from the opening, for the moisture is thrown into the concave of the clamp.
And then insert the tip of the clamp into the urethra as we have recommended in the circumcision; and push the moisture towards what you are pushing, for that moisture soon reaches the bladder, and the illness often arises from it.
The shape of the delicate crystal through which the bladder is cristalized, and that shape is as follows:
Whether it is made of silver or lead, which resembles a small feather at the top and leaves a trace of lint behind.
Then take the bladder and place it in motion, stop that moisture you wish to crystalize within the bladder, and then tie it tightly between two strong ligatures with double thread, and heat that moisture over the fire.
And then insert the tip of the crystalizer into the urine.
Then place your hand over the bladder, pressing gently on the moisture within as it flows down into the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder at hand, take a piece of cloth and make a circle from it; then punch holes in this circle all around its circumference; insert the thread firmly into these channels, twist them, and then wrap the cloth tightly around it as if to form a container; add whatever moisture or matter you want to preserve, and smell and taste it.
And then you tie him up with the instrument and make it so as you have done with the bladder, and express with your hand while the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter LXX (60)
On the removal of stone.
We have already discussed the classification of kidney stones and their treatment with medicines, as well as the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each.
And we have discussed the stone that requires surgical intervention by hand, and sectioning.
And the stone formed in the bladder specifically is the one that remains in the bladder.
And they are describing that concise and clear exposition.
Therefore, it says that the pain generated in the bladder often goes to children; and among its signs, the urine expelled from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, appearing in that sand; and the disease scratches its own verge, causing frequent pain, and then it becomes inflamed; and this is how they get the disease.
And the healing of children from that disease they have achieved at 13 years old; and it is a difficult cure for the elderly. In the young, it is more common due to what is between them.
And of him whose pain is greater and healing is more difficult; and if it is little, it is contrary to that one.
Therefore, to arrive at the cure for that condition, we must begin by cleansing the disease with Christ, who extracts all the gap that is in their intestines; for that gap sometimes prevents the flow of urine after its inspection.
And then we should take the hernia from their feet and position and adjust it carefully so that the urine descends to the bottom of the bladder or sometimes it may jump from its place.
And then make that closure between your hands, prepared, and the other parts of him should be left open for his things; so that the bladder is entirely made to decline towards the lower parts.
And then we should remove that one and all those defects.
Therefore, if you feel the urine in the space, then you should cut yourself sometimes over it.
And if you cannot grasp the exact touch of the disease, then cover it with oil the specific part indicated by your left hand, whether it is a child or a young adult, and insert that into its place. And once the stone is removed, ensure it stays in the place indicated. And gradually convert that pressure into the urinary bladder's opening.
Then apply pressure on that part indicated, and expel it outside through the opening from which you removed it.
And instruct the assistant to press on the bladder with their hand; and command another assistant to extend their legs above the patient, and with their other hand, hold the skin around the opening where the operation was performed.
And then insert a spatula into the incident from which this is the form of it: It divides into what is between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle part, beginning on the left side of the fissure; and the incision should be above that bone, and as they say, in the buttock, and a transverse cut is made so that the external cut is wide and inner narrow according to the quantity that can be removed from the bone without causing too much damage, for it is essential to consider the saying that the bone is in the buttock, and forgetting its weakness.
And you should know that there is some bone with angles and margins, making it difficult to extract.
And from that, there is something resembling a globe, round, and made of lighter material.
Therefore, if it is the one with edges and margins, adjust it in the crack.
And if it is not thus easily accessible, cover your fingers over it or tighten them around it properly, the end of which should be as smooth as lime that you press onto the stone, and do not slip from it; or insert a delicate instrument with a curved tip between them.
If you cannot do that, then enlarge the opening a little, and if you see blood flow, cut strongly with vitriolic trepan.
But if the stone is larger than one, at the beginning, push your finger into the mouth of the bladder and cut into it; then gently insert a small amount of water; and in this way, if they are moved by two or more.
And if the pain is very intense, it is ignorance to pierce that great section, as it causes two effects on the patient: either it stops (the pain) or it leads to the continuous discharge of urine, which is why the affected area is not entirely consolidated.
They may administer an expulsion of the foreign body from within, or use a forceps during the fracture to extract that in the foot.
After you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and tighten it. And place over that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rosin oil and water, to ensure the heat is gently released.
Then return the patient to their bed, and do not dislodge the bandage for three days.
And when that is loosened, moisten the area with water and oil, and then apply a mixture of honey and garlic within until it is healed.
If, in the case of a plague, you encounter gangrene, clean and dress the wound, and it resembles a frozen bladder (and this is known due to the exclusion of urine), then insert the small pipe into the plague and extract the pus, for if it causes corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then wash the plague with vinegar, water, and salt, and oppose all species that are suitable for its healing until it is cured.
And during all the stages of treatment, make sure that you do both things and adjust the medications that are placed on the area.
If the stone is small and located in the urethra, lodged there, and urination is obstructed, then treat it with what you have recommended before it leads to impaction, for the instruments used in this treatment are often accused of causing impactions; take a metal perforator, which looks like this:
with a triangular end, sharp, lodged in the wood.
Then take hold of the cord, attach it to the urethra to prevent the stone from returning to the bladder.
Then insert the metal into the urethra, piercing it gently until the stone is reached. And turn the metal with your hand over the stone, little by little, and continue piercing until you make an opening on the other side; then urine will begin to flow.
And then apply your hand over what is broken from the stone of the kidney outside the hernia, for it is squeezed and relieved by urine, and the illness is healed.
If this treatment is not suitable for any reason, then tie a thread around the kidney and another thread on top of it. And then close the opening over the kidney within that hernia between two bands. And then extract that one. And then loosen the bandage, clean and dry the infected wound, which is made in the ulcer.
And it is not necessary to tie a thread around the kidney again, only to prevent it from returning to the bladder; and the other bandage on top, for when the thread is untied, the stone returns to its place and the illness returns.
And for this purpose, when you tie the patient, lift their legs apart or return them to their normal position, and thus alleviate the pain as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
On the extraction of stones from women.
Stones in women are rarely generated.
If you see a stone in any of those areas, the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden by many methods.
One of their (stones') causes is that women who are strong and virile give birth.
And the second (cause) is that you do not find a woman with good knowledge to discover if she should go to the doctor when she is pregnant, or if it is from women who have husbands.
The third sentence translates to: "The third is because you do not find many women skilled in this art, especially in the operation with their hands.
And the fourth is that the place of incision over the stone in women is far from the place of the stone, so it requires a deep incision, and there is fear in that.
If it is necessary to do this, then make sure you get a skilled female surgeon, as they are rare to find.
If you are lacking in this, then seek out a skilled and subtle surgeon, or present a female midwife well-versed in the facts of women, or a woman who has gained experience in this art.
So do as follows: present this person and command them to do everything you instruct, from the examination of the stone to its beginning. The reason for this is that he must determine if the woman is a virgin; make sure he inserts his finger into her anus and checks for the stone.
Therefore, if you find it, cut it off, leave its side, and then command him to pierce through that.
If it is not virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's urethra and probe around the penis, as she places her left hand on the bladder, and extracts it at a reasonable price.
Therefore, if you find it, slowly remove that, gradually massaging it from the opening of the bladder to the sides, using the power of your virtue so as to draw that out at the root of the problem.
And then pierce through that position of the organ in the vicinity of the root of the problem from any side it stops and direct the penis to that opening, and his finger should not be withdrawn from the penis.
And the section should be cut slightly at the beginning; then insert the blade into that section, and if the pressure is felt, adjust the section according to the amount so that the pressure is removed from that.
And you should know that the parts of the kidney are small and hard, and some are sharp and tough, and others thin and round, and they have points.
Therefore, you know the number of parts it has, according to what you have said about what you intend to do.
And if you want to release the flow of blood, apply hot salt on the affected area three times and leave it for an hour until the pain is relieved, then return to your operation until the kidney stone is passed.
And prepare yourself with all the tools mentioned for the extraction of kidney stones in men, so that you are aided by them in your operation.
And if you wish to stop bleeding, and know that the expulsion of blood is from a wound that is incised, then apply powder to the area and gently press those that are pulvils (cataplasms) and stricture descent, and do not repeat this; leave the pebble (perhaps referring to a clot) and do not extract it, for the strong nature of the disease will die. And then cure the plague.
So when the intensity of the blood loss has decreased, and the location (wound) can be handled, then return to your operation until the pebble (clot) is removed.
Chapter LXII.
On section (surgery) concerning hernia.
A hernia of the abdomen is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white flesh, which leaves the opening of the vessels containing the bowels, and it is called the abdominal cavity.
And in some cases, it is within the natural fat that prepares itself at the departure of the wind, as long as it is a different organ, which is the kidney of the generator between the white rib, which we have said, and it is not this but stone.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the generators, so that this material is discharged into them, and sometimes it happens due to a blow struck against the generators.
And this humidity does not have moving colors, because the color of it is declining to citron or to bloody, or red, or it is dark and sticky, or it is white and watery, and it is this that is most significant.
And the signs by which it is known that this addition of water has occurred are as follows: for if it is in the white rib that we have mentioned, then the abscess becomes rounded and declines slightly in length like a pear, and the generator appears, because the humidity covers everything.
And if the humidity is in the own panniculus, then the abscess is opened by cutting and so the doctor believes it to be another humor.
And if the humidity is between the genitals and the white sphincter, then scraping releases the sensation.
And to determine the colour of the humidity, you should observe the colour of the humidity in the abscess as it is expressed by the discharge whose form it precedes; and according to what is observed in the trace of the discharge, judge what lies within.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of it with iron, you should know that you command the patient to be flushed if it is possible for you, and empty his bowels.
Then place yourself supine on your back for any cause for a short time, and lay a moist cloth over it.
And then place yourself on the patient's left side and instruct the assistant to follow their right side, extending their leg from one to two spans at the knee of the genitals down to the opening of the belly.
Then take a sharp knife and cut open the foreskin at its mid-point near the penis.
And make the incision according to the specified distance from the line where you must remove the foreskin, reaching down to the white part of the glans.
And then extract it, observe, and be careful not to cut yourself; your incision should be wide enough to allow the part you are removing to come out easily while carefully examining the incision for any signs of damage or excessive bleeding.
Then carefully pierce the glans with a wide enough puncture to allow all the water inside to be drained out.
And then separate the two lips of the incision with scissors, extend the blade to the parts above; do not touch the suture that the genitals encompass, and cut the blade in that manner as is within your ability. And cut into it as a whole or in pieces, and most importantly its thin edges, because if you do not carefully scrutinize the incision of it, there is no guarantee that the water will not return.
But if you remove that from outside its cavity during the time of your operation, then once you have completed the incision of the blade, return inside it, and properly adjust the two lips of the suture around the genitals, and then treat it just as with the others wounds, provided that it heals.
And if you find that it is corrupted by another illness, then understand that you must close the vessels that are above the suspenders, extract the hernia, and then treat it as we have said.
If water is added in two parts and you know that both are hernias, then incise the part as you have done with the other; and if it appears to be an operation, then perform it yourself.
Then you should cleanse the sore, and enter into its sections, immersing them in oil or rose oil; place another cloth submerged in wine and oil outside, expanding it over both legs and the wonder of the belly; then cover it with folded drapes and poultices, and bind those to the body according to this form:
Then take two sheets of cloth and fill them with wool, according to this form; secure the extremities at which they are joined with wet wool or cotton, and add them to the structure in the crotch of the breeches, one extremity entering between the buttocks and the other at the opening of the leg, and two other extremities on each side, leaving two others over the hips, and all adjustments should be made in the crotch of the breeches.
And in some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of cutting with iron; you take a thin cuttle bone cautery and make incisions at the base of the genitals, and light it according to what we have recommended until the white scrotum containing the water is exposed, and then take cautery in this way: and it is similar to Greek writing.
Then pierce the scrotum, and light it until all moisture is expelled.
Then extend the scrotum with cuts, and scrape it with cuts using a finely lit cautery; cut it as best you can until all is removed; and be careful so that the fire does not touch the patient.
And you should know that this operation is much safer and farther from infection than cutting.
If it causes you discomfort to make an incision or apply cautery, or if there is a discharge of pus, then be sure to treat the condition that causes you harm through the appropriate cure as mentioned.
If the illness is severe and there is no hope for a second operation due to its horrid nature, then perform an incision as we have recommended; and it is at this point, as we have said regarding the meanings, that you will know that this hernia is watery.
Now you know that you must sever the illness on a raised spot, then perform an incision in the area where the pus is lowest, using a wide spatula, and stop the incision according to the length of the body.
And it is the opening that should be wide enough to let all the water out.
And then place your hand over the area to stop the water's flow. And then apply care so that the wound is healed.
If there is any opposition to the outflow of water at that time when you perforate it: this should not be done unless the white panniculi in the orifices of the wound cause opposition and prevent the discharge of water, then know that you must insert into the wound a pen or instrument with which the water from the glands is extracted, whose shape precedes; or apply a small amount to the size of the wound.
And know that the water returns and is retained for about a month or perhaps even longer; and when it is added, then it should be perforated in the same manner as before, so that the disease will also pass its days.
Chapter LXIII. (This appears to be a heading or title, indicating the start of a new section or topic in the medical treatise.)
On sectioning a carnous hernia and its treatment.
You know that in sectioning this hernia, great danger is present for the patient's vital functions; which is why I believe its removal and salvation through a better method is preferable.
And you should remember the operation on that one, as well as the specifics of the incisions.
Therefore, it is said that the apostemas appear in bodies where the veins are composed and this is done for various reasons: either due to a sudden severe congestion of blood in the veins, or because of a blow.
And the color of the apostema varies according to the body's color, and it does not cause pain in itself; however, a severe apostema can occur.
And it is very rare that an abscess hardens, of which the color is dark, and it does not hurt.
And sometimes it is caused by the compression of the arteries, or by the inflammation of those very same structures that have already been perceived as a recurrence, or by the inflammation of veins.
This can be understood as: It is known that inflammation of the arteries causes the abscess to disappear when you compress them with your fingers; and it does not hurt.
That which is caused by vein inflammation does not disperse the abscess for any reason without compression with your fingers.
And it is also possible that on this type, incisions are made and on the other meats; and you insert the knife of the skilled ones, then extract the white bone, and cut the suspenders of the vessels, and tie them, and slice the suspensory of the pus, because after you have cut off all parts from the parts of the bone.
Therefore, if the bone has already attached itself to the inflamed flesh, you must extract the bone and cut it out.
And if there is an adhesion due to any cause within the joint or between what is between the bellies, you must then carefully remove all that adhesion and cut it out with a round incision.
If there is a growth of flesh at the site of the adhesion behind, you must then cut out everything that belongs to it and extract the bone as we have said.
Therefore, after your operation is complete, fill the wound with hot oil and wool; and then take care of it with the other remedies until it heals.
Chapter .LXIV. (46)
On the treatment of a hernia in the side.
It is an abscess that has enveloped the testicles, somewhat similar to a growth, causing difficulty in movement and walking for the patient.
And in the treatment of this ailment, one must be cautious regarding what preceded it, as that is where the cure begins.
However, I have noted that they speak of operation according to what I did initially.
And it is said that you must remove the hernia from its position on an elevated pillow; then, disengage the suspensory of the testicles from below; and hold the genitals with your hand, pressing them down toward the perineum, which has been previously prepared with lard; and have other assistants hold him firmly and stretch him out to his limit.
And then cut with a broad spatula, using a transverse section, along the direction of the vessels while they are still exposed.
And then excise from any remaining part, as we have mentioned regarding the extraction of stones from the temples.
And then insert a needle with a double thread, tie it in the first place where the pain occurs, and do the same again at the end of their course. And then cut them in the middle place with a right section according to the length of the body, and extract what is added due to putrid and corrupt humidity.
And then treat the plague as other plagues, in which you wish to be free, so that the vessels, which do not allow one of two generations, fall, for it is not evil through this.
If a vein is accidentally pierced, you must know if the testicles are extracted or if they are compressed by the veins, in order to prevent them from receiving any nourishment due to the incision of the veins and to ensure their permanence, or compress them so that they do not receive blood.
It appears you've provided only the chapter number "Capitol.lxv." Without additional context or text, it's challenging to guess the content or provide an accurate translation. If this is part of a larger text or a specific section, please include more details for a more precise response.
**On the Care of Intestinal Hernia**
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a tear in the abdominal wall extending from the arteries of the belly, so that the intestines protrude through that rupture into the abdominal cavity.
And this rupture is either of the abdominal wall or of an hernia, and it occurs due to various motive causes: percussion, a blow, a sudden movement, the lifting of some heavy object, or similar factors.
The sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the abdominal wall, is that it occurs gradually over a long period and not suddenly, and it creates an aperture within the abdominal cavity through which the intestines protrude.
And the sign of this (hernias) is when it is due to a tear in the abdominal wall, as it suddenly causes severe pain; and it appears as a different bulge below the ribcage, which is caused by the protrusion of intestines from the abdominal cavity.
And in some cases, the intestine's sac is forgotten, and this is called intestinal hernia.
And in some cases, it is caused by bloating, and in other cases, it runs in the hernia gap, and here it is retained, and this causes great harm to the patient, and in some cases, it causes severe and unbearable pain, especially when pressed.
In the treatment of this illness with herbs, one must be cautious, for it is important to avoid harmful reactions in that individual.
The method of the operation for this condition is to guide the hernia back into its cavity using your hand inside the body, then place a cushion between his legs and lift them up.
Then, narrow the opening of the scrotum where the testes are located on both sides, and incise the scrotum entirely through; then, fix in two folds of the cut section as needed to open the incision with these.
And if the sectioning is according to the amount that you can do, so that from it the bone is completely severed.
Then carefully excise those which are left at the cord of the testes, as long as the white hard stone of each part is discovered.
Then you insert the little finger into where the testicle is, between the white stone, where it is left at the cord of the bone, and between the second stone, and gently dislodge that adhesion which is behind the bone.
Then you hold the cord of the testicles at the openings, and with your left hand pull the white stone towards you, and raise the bone against the stone where the section is made; and order the assistant to stretch out the bone further, and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with complete solution.
And seek out the threads that indicate there is no cause for the hernia enclosed in the hard white ciphe. If you find no cause for it within the patient, then turn your attention to the abdomen below.
Then make an incision in the opening next to the testicles' cord, from which blood and urine flow, as we have recommended in what we have said above.
Then apply wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; and use the dressing we have recommended (and sometimes white cautery is used, as we said before the incision for fear of blood flow, because it has been seen to happen on some occasions) and leave the dressing until it falls off by itself.
If the case is delayed, then hot water should be applied and it should be left on until it falls off as we have said.
And then apply treatment for the disease with other remedies for ailments within until it is healed.
**Chapter LXVI**
**On Ventous Hernia**
In this hernia, no other method has been seen to be effective in its treatment except by iron.
And the first method is thus as we have recommended for hernia, which is to cut open the channels close to the affected area, and then dry the middle portion around the aperture with something that causes it to heal; until the channels fall off.
And treat the disease as we have said, until it is healed.
Chapter .lxvii.
On the displacement that is suffered in the angles (or joints).
Sometimes, as we have said, the joints rupture, and the fragments protrude from the location.
And do not attribute any cause of the hernias to nature; and if they do, it is rare; and return to it at all times.
If the condition prolongs, a fissure may form in the wall within, allowing the hernia to protrude into the cavity; and this happens due to the expansion of the wall in the joints as we have said, which causes the wall to stretch, become weak, and the hernia to protrude.
And the cure for it is done with a cautery in such a way that its application is preceded by the description of the condition.
And sometimes the condition is cured by cutting it with a knife according to this manner: and the disease appears between your thighs, and then you should dry the site of the rupture of the prominent apostemas by making a section according to its extent depending on the quantity of three parts.
And then tighten the white strap that is beneath the knee while it is still uncovered.
And then take the ray and place it over the prominent site of the strap, and press it against the abdomen's point.
And then pinch the two prominent sites on the end of the strap and adjust the suture with one to the other.
And then carefully extract the end of the limb, do not puncture the skin anywhere, nor stretch the muscle excessively, or any other cause that you should know in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
And then apply the cure for wounds, and when you have cut away the filth, cleanse that area and restore the wound until it is healed enough that the muscle contracts and the prominence of rupture is adjusted.
A cautery is better in this place, for it is closer to health.
**Capitol .lxviii.** (Capital LXVIII, meaning 68) - This appears to be referencing a chapter or section title in the treatise, indicating a topic related to medical practice or anatomy.
On the softening of the cord of the testes.
In some men, the cord of the testes is softened because the tissues surrounding it become softened, and great care should be taken with regard to it.
Then it is necessary for the one who is asked to cure the patient that he lay the malady according to his own side, and uncover all the stitches that are softened over the natural stitches; and then that he adjust two lips to the suture.
And if you want, at the beginning, the surplus of the softened stitches can be cut with three or four incisions and a secure suture.
And then cut between the stitches; and then cure for the healing of the other ailments within that they be healed and the filth fall.
Chapter LXIX.
Of castration.
You know that castration is forbidden in our law, but for the sake of remembering it in this book, and not being necessary to recall it except in two ways: one is so that when asked about it by a doctor who knows its cure, he may understand; and the other way is that we sometimes need to castrate other animals, as with horses, bulls, dogs, pigs, and similar creatures.
And therefore it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by constriction or by a cut through a fissure.
In the case of castration by constriction, the surgical method involves cutting off the testicles while they are still soft and hanging down. Then, using your hand, carefully extract the testicles so they do not appear exposed from the incision.
For castration through cutting and sectioning, ensure you have a firm grip on the animal, then use your left hand to press down on the testicles.
Then attach the suspenders, and make an incision on each testicle using a sectioning technique.
And then you cut out those pus that you have removed from some excoriated area. And do not leave any cause untreated from the spleen, but the subtle spleen that is above the veins.
And this method of castration is better, which is done by tying, for strong tying leaves no cause for the testicles so that the beast does not desire copulation.
And then tend to the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LXX (70)
On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one where there is an obstruction in the space in the scrotum containing the testicles, and in the other, it appears as if there are both male and female characteristics, with hair on the perineum (area between the genitals).
And in some cases, this flow of urine from that vein in the scrotum.
In women, there is a difference: the womb of a woman over the vulva has two ovaries like a man's, slightly smaller, and also has the cervix of a man along with two uteruses.
And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women. It is necessary that you know how to insert those tight garments between the parts where the emission of that secretions occurs and cure them with a treatment similar to other ailments.
And in the second kind of men, where urine is secreted from the vein in the scrotum, there is neither treatment nor operation for it.
Chapter .xxi.
Of the springtime and flesh swelling due to causes related to women.
The swelling of the lymph glands is closely related to natural causes, as it is affected and can be felt through observation; in some cases, it becomes enlarged in certain women to such an extent that it spreads as in men and even prevents coitus.
Therefore, if you have an abundance of lymph swelling in your hand or fingers, use your thumb or fingernails to probe.
And do not finish the incision with a single stroke, especially at the point of the knife, to prevent bleeding.
And take care of that which is under cure for the wounds, until it is healed.
The flesh that is born hidden in the depths of the mother's wombs, until it emerges and strongly attaches itself to the exterior parts according to the appearance of a root (and for this reason some first called it "rooted ill"), therefore we must incise it as we incise the tongue, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXII.
**On the Cure for Arthritis**
Arthritis is when the woman's womb is not perforated or a small tear occurs. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to illness that has preceded it, and it is caused by flesh not properly adjusted, or by a subtle and dense effusion.
And it is done either in the region of the mother, or on the sides of the patient, or on the upper part of their body, or on the lower part, and you forbid all movement and engagement and childbirth, and strongly forbid menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is gained by observing the mother, if the pregnancy is visible, then it is recommended; but if it is not visible, then you seek it out with your hands or with a ruler.
If the pregnancy is subtle and is felt in both lips, then you cut and tear it apart.
And it is placed over the two delicate lips, and then your fingers indicate both the most painful spots.
And the woman lies on her back, her limbs extended, and then she forces both lips apart until that subtle pregnancy is ruptured and the pregnancy is opened.
And then take wool and cover it in oil, place it over the area, and apply heat to the spot daily so that the incision does not heal.
If the cyst is large and thick, then cut it with a sharp knife or use a blade of myrtle.
If the swelling is due to food, then suspend it and cut it.
And these are the medicines that stop the flow of blood from wounds, as well as inflammation and dragon's blood, and herbs, adjusted to an album of oil.
And then administer a wide metal needle to prevent the plague from healing quickly.
And hold it for several days, administering warm water from the spring.
And then it is treated as another cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes it happens in the natural origin of other meats, and you will know that you cut according to this manner. This is also for gangrene, for the gangrene which is in the natural state should not be opposed with force in any way.
Chapter LXXIII.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, piles, and red boils that occur in the rectum of women.
Hemorrhoids are caused by the openings of small veins, not by those of larger ones; and they become chronic when the veins have been irritated for a long time; and since old hemorrhoids form knots, they should be treated immediately.
And now that we have discussed the divisions of these conditions and their symptoms, let us also say which receive treatment and which do not.
Therefore it is said that hemorrhoids and piles are when they are in the lower part of the body and do not appear in sensation, then in those cases treatment with iron is not effective.
Those that are in the upper part of the body where sensation is felt, those are the ones that are curable.
And be aware that you should not put a woman in a tight dress and extend her limbs with sharp tools or rough cloth, and cut those with the razors.
And then sprinkle upon those parts the flow of sanctum from one of the powdery substances that scratch like a lion's, thus as with cassia and similar to those.
And then gently stretch their feet for an hour, and place them in cold water.
And if the flow of pus persists, then make a incision for drainage, and remove the accumulated pus, as well as scabs and similar debris.
Then take flour of wheat and mix it with honey, wine, and make a paste with this over the patient's back.
If the abscess has drained, it is good; otherwise, adhere two bandages to the affected area and perform lancing at the nipples.
Then take wool and dip it in vinegar or gallnut extract or nettle juice, soak it in wine, and make a paste at the site; then cover the area with ointment until it heals.
And cure that which is within, that it be healed.
Chapter .lxxiv. (This indicates the chapter number, with Roman numerals)
On the perforation of the eye socket during an accident in the head.
You can observe various special types of abscesses in the head, such as inflammation, swelling, ulcers, scabs, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhagic and suppurative abscesses, and others. And you have already described these ailments and their types, the signs of those, and the treatments for them in detail.
And be aware that I shall discuss in this treatise on gangrene the method you see used most often when dealing with it, and if you wish to know how the operation is performed, listen closely.
So then, consider whether the pain of gangrene in its beginning is sharp, accompanied by percussion and fever, and if you observe swelling there, do not immediately resort to perforation, but treat it with what aids its maturation until the acute symptoms subside.
And now, know that you should bind the woman to a bed with two supports; lay her on her back and position her feet below the waist, spreading her thighs apart, resting her arms by her sides, and securing her with suitable bindings.
Then the midwife should stand at the head of the bed and prepare the instrument that will be used to open the womb, the shape of which will depend on the specific conditions being treated.
And when you wish to use this instrument, hold the head of the knife to the skin of the woman's thigh, and whatever part of the instrument enters the woman should not be larger than the knife's edge and ease the pain. If the instrument is larger than the knife's edge, then you should apply poultices over the skin of the thigh to prevent any further penetration of the instrument into the thigh.
And you should ensure that the knife's edge is positioned above and that the assistant holds the instrument, opening the orifice of the woman while rotating the knife's edge until it is fully open.
When the excitation occurs and it is sensitive to touch, becoming hot and moist, then you should quickly seize that part with a clean cloth to prevent further complications.
And when the sanie (bowel movement) is evacuated, you must place a sponge soaked in warm oil or green oil on the affected area to relieve any stiffness; and hold the compress in the section near the anus.
Then remove the compress from the anus and place a clean, wet woolen cloth over the penis, which has been soaked in water with alums.
And the treatment is considered complete after two days, applying what is suitable for it until it heals.
In some cases, the anus and the affected area are washed with a mixture of water and honey, and then immersed in water heated with nettle or aristolochia (a plant) extracts, and finally treated with the appropriate compress.
If the infection is deep within the anus, you must avoid treating it with fire, but instead focus on the treatments we have mentioned in previous sections.
Chapter .lxxv.
To teach midwives in what manner the living embryos should be treated when they present in an unnatural position.
A midwife must recognize the onset of labor by observing signs in the mother, and when she sees the woman exerting herself during contractions and desires to breathe deeply, she is urged to focus on the position of the baby within her, and hasten its delivery, for this is a sign that birth is taking place naturally. The head of the child should emerge first, or it may be suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Therefore, when you observe these signs, you will know that her abdomen is contracting to expel the child, and as it passes over its head, the second stage begins, and it is freed from those superfluous tensions with a good cleansing.
Whoever is affected by a condition in this part of the body has an unnatural and unworthy plight, for when the drunkenness is upon their feet and the rest of their body is situated before their head and their feet, or their hand is on their foot or at their head, or their head and hand are on their belly, they are greatly twisted on their spine, and it seems like their figures are impossible to describe.
For all these reasons, it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all such cases, and guard against errors and disappointments.
And showing all the signs of these, and what skill is in them to make it understood by what it is and has been about that.
When the birth is upon their head due to natural strength, and it is violent towards the woman, and becomes a difficult part, and sometimes the virtue of him is already weakened, then she should do as the women have it, and apply fennel seed and humid oils.
And then carefully insert the meter between their dilated and fractured edges, or rather, into that with the second instrument, or directly into its nail while it is still moist. And press the woman's belly as the child is being delivered.
If it does not come down, then cover the woman with a mixture of owl's eggs and fenugreek, all ground up.
Then command the patient, take off the bandage, which should be changed, and make them sneeze in that position for an hour, so that the child is delivered shortly.
And if both feet of the child have not been delivered at the beginning, then gently reduce those that are still inside with slow movements. If you do not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a mat and lift her feet up, then carefully position the mat on the ground; and ensure the woman is held so she does not fall due to the impact.
And if the pains do not subside and the fetus dies, then incise them and extract the remains of the fetus or tie the body to the mother's hand with a cloth and remove it carefully, for that will be forgotten.
When the fetus is on its feet, then you should gently push them inside, convert the small one, and slowly extract each one, taking care not to tear them.
Once they are inside the body, then command them to expel it, and make them cough up the condition, for if God wills, it will be forgotten.
And if it is not forgotten what we have recommended, then gradually return the affected part to its natural state until it stops aching, otherwise it will be forgotten about and neglected.
And if it is forbidden to do what we have recommended, then take an infusion of althae and dissolved gum, grind it well in a mortar with a good percussion, and apply it to the pain in the hip joint of the patient, as well as the lower part of their belly. And then apply that compress in distilled water, until the pain subsides.
And when the wounds of the patient have healed, then do the smoldering with myrrh and gently apply it to them. And after the smoldering for an hour, then do you stop it on a cloth, and apply it to sneeze and free the patient's mouth from it, and lift that part of their belly closer to the surface with a lighter compression, as the sensation will soon be forgotten.
The condition of the patient hangs critically from one of its extremities. Use ingenuity to reduce the patient's hand, but if that is not possible, raise the woman's leg and try again.
If raising the leg is not possible, then have the patient lie down, and knock on their thigh bones with a forceful impact, then apply poultices and compresses as needed, according to custom.
If labor has begun, then perform the necessary procedures on the head, and carefully study the reduction of the hand, then gently return the fetus to its natural position, make the woman sneeze, and instruct her to press her abdomen until the pain subsides.
The condition of the fetus is critical, with its arms and thigh muscles contracted and the fascia around it tense. Nurse should have her hand on the baby and gradually turn him this way and that, to ease him.
And as it is and how much it is engulfed, then place your attention on the corner of it where we have recommended oil and gauze.
Then you command the patient to cough little by little, and once you have done this, make a compression on a small cloth and command them to lean on their right side, and then command them to change position; and make them sneeze in this condition. Prepare the exit of the fetus on the side.
When you see the signs of labor from the mother according to this manner, consider and then insert your second finger into your palm within, so that it may be evacuated of humidity.
And if the object is suspended over the face and neck, you should cut through that of the embrocation, so it does not get stuck and die.
Then gently pull the object apart until it stops moving, and instruct the woman to compress it for some time, and then slowly extract it with ease, if God wishes.
The outcome of twins or multiple fetuses. You should know that twin births are common, and sometimes it is three or four, which is strange and rare; however, these may be due to natural causes, and not alive.
And regarding these cases, whether they are multiplied, a second one, and they are separated by counting, distinguish those within the ligament in each other's navel; some births may be lost this way, just as a single fetus may disappear naturally; however, some births may also be lost in an unrecoverable manner, just as we have described.
And if certain aspects of their condition prove difficult to treat and you arrive at what we have mentioned regarding unnatural shapes, then care for them thus as we have described.
And if the midwife is subtle and makes it easy and swift, and uses her ingenuity according to each figure as she prepares them with the tools for health.
Reminder that it is formed in the womb from embryos and aborts.
Sometimes they are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more, and it is necessary to have verified that a woman who has had an abortion does not become pregnant again, and another who is completely formed causes pain due to the measurement of the wise sages.
And all of this should be in the science of midwifery, how strong they must be to that young one resembling this, and therefore pay close attention to it so as to cover.
Capital .lxxvi. (Capital [or Main point] 76)
On removal of the dead fetus.
When you cure the dead fetus as we have discussed in the division of treatment and it is not outside the body, and you are compelled to use manual operations, then consider whether the woman is of sound health and not prone to any conditions that might lead to her loss during the procedure.
Now consider that the woman should be placed face up on her back, and her head tilted downward, and her legs raised.
And the midwife should hold both parts or be placed on the bed to prevent the body's contents from spilling out during the removal of the fetus.
And then moisten the mouth of the patient with scents of cold humors, and with mud from alder and fenugreek and fennel seeds.
Then the midwife places her hand with those scents and muds, enters it with ease into the mother, and seeks the place where the cuts are made on the fetus.
And the appropriate place for this is: therefore consider if the fetus is ready to be born on its head, and then make cuts in the heels of it, or at the collarbone, or in the mouth, or on the palate, or leave the beard, or in the fork of it, or in the places near the ribs, or leave the hypochondria.
If the birth is on the feet of the fetus, then in the pubis or in the middle of the ribs.
And it is necessary that he hold the thumb with his right hand, bend it at that place which is between the fingers of his left hand, insert his finger with ease and keep the thumb in one of those places we have mentioned, until he reaches the affected cause.
Then he should hold and stay in the position of it with another thumb, or the third if necessary, so that it is equally attracted, and not extended according to its natural state only.
And thus it is beneficial for the whole process, so that the manifestation of it is also alleviated as is done in various cases during the eradication of it.
And pay attention to what is between them that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife should apply some of her chosen herbs in oil and insert them skillfully and turn them over in that which is retained.
Therefore, if the fetus' position is overlooked, then the incisions should be changed to wherever there is more discharge; and do this until the entire fetus is delivered.
If the hand is positioned away from the other and cannot be reduced due to the hernia's tightness, then a cloth should be wrapped around it; and then extract it once everything is outside, cutting it either at the joint of the hand or in the thigh.
And likewise, do the same for the other hand and both feet.
If the fetus' head is large, or there is compression in its presentation, or it is in a position of water-head, then insert between the sharp edges and cut off the water, or discover an instrument called "alundat", which resembles other instruments described in the appropriate chapter.
And it seems that this work is of great importance by nature: and now you will see that it cuts into that flesh or takes hold of that swelling just as we have said, and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is situated and constricted, then its fork should be cut through so that the humidity in the foot can be drained.
If it is not complicated and does not violate any rule, then you should cut off the head as soon as possible.
And if the discharge from the belly is apothematous or hydrophilic, then you must perforate that part through which the humidity in it flows.
If the work is above their feet, then the attraction of it should be light and the direction towards the mother's opening should also be light.
If the abdomen and foot are cramped, you must remove that thick cloth you have wrapped around your hand, and cut open the abdomen and foot until what is inside flows out.
If other members are stuck and the head cannot be turned, then the left hand should be inserted; if the opening of the mother is blocked, then insert the hand into the opening of the womb, and seek to catch that by the hair, and pull it inside the mouth of the mother, and then insert one, or two fingers, and pull it towards you.
And if the opening of the mother is blocked by an abscess that occurs in the womb, then do not force it; instead, you should first minimize its swelling by applying hot compresses or similar treatments. And apply poultices, and follow up with the patient in warm waters that soften and moisturize.
And if the condition is on their side, try to tilt them as much as possible; and administer what we have mentioned regarding the living body.
And if this is not possible, then make an incision in the leg, and extract it.
And be sure not to leave any cause within the second incision.
And when you have completed all your operations, administer what we have mentioned regarding the treatment of scars from the heat that arises from the fire.
And if bleeding occurs from the wound, stop it with strict water and administer the other treatment.
And you have already seen a woman whose belly was filled with dead children, and again over that fire another embryo is conceived, and again out of that dead fire comes another birth. It happened that after a long time an abscess formed in his leg; it swelled until it opened like fire, and he began to feel pain.
And you have been called upon to treat them, and medicated for a long time, but the disease is not cured.
Then you should pause over them due to various causes and apply strong plasters, and extract an oss (bone), and after a few days, another bone will be extracted; and you will be too amazed when there is no bone in the belly.
And then you will realize that they were bones of the fetus who is dead.
So you will continue to treat the disease, extracting many bones, correcting their positions, and already healing in such a manner for a long time, alleviating a little of the pain.
And do not be afraid that it is strange, for in this there is knowledge and aid to the patient, as the physician uses his hand for treatment gently.
On the forms of instruments necessary to extract the hernia.
Form of the instrument used to open the hernia:
This is the form of a forceps in which the jaws are curved, with two cutting edges on both ends of the feet. However, this forceps should be made to be very subtle in its grip, and can be crafted from ebony or wooden sticks.
And the thickness of each stick should be such that two fingers can fit between them, and their margin at one end should be a finger's width, with a length of half a palm; in the middle part of the sticks, there should be two fixings made from the same sticks, whose length is equal to a palm and a little less, and whose breadth is two fingers or slightly less.
And these two additions are to be placed in the mouth of the hernia so that it opens as you apply the prescribed virtues.
Another form, similar to that subtle and light pus:
It should be made of tough wood or iron, according to the strength of tweezers. However, in the extreme case, two additional parts can also be used, and the length of these additions is about one palm, and the width of each is about two fingers.
And when you want to open the hernia, you should lay the patient down with their feet hanging, opening what is between their thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument, similar to shears, according to the quantity you want from the hernia's mouth, as long as the meter indicates that it's enough.
The way of vertigo which the ancients spoke of:
The method of pushing which is used to propel the process:
The method of healing as described, which focuses on the greatest problem:
And it is assembled like forceps with teeth at the end, also when using, and sometimes it is made long as per this form, also when using, which has teeth similar to a sawtooth with which it cuts and penetrates. Methods of healing rarely:
The method of incisions without a spur:
The method of double incisions without spurs:
A type of spatula with two ends, one of which is used to separate the head:
A form of two spatulas wide:
All those instruments are practiced, and when the number of their species is multiplied and they are properly prepared for use, then they become lighter in handling and more useful to the artisans and to people in general because of their quantity.
And do not neglect those instruments that are already available to you, for the need for others is not an excuse.
From the extraction of the secondine (a medical term for a type of tissue or structure, possibly referring to a specific part of the body).
When the second stage of childbirth is reached, you must command the patient to hold their breath and make them sneeze in that position, then place your hand over their mouth and nose, if they exhale outside, so be it.
And if that happens, take a blade and pierce the cover at a point, then place in the mouth of the mother herbs soaked in warm water and ginger, fennel, licorice root, chamomile, and cinnamon bark. All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the vessel, and then placed over the fire.
And then place a canvas tube in the mother's mouth, and hold it until the vapor reaches the concave part of her mouth.
And do as we have said, so that the second birth is brought about quickly.
If the Roman method of this treatment is followed and not abandoned, command the midwife to immerse her left hand in hot oil or an infusion of alder, then insert it into the anus and carefully seek out the second one, and once found, gently pull it out little by little; if it is attached to the mother's body, then insert her second hand as we have previously mentioned, and when she finds the second one, extract it slowly according to the prescribed method so that the mother does not suffer intense attraction. Begin by changing the position of the sides, right and left, as is easiest.
If the mother's opening is narrow, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and herbal medication.
If all the causes we have mentioned are not forgotten, be careful not to do anything in excess during extraction, but know that what comes out of the hernia into the mother's mouth is a matter for women, and treat it with a mixture of herbs and tetracycline; for this will eventually putrefy, dissolve, and be forgotten.
When it appears, there is a high noise from the liver to the head and stomach, which causes the patient's suffering; and then know that fumigations and appropriate remedies should be administered.
Some of the ancients already used fumigations of nasturtium and dried figs.
The form of the instrument used to fumigate women for the retention of menstruation and postnatal bleeding:
Make an incision or a tear.
And the fine end of the tool should be in the cavity and the broader end over the fire, and the smoke should be restricted above the arms of the fire.
And hold that until the smoke is consumed, and repeat another.
On the cure of the unpierced child's anus.
Many children have this, and the anuses of these infants are not pierced, which is already slightly closed and swollen. Then instruct the midwife to pierce it as she has said, and if not, pierce it with a sharp instrument, and be careful not to touch the feces.
And then apply pressure over that cloth soaked in wine and oil; and carefully tend to that paste until it is calm.
If there is a risk of it becoming blocked, apply pressure on the trail using a catheter for several days, and hold it when the child wants to pass it.
And it also happens that the oppression in the anus occurs for the formation of a plague or abscess; then, once that consolidation is incised, it should be treated with water and lead as we have said regarding treatment and plaster.
Regarding the treatment of fistulas that have formed.
Fistulas that form in the anus exude a foul-smelling, thick fluid, which can be seen protruding from the rectum or in the space between the buttocks.
And it is a fistula or ulcer.
And when that contraction is old and due to the flow of moist white pus or subtle corruption, sometimes these fistulas penetrate from them.
And those that penetrate are known by what is expelled from them through the exit and by their pus; and sometimes the patient suffers from the difficulty of exiting, and very often they are filled with vermin.
And regarding those fistulas, some are found in the spaces penetrating into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and others penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the nose of the scrotum.
And for the case where the fistula is found to penetrate into the anus but not exit, you should insert a thin, sharp probe or iron into the anus, and attempt subtle traction on the fistula when it is not too tight.
If there is stiffness in that area, then insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the stiffness or hair in the proper place.
And if you do not feel any of these, nor do you detect any cause for discharge or swelling, as we have said, then you know it is non-penetrating, and you should cease treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the significance of it is the emission of urine from that area and the prohibition of its use until the location is healed by medicine.
If it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the surrounding area, then its sign is that the stiffness penetrates here if there is no stiffness within the bone, and pain in the circulation; and it causes putrefaction at all times; and it does not respond to any treatment, nor is it healed by unguents.
And in all those penetrating ulcers, there is no complete cure, and the cure for those requires work and patience from skilled doctors on whom they rely.
But for those that are not penetrating or recent, healing with iron is hoped for according to what I have advised you, and what you have already experienced.
And indeed, the disease moves between your legs over its joints and raises the patient's legs within, the parts are inclined towards the patient's belly, and then attempts to insert lead, or iron if it is in a narrow fistula, knowing the place where the attempt should be made.
And if that feels like the disease is around the heart, then you must insert your finger deeply into the chest.
And if you feel the attempt in the finger already has made itself open to penetrate, or if you feel something between the finger and that flesh, then you will surely know that it is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that, because there is no cure in that, as we have said.
However, some say that it heals certain people suddenly.
And regarding the treatment by which one hopes for rapid improvement in the patient, that is to use subtle cautery according to the extent of the fistula, as mentioned above, and introduce this ignited thread into the fistula until it reaches around the core; then repeat this process two or three times until you know that all those flesh tissues attached to the fistula, which are similar to a quill of downy hair, have healed.
Then, wrap those with calgue (ganglions) in bandages until all those tissues that are attached heal, and treat the affected flesh with medicinal ointments that nourish and strengthen it; if it heals well, that is good; otherwise, it will not heal at all through any other treatment.
If the attempt enters and does not penetrate deeply enough to reach the base, and between that and the attempt there is a space filled with flesh or bone, and the fistula is in such a way that it opens on the surface of the skin, then dry the skin at the beginning of the fistula, and watch as the attempt dries too; once the attempt has dried, it is released and removed.
And then clean those fistulated meats that are assembled like a tube of quill pen and not torn from any cause.
If a flow of pus appears between you and your operation when examining those meats, then the best action is to use a clean instrument either cauterized with fire or acute medicine, for cautery with fire adjusts both openings: it suits the attached meats and severs the pus from the humidities.
And then tend to those wrapped in bandages or bound by cause within that area, and take care of the plague with hot, hard flesh-engendering and consolidating treatments.
And such medicines that involve stopping and cutting; when the healing is already restored, it is free from recurrence.
But if the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and is extended from the surface of the body, then insert a small finger into the anus and inquire about that.
And therefore if you feel the attempt and between you and it is visibly infected or of flesh, and it is prone to penetration, then it is not an operation on it but rather a way of trust and hope.
The treatment for this condition can be administered in three ways: either by cauterization as mentioned earlier; or by drying out the affected area to achieve its cavity so that you can insert certain remedies; and do not make a complete amputation because it would prevent you from inserting the probe containing the pus, and you might cause further damage to the patient's will; and take care of it as we have said for it to heal well; or elongate this veil and drain the pus from within close to the anus, as mentioned earlier, or try another attempt or use another instrument of extreme sharpness, and then clean those fistulated meats which are in the section you can access through incision; and make every effort to restore the entire wound through incision, and if the pus opening on top does not heal, and the fistula remains open at the anus, it will become lighter due to the disease. And in some cases, the fistula is ended in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, it is at the side of the anus near the surface of the body and on the margin of the anus, then take the probe of the perforating extremity, which is thus prepared with a needle in this form:
and insert yourself into that wound wrapped in cloth or around those; then, insert the probe into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
If it is penetrating the margin of the anus very deeply, then extract the wound from there, thus inserting the probe into the anus; extract the end of the wound and align both ends, then stretch each one, leaving it for a day or two, and when you again insert the wound into the flesh, be sure to do so between the two extremities of the wound, which are separated.
And then apply a cure for the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
If the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in some way that you are prepared, either with heat or with a sharp object, since it is not for you to incise the wound; and then apply a cure for it until it is healed.
The shape of the spatula with which the fistula is incised: its curvature is sharp and one edge is not sharp, so as not to cut unnecessarily when you use it.
Of the stitching of hemorrhoids where there is bleeding during the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids occur in two ways, either they are between the buttocks resembling coal, or those are with the skin like ragged grass. And they are small and large, and the fever runs from them at that time, it is one, hot, very intense, and in the ends of it.
However, those that are very intense in the ends (of the body) often correspond to a few humors with a low moisture content, from which citrus-colored or slightly feverish blood continues to flow, and they depend on the body's color.
And the treatment for that which is within the chest is to order the patient to rest and press, between when the chest burns and the hemorrhoids appear before you. Then you take care and suspend yourself with hooks or what you have at your disposal, and return those things to their roots.
If the hooks are not held in those parts due to their moisture and softening, then take those as rough cloth or leather or woolen threads, remove them with your fingers, and then cut those and sprinkle some powdered herbs over them after the incision, so that they adhere to those at the place of cauterization, or cauterize them as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization. And then attend to those and other remedies until they are healed.
If the hernia does not yield to treatment, then lacerate the malady with lances where there is a small bite, wash it with water that is in the wound and which hinders the hernia's exit more lightly when the malady presses.
But if the hemorrhoids are external in the buttocks, their cause is slight, and it is because you take those with your finger, or those with a horn, and cut them, and then attend to them with water as mentioned above until they are healed.
For those who are skilled in incision, here is how to perform suture according to this method: take a thread wrapped around and insert it into an needle, then extract the hemorrhoids from their positions above, and make the needle penetrate into the root of the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread on the side away from the needle, stretching them laterally; tighten the hemorrhoid with strong traction, tie the thread, and remove the needle.
And do this continuously, leaving none of them untouched, so that the excess of blood flows from that one.
Then place your weight on the linen cloth dipped in hot oil or wax; press it onto the wound and instruct the patient to rest. And leave that inside the wound; and when it heals, treat those with ointment or other remedies until they are cured.
And since these are old and no longer effective in that medicine, you will find that you press those with the point of a spatula or with your finger into wet wounds to drain the pus from them, which prevents their hardening; and then treat those until they have hardened.
Then you should stop those parts that are inflamed and painful, as the first enters, and take care of those that need to be healed.
You know that hernia is crucial, and it appears as a red bulge in the body, similar to a knucklehead, and it is felt throughout the body but more particularly in the joints of the feet and legs, and precisely through those pains, you should attend to it.
And so, you should incise what is in the region of the hernia, and hold it with forceps or a hook, and eradicate it from its attachment, and then take care of that.
And if you wish, cauterize according to what is mentioned above in its chapter.
May it be a small, sharp, round ulcer raised on the surface of the body, and spots are often seen in children's bodies.
And the treatment for it is to extend and incise that, or open it with a sharp instrument within the wound. And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine, as we have said.
May it be a small, hardened or rounded lump on the body's surface that itches and when pressed, feels like a mosquito bite, and it is widespread throughout the body.
And the treatment for it is to take a sharp needle from an oak or a viper, and make it strong, and press it onto the mosquito within the circle of the needle's points; then, turn your hand over the needle as you pierce what is in the mosquito's path, and place it on the flesh, and eradicate the mosquito from its root.
And if you wish, make this as a tube of silk or iron in this form:
The beginning of the tube should be delicate, soft (not perforated), wrapped around itself so that the appearance of it is preserved and the revolution of that one is avoided.
And if you wish to cauterize the wound as mentioned above in the cauterization of a thorn in the chapter on cautery.
In the form of instruments that are administered to give cryotherapy.
Sometimes cryotherapy is done with silver or iron or silk that has been melted and molded; and sometimes it is done with small or large instruments according to those used, for the cryotherapy administered to young children should be small; and for those whose anus are sensitive or painful, the cryotherapy of these should be small.
The method of making a large and few cuts:
The top of the bag should be wide according to this method, and it is distinguished where the bag is attached in the same way with various times.
And the end of it is placed below, which enters into the anus, should be blunt (not pointed), moving with subtlety; and on one side of its length are two channels, and on the other side one channel, and the width of the channel depends on the thickness of the rays and more specifically a little.
And the bag in which the medicines of bladder of an animal or of sheep's skin are paused, and its length is a palm.
And it is perforated through many channels in the same way as it is twisted; and if the space between the channels is thick, then that should be considered.
And then insert a strong, sharp knife into these passages, whether they are closed or open; adjust the bag to it; and when the bag is placed in position, tighten it firmly around the patient's crotch between two strong constrictors, and then apply the cautery to each passage: The quality of cauterizing these is that you fill the bag with medicine, heated according to the severity of the illness, and be careful not to cut too deeply or too superficially.
Then have the patient lie on their back, raise their legs up on supports, and place a cushion under them, over which they should rest their body, either on men or a bedpan; apply the tip of the cautery to oil or egg albumin or a paste of fenugreek or similar; insert it into the anus with ease, and have the assistant take hold of the bag and squeeze it twice, exerting force so that everything in the rectum is evacuated; then remove the cautery and the patient should raise their legs against the wall.
And if the medicine forces him to vomit, take as much as you can; and if he sleeps with it for the whole night, it is more beneficial for healing.
If you believe that applying heat to the pain of stomach solutions and vomiting helps it, then use the cautery until it is healed.
And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or fistulas bleeding, then use a gentle heat and the cauteries whose tips are made for children.
**Treatment of Plagues**
You have already mentioned in the discussion of the treatment of plagues what is suitable for the body, and you have thus given the cure for those with great pain and using medicines according to their strength.
Therefore, it says that plagues are diversified according to where they are produced by the plagues and according to the place on which the plagues fall.
And the causes for which plague spreads are also due to the breaking of stones, or incision of space or of skin, or striking with a spear, or with a club, or with an arrow, or similar to those causes that bring about sudden illness.
Plagues that are in the places of the body may also be like plague which strikes on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the stomach, or the chest, and similar to those members.
And it is often recommended for the treatment of certain plagues, to stop that reasoning and regulate about other plagues.
And one should begin with the simple plagues of the head, since the remembrance of the composed ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, it is said that when a simple headache occurs and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to the pressure of stone or something similar, and you have already squeezed the neck as much as possible and it is a great pain and you fear the progression of the malady with the formation of abscesses, then you should immediately perform a cerebral puncturing and drain the fluid according to the quantity of virtue (it) contains, unless there is any other cause prohibiting cerebral puncturing, especially if the abscess that has formed from the headache is small.
And cerebral puncturing is the opposite of the previous treatment; and pay attention to the patient's state of rest, diet, and avoid heavy foods.
If, however, any cause prohibits drainage, then reduce the diet and do not approach meat or wine.
And focus on the malady; if it develops into a cautious abscess, apply hot oil or wine in which a cloth has been steeped to it.
If you are certain of the septicaemia, rest over the wound, if it is fresh and its pus and the air have not changed the powder that I will tell you to apply properly.
And if the air has already changed that, rest on some poultices until it is healed.
But if the wound is large or made by a sharp object and the edges of it are not well adjusted for healing due to lack of proper care, then adjust them with sutures as I will tell you about the suture method.
But if the wound has already exposed bone and tendon, and it is not a deep one but rather a small suspended one, then incise it and properly treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh appropriately in the area of concern, and order for the patient to abstain from foods that are harsh: fruits and vegetables that are hard and similar in texture to them, until it heals.
If you find putrefaction in the bone that does not adhere to the bone, you will cut off all the rotted parts and remove them, then take care of it.
If these plagues involve an artery or vein from which pus flows and it is not drained by medications, then you should investigate the artery. If you find one that is not incised, you will cut it with a knife or tie it; and if cauterization is required to prevent the pus from draining while the infection is being treated, do so.
If these plagues are simple and small, their cause is often slight; so you sprinkle over them this powder, for it hardens before the air changes those.
The method of the powder is as follows: mix together one part olive oil from crushed sesame seeds, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts ground, unextinguished ash; thoroughly grind and sift it all, fill the plague with it, and tightly wrap it to ensure it adheres, then coagulate it with the pus.
And then tighten it from above with poultices and leave it, and do not loosen it while it is in that state so that the medicine does not escape until it is healed.
And at other times, it can be treated alone with cautery, when there is no fever or dragon's blood present.
And this surgical procedure is also performed on great plague sores when it is appropriate to pause them and tighten them, and only recent ones with fresh blood, whose air has not been altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially during summer, then it is not understood to be in the position of this powder, but instead, treat them as we have said, by pausing over these blisters with a mixture of vinegar and honey, or pause over the pores of the earth's order mixed with water and honey until they are cured; and then treat those with other remedies until they are healed.
If a fracture of the bone occurs in a small place, then you extract it with your hand.
And now, I will tell the cure for skull fractures that are dangerous.
Of the ailments of the collarbone.
If the fracture occurs in the collarbone, its treatment is not different from other fractures; nor is it as complex as a skull fracture.
If the nerves or arteries of the collarbone are injured, then, since it is a nerve, treatment should not be aggressive but rather focus on avoiding harm to it as if it were poison, using things like vinegar and similar substances that soothe and do not irritate the nerves or cause tension. And do not apply any treatment to the pain without first understanding its cause, for the substance of the nerves is affected and their continuity leads to the brain, which is the source of all the body's members.
And if it is treated with lighter medications, it is also washed with hot water, sometimes with olive oil or not, and rubbed while washing with hot water and other herbs according to this method, and moistened with humidity.
But if the pain is severe, then apply a suture, or tighten the edges of the wound, and once it is healed, take care with powders inside.
But if the pain is deep or there is pus in it, and a severe abscess has formed, then perforate it at the most painful point.
But if in the pain an artery is already incised and blood flow results, then separate or dry it, tie it off, or cauterize it if that is necessary to stop it from causing more harm.
If you have already incised the spinal columns of the chest or entirely, having saved the collar bones' veins, then adjust the edges of the wound with sutures over the rib cage and do not touch it; equalize it and return it to its natural shape, and then stretch it gently with decent tension, leaving it for a few days; and take care of it with poultices in which there is stiffness and excitation until it heals.
If the infection has already taken hold in the bone, then probe it and if there are any fragments within, extract as many as you can; leave what does not seem infected until the plague has dissipated, separated and removed from it.
And if the infection is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder that has been recommended to you. If the infection has caused a fistula, then treat it with the water from which the memory of the cure will come, appropriately in its chapter.
If it is a lance or a sword that has pierced them, and they show deep penetration, then consider more seriously if the plague has an air of toxicity when the patient's condition worsens; then you will know that the plague is fatal.
And if there is no deep penetration and the plague is recent, then you should apply powder to it in the first hour; do not press too hard so that the swelling does not remain in depth and return to the heart, but rather apply a more attractive ointment, and wipe it twice a day.
And if you do not have an ointment, then apply a cloth cut from the affected area to draw out what comes from moisture; and make the patient rest on the plague so that what is in it flows properly.
If the disease has passed three days or more and does not cause spasms or tremors in the heart, nor constriction of the arteries, and other good dispositions follow, then you will know that the illness is cured; and from there, treat it with cool applications and other remedies until it is healed.
If the healing of the disease is prolonged and still open, then you will know that a fistula has formed; so treat it according to its nature.
And if the disease is due to an incision of the skin or cartilage, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it as follows: with stitching if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
If it has already taken hold in the bones, and you have already made incisions in the flesh, then press the disease and extract the affected parts if they are separated. If they are not separated, then leave them as they are, for the disease may spread if you try to remove them.
And for other accidental diseases in other parts, the youth (or treatment) in cure is similar to what we have said.
Of abdominal diseases.
The disorder that occurs in the stomach is either great, or slight, or medium.
And for minor disruptions, it is difficult to reduce them by another method, and I note that their return to the cavity is more difficult if you do not insert them into their place immediately, as they open and swell, making it difficult to insert them.
And therefore the best disruption is halfway, for in that there is no difficulty in reducing the hernia, as it is difficult in both the two species mentioned above.
And know that the suture of the abdomen is according to four manners, but two sutures are common that are suitable for sutures in other diseases of the body.
And the other two sutures communicate with other diseases, but nevertheless, they are more proper for the suture of the abdomen.
And I recommend to each of you exposition and declaration.
Therefore, it is said that when the disease is small and there is no cause of hernia from within, and it is difficult to reduce it, then this is in one of two ways: either because of the narrowness of the disruption as we have mentioned, or when the hernia has come due to inflation from the cold air.
And therefore, when this occurs, it is necessary that you wash the affected area with a sponge or cloth soaked in lukewarm water, or use water containing vinegar, salt, and spices, and apply it to the hernia until the swelling subsides.
And in some cases, they use vinegar, which helps in the resolution of inflammation.
And when you see that the swelling is resolved, then moisten the hernia with water containing high amounts of aloe and marshmallow, for this alleviates its pain due to a slight cause.
However, if the pain persists after this treatment, cut open the hernia using a small instrument with which hemorrhoids are incised.
And the initial treatment is better when it does not involve cutting, and there should be no concern about drying it out completely, nor should it be deprived of nourishment.
Of the instrument, consider its form:
In one part of the acute torsion, and in the other part not acute, and at the fine extremity, it is not that the subtlety of the cut be sharp, but rather obtuse a bit.
And therefore, when the illness has intensified and the hernia has protruded, it is necessary to return it to its reduction according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible on that part, for it is better.
If the rupture is extensive, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you must have the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; but if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you must raise the head and feet higher than the affected parts.
And similarly, if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the belly, you must pause your intention and consideration at that point so that the part affected by the illness is higher than the other.
And thus it is that you must administer this in great pains and in milder pains as well.
And in smaller pains, apply what you have prepared, and then make the medicine flow between your fingers, holding it with your hand, adjusting the edges, and uncovering from one point to another to see if any cause is found for the rupture.
And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or count one according to the amount of the width of the wound; then lay it at the end of the rupture from the middle finger, and tighten the needle once; avoid inserting the needle into both ends of the thread, but rather let it penetrate from the other side; thus you have added two ends of the thread and two ends of the needle, making four orders.
Then tighten the thread double around the needle, and in some cases join both parts together, and add the two edges of the wound with a decent stitch; lay the thickness of your finger on it and insert another needle through it, just as you did with the first; do not stop doing this for the needles until you have filled all the contraction of the wound.
And the needles should be of varying thicknesses, for the thin needles pierce the flesh slightly; and the thick ones are difficult to insert into the wound, therefore it is necessary that they be both medium and thin in thickness.
And it is necessary that the needle be inserted into both ends of the wound at once, so that the flesh is not pierced too deeply and the injury heals before its consolidation.
And the sutures should not be too long, so that the wound is not hindered from healing.
Then you should cut the ends of the needles off so that they do not lacerate the patient during their sleep; and place over the sutures powdery substances from all sides, which will hold the ends of the needles; and remove them when you know that the wound is healed.
And these kinds of stitches are most conveniently done with needles in any manner for small wounds, since it is enough to sew them with one needle or two or around those.
The second suture is as follows: it is because you administer a suture to all four limbs, from the thigh and both limbs of the body, at once, with an needle in which thread is tightly wrapped, in a manner that suits both fineness and thickness.
And then, when the needle has penetrated these four limbs, withdraw the needle from that end of the thread by which you began, so that the thread retracted draws the wound closed and the suture is like a second stitch with which the bandages are tightened.
And between each suture, maintain the quantity of the thickness of the said thread.
And this suture heals men.
And I have carefully sewed up the wound that had occurred in a man's belly, which had been cut by a knife, and it was the rupture of the main plague, about two palms from the opening of the hernia, and the disruption was in the middle of the member; and then I returned that part to its cavity where the hernia had been for twenty-four hours.
And the wound became consolidated within fifteen days or so, and I treated it, and it healed; and then I watched over him for many years, and he returned to his former state.
And other doctors had judged that it would not heal; yet by a miracle of God, as you would not cure him with any ointment or medicine, I placed my hand on the wound twice a day and washed it daily with honey water until it healed.
But I will tell of two kinds of sewing, according to the narrative of the Word.
And so you begin to stitch the wound, and insert the needle from outside towards the inside.
And as the needle penetrates the wound and passes through according to its direction and length in all parts of the body, leave the tip of the thread on which you have inserted the needle; and make the other end of the thread pass from inside to outside at the other end of the cut.
And when you have made the first penetration, make another penetration in that end of the wound from outside to inside; leave the tip of the thread on this side, and insert the needle into the other end of the cut from inside to outside.
And make another penetration with the needle that you use to penetrate the thread into the wound, at the end of the sight within which all of it will penetrate.
And then it begins to draw this medicine from the side where it has entered, and takes it back into that vein and aligns the extremity of the hypodermic needle that is on the other side with this extremity of the mirror; and draws out that one from the vein which is on its part.
And do this once and then again, and continue doing this until you have treated everything that is outside according to that example.
And the sum of this method of sewing is that you sew with a needle to which hair is attached, thus sewing the flesh; so you sew the hypodermic one time from the part of the end of the vein, and then you continue to sew until it is completely closed.
But the second species of sewing, which is truly worthy of mention, and this one is spoken of by doctors, is that you sew it with a second thread by which some physicians sew it, adding all parts to its proper part according to nature; and apply the end of one part of it to the other end of it, and this is done as you have been taught.
Ensure that you hold the needle at the end of your sight, aimed towards your own body, and penetrate it through the opening inside that joint, leaving two ends of the cipher; then turn around the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside through both ends of the cipher.
Then turn around those parts, making some penetrate from inside out through the opening in two ends of the joint other than the opposite side.
And this method of stitching is better than the common light stitching, and it's a stitch of which one remembers preceding.
This is the speech of Gaul.
And they might say, the stitching of the belly is rectified with two needles; so you insert a thread into some of these, beginning with the needle from which you should start, and make it penetrate through the other side according to the stitching of those whose hearts are intertwined.
And you should know that when there is a rupture in the middle part of the abdomen, closing it becomes more difficult than with other parts of the abdomen.
The treatment of plague should be judged according to other plagues.
Which is because when you discover a new plague with its sore in front, the air alters it, and you return the intestine to its place, and sew it up and treat it properly, then you should pay attention to that powdery flesh.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then you should focus on the pus that is present, making it hard and causing the flesh to turn black, and let it be solid and heal; and treat it accordingly as with other plagues until it heals.
If you do not have any medicines at hand, then focus on these as soon as possible, since it begins to feel hot, red, and swelled, and changes color twice a day, just as you have been taught, until it heals, for you should not need other types of treatment with such simple plagues.
If you fear that the infection may spread to the vital members, then cover them with a woolen lion in oil of good quality or olive oil, and place it in the area between the angles and leave the sleeves open.
And if pain or putrefaction is felt in their intestines, as these are signs of urgency, then you should apply a cold compress of black vinegar, especially if the hernia has been opened and the intestinal wall is protruding into the cavity.
And know that the one originating from larger intestines has a lighter chance of healing compared to the one in the smaller intestines.
And it is difficult to heal because the hernia called "gegunu" does not receive healing from any plague occurring in it; this is due to the great number of veins present there, the magnitude of the hernia, the subtlety of the body part affected, and its proximity to nerve nature.
If what you process from the illness is the fabric, and you obtain that raw, reduce it according to your recipe by which you reduce hernias generally.
If it has been left in the space and has turned red or black, then you should tighten the bandage over the area affected by it, so that pus flows, for within the fabric there are veins and arteries.
And then you cut what is another part of the bandage, and place two extremities of the bandage outside the infected area, so that by moving it away from you, the attraction of it should be removed, along with the fabric's contraction and the plague's discharge.
Remembrance of the plagues that occur in the intestine.
When there is a disruption in the intestine and it is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people, so you may see one who was previously plagued by it in their abdomen through the use of lances, and the plague was from the right side of the stomach, an old plague with fistulas, and treatment involved managing and ventilating it.
Then pursue the cure of the patient, even if it was not confirmed in their healing, but continue to apply that which brings heat to the wound and the location is consolidated.
And if you see the location consolidated, pay attention to the disease that afflicts him from the accident of evil in his belly; do not attempt anything for this ill-fated accident and break up his healthy dispositions by eating and drinking, and then immerse himself in water and exercise himself as he wishes.
And some experienced ones say that when this plague in the intestine is small, it should be tied according to this manner: take a large needle; adjust both lips of the plague and place a needle from those that keep the mouth open over both lips of the plague; then as he takes hold of those and tightens his mouth, cut off the head of it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then place another needle close to the first, and do not stop this from making needles one after another according to the quantity of all the plague.
And then return it, compressing and healing it; and detach those appendages of the hernia inside until the hernia is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
And it is possible that the hernia may be a thin, fine thread made from animal intestines, finer than a needle; so take the end of these intestinal threads, stripped bare, and approach the end of it to a thread wrapped around a needle, and insert this thread through the hernia, and return it to its place.
And this method of stitching with catgut is nothing but a second way of trust and hope.
If the hernia is large and extensive, especially if it is in one of the delicate hernias, then it requires a delicate approach, as it is not a simple cure but a complex one.
On the treatment of wounds and fistulas.
You know that every wound and abscess that forms due to aging and becomes chronic, develops into a ulcer that does not heal and persists for a long time, is universally called a fistula in any part of the body, and we call it this disease "ulcer.
A fistula, in truth, is a closed, hard, white substance to which pain is not associated, and it has a hollow space similar to that of a cavity caused by external injury; for this reason, it is called "ulcer," that is, pain.
In some cases, the ulcer is moist, which causes swelling; and in a short time, the moisture is absorbed, leading to pain. Sometimes this moisture is abundant, and sometimes it is scarce, thick or thin.
All those causes have been shown, and the signs of them and their cures with medicines are described in the division.
And so, know that you should apply the cure for a fistula caused by surgical operation with your hand.
And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; those are fistulas that reach large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the skull, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or any of the spinal joints composed as such by the hand and foot, and from there they open near the main member and similarly.
And therefore, among these fistulas, those following this manner are from the difficult illnesses of which there is no cure, and any occupation or treatment is a result of labor and ignorance.
If it is one of these fistulas with depth such that it does not reach the locations mentioned above, and you expect and confide in its healing, and you wish to come to knowledge of it, then take care or a knife, and if the fistula follows a straight path, probe it carefully.
If the fistula is twisted, then carefully investigate it with a delicate probe, because the weight of its body being raised and curved away from the twist will help correct the curvature.
And if the fistula has an extremely horrible odor, it is not possible for you to treat it with attempts.
Then you should crystez (sterilize) the orifices for their horrific nature, because the moisture by which you cleanse them is necessary for cleaning other orifices and their flow.
And then you should carefully inquire, according to what manner it is possible for you to know if here there are bones or nerves, and whether the concavity of the fistula is distant or immediate, or if it is a fistula with an extremely horrific odor that occupies all of your strength, requires all of your questioning, by which you question the illness, and you attribute the pain to your compression with your hand over the area, and similar things regarding the symptoms and accidental causes in the abscess.
And when you have considered all of those causes with careful attention, you will proceed to treatment according to your confidence: and it is that you consider now if the fistula appears near or in a clean place, far from a joint, or of nerves, or of an artery, or of a vein, or one of the places that you have at hand, and say.
Then dry the fistula as it is described in the narrative, stop what is in that flow and from corrupted flesh, and what has grown in the orifice of the flesh, or from its parts and similar, and cure it until it is healed.
If the fistula is of great depth and according to the rule, then you should incise it into the bone as far as possible, and thoroughly clean it of all corrupted flesh; and then apply some wrapped up in acute medicines, and insert them into the hollow of the fistula that you have understood with your hand.
And do this until some times have passed, so that the acute medicine corrodes everything that is soft in the hollow of the fistula from corruption.
And then restore it with bandages that promote healthy flesh until it is healed.
If it is not healed by this, then you cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
If the cause of a fistula is bone and it is necessary for you to be certain of this, then examine and dry it according to what we have recommended; if you do not prohibit any cause from veins or nerves or from the main member, as we have said.
If the bone is exposed and there is no corruption or blackening, then cleanse that part where the corruption is present until it is completely healed; and apply care to it with something that promotes healing.
And if it is not healed and pus flows as it was before, then know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and so uncover it again and carefully make the incision on it and perform the cleansing of it with the last remaining strength, and then restore it.
And so if it is sane, good; otherwise, you will know that this corruption is in the distant depths of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore to you there is nothing to do but cleanse it.
And if the corrupted bone is small, it may be possible to remove it with delicate forceps suitable for this purpose.
And if there are many bones, carefully extract all of them, and do not leave any cause for concern regarding your strength.
If anything causes you difficulty due to moisture, and in their examination there is no fear or error, then incise these bindings or flesh if they are here, and carefully extract the bones.
If you do not have the preparation to remove the bones from your patient, then place your hand over the area where the pain is located, and leave it there until the pain passes, ensuring that this is in the vicinity of those bones, flesh, and ligaments, and watch for any signs that the pain becomes consolidated, so that the section you have incised in your operation does not become restricted.
While not a perfect match, here is a line-by-line translation based on the given context and linguistic cues:
If it is a large bone such as the thigh or leg bone or similar, and what is corrupt from it is only the appearance of it, then quickly treat it as soon as that darkness and corruption are contained, and then restore the illness.
If the corruption of the bone has spread widely and the infection has reached the bone marrow, then it is necessary to cut out that part completely from the area where the corruption has taken place, and then treat it until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you that you overcome a man in his thigh so that he supports you at every turn and assists in your operation.
Focus on a young man around 30 years old who experiences pain in his thigh, and the swelling originates from within the body, affecting the material inside the flesh, resulting in an abscess or a significant abscess, and it is not caused by an external factor.
And so the time extends until the abscess is formed due to the errors of doctors, and it will be filled with moving matter, and its cure is delayed until the leg is fistulated, and it makes in it horrible wounds that can cause necrosis and body humidity.
And thus, after many years of treatment by doctors, who focus not on the essence but on the symptoms, you will still be called upon.
And he saw the leg of the patient and the matter flowing from these horrible wounds, spreading throughout his body; the skin of that man was completely rigid, and its colour was citron-like.
And so he inserted the probe into one of these wounds and reached the bone with the probe.
And then he carefully examined all the wounds and found these pernicious things spreading throughout the leg.
And then I carefully cut and incise one of these openings where I discovered a part of the bone, which was rotten, hard, and corrupted, and already had a piece of the thigh corrupt, penetrated into the mesenteries.
And then I secured what I had discovered and prepared the exposed bone.
And I thought that it was not the bone but that corruption which I had removed and secured, and I had already drained it.
Then I carefully paused the restoration of the disease with restorative medicine for a long time, but it was not solidified.
Then I iterated and further discovered the bone according to the initial discovery, and found continued corruption within the bone.
And I will address what appears to me as that corruption, and then I will make you do the perforation for its cure and restoration, but it is not restored.
And then you will discover it again and do not continue to cut the small bone particularly and perforate its restoration, but rather once you have incised around a palm of it, you extract its marrow, and then restore it with medicines, and it is somewhat consolidated and healed.
And it is not necessary to repeat the operation and section of it except for the arrangement of its frailness and due to the lack of patience in enduring it and fear of death, as it falls into a state of weakness at all times due to excessive evacuation.
And therefore, healing is complete, and nothing takes the place of the hard bone; its arrangement in the body brings good health and returns its virtue; it is adjusted to its dispositions, and does not cause any opposition in walking or harm due to any cause.
If a bone protrudes from the body, when you discover it, follow this manner: take lint and tightly wrap it around the end of that protruding bone, command someone to extend it; then place the thicker lint over the raw flesh left by the bone, and wrap it close to the flesh so as to draw the flesh away from its position, and uncover the flesh in the area you want to incise, so that the incision does not harm the flesh.
And place a stick or a table beneath the bone properly, for when you do this, the saw is not prohibited from cutting through the corrupt flesh without harm.
And be sure to make the incision over the corrupt area little by little; for if it is in the hollow of the corrupt bone and does not appear in its sensation, then force the saw another time.
And if the bone is corrupt and not prominent, it is one continuous split with the other, and the corruption is in the middle or at a distance from it, then uncover the flesh from all sides; and place a stick beneath, and saw first the part with the corruption until the other split continues.
And the incision should be according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
If the corruption is in the joint, you should incision that corrupt joint, and cut the bone where it continues to another part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it should not be treated rationally but ingeniously.
And if the corruption is in the chest of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; nevertheless, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you, and open that up, and remove it according to some arrangement possible to you, and in such a way ingeniously correct any curvature, so long as it does not cause you pain or affect nerves.
And you should know which incision tools and the cutting of these bones are very dependent on the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the subtlety, size, and rarity of those, and their hardness; so it is necessary that you prepare for every kind of operation the appropriate instrument for that operation.
And you will know that this operation signifies to you regarding the kind of instrument of which you have need; when you possess great knowledge and long experience in the ways of this art, and testimony of the methods of various ailments, for you will already have learned what is suitable for it among all instruments for every ailment.
And in the end of this chapter, you will learn the number of instruments which you will use with examples as you proceed with your practice, to further refine your skills and experience in treating others. Form of saw:
Another form of saw:
Form of another large saw:
The shape of the ray: The head of this ray should be in the shape of a star's claw, and its points are shaped like the spikes on a thistle.
And it is not appropriate to apply this only when the joints' heads are clogged, or when the aperture is very wide.
Shape of the smaller scissors:
Shape of the broad scissor:
The shape of another saw, appropriately curved and with sharp teeth, the blade made from a strong material, and the handle of the sword-like member cut down. Form of it:
The form of scissors with a concave shape:
The form of other scissors, more subtle:
The form of other scissors with an extremely curved extremity:
The form of small scissors resembling a tent:
The form of other smaller chisels:
The form of another chisel; this one resembling a ray, with a saw-like tip, and is presented in various places for the purpose of cutting bones.
Form of the ray which is suitable for reason of him who is pierced by bones:
And the end of it is triangular and of a sharp point.
And it is made of Indian steel, and seems to be capable of all the causes we have mentioned of razors, scissors, and saws.
Of incision of the extremity and of the lock of the bones.
The extremities may be affected either by an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or if the corruption is not treated with those remedies and the cure does not follow, then you should cut off that part of the body which no longer has any use, because it will only contribute to the spread of the malady, leading to death or serious damage to the member.
And the sign of that which happens is that the member becomes black until it is cut, or if you can see the blackness within, then cut it from that part of the body where it has spread to all parts of the body; and thus make an incision of that.
And it seems to be caused by the corruption of some poisonous sources, just as from a sea scorpion or a viper or a leech and similar things.
And if the corruption or the bite is on the tip of the finger, then cut off the finger and do not give space to the corruption for it to spread into the hand.
And if it affects the hand, then cut off that part from the base of the finger, and do not give space to the corruption until it spreads into the forearm.
And if you cannot do that, then incise the arm at the joint.
And if the corruption spreads and the joint is affected, then at that point the patient dies; and to treat another cause of this in healing requires a great deal of virtue.
And it seems to do for the foot when corruption occurs in one part of the foot, then you incise that into one of the joints.
And if it takes hold of the sole of the foot, then you incise the entire foot. If it can enter the toe joint, then you incise the leg at the toe joint.
And if the corruption has already spread to the toe, then there is no cure for it other than dismissal, and you leave the patient to their fate, to die.
And the method of cutting or severing a member is that you tighten the ligament at the point where you wish to cut, and tighten another ligament over the area; then extend the instrument one ligament beyond the other, and extend the minister another ligament onto it; and separate the flesh which is between two ligaments without leaving any space wide enough for all the flesh to be exposed; and then cut or sever.
And cover it with a cloth of linen from all sides so that it does not touch the area, and bring to the patient an adjusted and clean wound dressing.
If bleeding occurs during the operation, cauterize the area carefully, or apply some powdery substances to constrict the blood flow; then return to your treatment until it is complete.
And then attach the affected member with a suitable ligament, and treat it until it heals.
And I advise you to treat this man on his foot, this condition that you and I have agreed upon, which occurred due to the darkening of the skin on his foot resembling the burn from fire.
And that corruption, which occurred first in his toe, tends to spread throughout the entire foot.
And so that man prepares himself for this condition that he sees as the cure advancing to the member with the force of it that weakens from pain and the heat of the burn, and he cuts into the foot at the joint, and fire heals.
For a long time, that condition of corruption has occurred in the big toe as indicated.
And so it occurred to me, and I have pierced to reflect that superfluity with the water that I use for medicinal purposes, returning the purification of the body; and the superfluity is not reflected, and we begin to go to another toe as we began on the big toe.
And the doctor then incises my hand, and I do not want to do this hoping for the rebound of that superfluity, rather, you must be aware of the incision of the patient's dead hand, because the virtue of the disease was on the verge of death.
And since he has left me, he has returned to his land and forced me to prepare and incise his hand entirely, and he is healed.
And I have not related this story merely to help anyone suffering from this illness, but also to explain its cause and meaning, so that it may be understood according to its nature and treatment.
On the cure of wounds and the quality of enema with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in a fleshy part of the body and the space of the abscess is prolonged as far as a collection of pus, and then it is broken and perforated, and the pus is discharged from it, and the place becomes empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin over it remains intact, and is not affected by any posterior corruption, and does not press on the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and is not named a fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged such that corruption entirely affects a member, it is then called a fistula and not incurable.
And the cure for it is that you cut that entire cord as it is twisted, especially when it is subtile and made with cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
If you hope that the cord will adhere and that that corruption will not succeed through its last consequences, and if the cord has passed through the skin from front to back, then treat it with a cleansing enema.
And it is that you consider the sinuses, and if they are large, and the breath they produce has an evil odor, then cleanse them with an Egyptian medicine made of oil and wine and heated coals, placed in a vessel, and sealed over the fire until the medicine becomes hot and effective.
And then take from him what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; cleanse the sinus with it, tighten the orifices of the intestine, and leave the medicine inside for a duration of two hours.
And then remove that filth; do this for as many days until the sinus is purified and the pain relieved.
In some cases, enema with ash water can be used when this medicine is not available; take the ashes of wheat, put them in water, and mix well to prepare the enema which should be administered until the sinus is cleared.
If the patient is intolerant to Egyptian medicine or ash water, then an enema should be given with honey and water mixed with three parts of treacle, or wine and honey mixed; for honey purifies and cleanses, while wine causes the sinus to adhere, especially when excess of stings and dryness has been removed from it.
And after you have done this several times and feel that the swelling has subsided, then apply a clister with water that helps bring forth flesh in it.
And indeed, you should take a mixture of dyaphonic (a cleansing agent) and dissolve that oily matter and apply it with a styptic (to stop bleeding); or else, you can clisterize (use as a purgative) that same water with some medicines and apply others that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the orifices of the swelling are narrow in which the cannula of the clister cannot pass, then gradually widen them using a small iron, and place warm compresses wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon until they are sufficiently widened.
And if the orifices seem wide, then you should close them with stitches and leave enough volume for the clister to be adequately filled.
And if the opening of the patient from which the arm emerges is elevated above them, dry it in the lowest place on them where the arm passes through, for when the arm is restricted within the depth of their chest, flesh will be generated there.
And if it is not possible to dry the chest within the environment of the deepest bone, then pierce what you have prepared for the arm to pass slightly from there according to your will, so that no cause of restriction for the arm remains in it.
He who is over the wound of the sinus, which you keep moist at all times so that it draws out what is stuck in it from the arm. And so that you know whether what flows from the arm is much or little, or digested or undigested.
And so consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in an abscess.
And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the material being discharged over the sinus wound has become adhered, or a strong adhesion forms, then at the fourth day, remove the bandage, dislodge the plague, change the dressing for another one, and renew the ointment.
If it is a sinus that has created a long narrow space and the adhesion is firm, do not be anxious about it, for healing will occur of its own accord; for there are some people in whom new tissue grows in their wounds after a long time, and others in whom the opposite occurs.
And if a bruised arm is left for several days and the sinew does not adhere, then you know that the sinew is not adhering; if the adhesion of the sinew takes too long and this causes prolonged pain, then adjust through the use of medications, and if the medications are humid in their essence and virtue, dry them out with a specific ointment when there is an excess of moisture from additional treatment.
And the last method, which is used to cure it, is to take a specific ointment and dissolve it in warm oil, then apply it directly over the affected area, and repeat this treatment daily until it is cured.
And it seems to work just as well, when there is no bruised arm, with specific ointment, especially if it is thick, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and burn them, crush them all and make a powder over the fire, then apply this on cloth and wrap it tightly around the affected area; and apply that with the ointment which you have noticed to be thick, and sprinkle that onto cloth and wrap it tightly.
And at times, they administer to him long-soaked and crushed lilies of the sky (that is, lilies of the sky) and fennel flour and centaury, and use these simples, strain them, sift them, and sprinkle over honey that has been reconcocted; and apply it.
And if the pain persists and is not relieved by this treatment, you know that the corruption is in the blood of the patient, and it has affected the bones or other hard members or the ligaments; then you treat it with fists, as it is said above.
On the treatment of wounds, burnt skin, and cuts added with finger incisions and sectioning.
Panarici is an apostema that remains in the nail of the thumb or toe, and it strongly affects the other digits, and as time passes and its treatment is neglected, it either becomes a cauterized apostema or is corrupted, and pus flows within, consuming the root of the nail. It severely corrupts all of them, reaching the bones inside through which a foul odor emanates. The end of the affected digit turns black, and its color becomes dark.
And therefore when you have treated the condition as we have described and do not find relief, then cut out with a knife all the excess that is pressing on the joint and apply a hot cautery to the wound nearby, for cautery helps in such cases.
If the bone is broken and the joint is healthy but the swelling from the joint pushes into the surrounding flesh, and it begins to hurt and inflame that part, then place a fine cut at the angle of the joint that is pressing on the flesh, push it aside and cut that flesh easily, and apply a poultice of healing medicines, such as anti-inflammatory salves, until all signs of the injury are healed; and take care to keep the area clean.
If the corruption has already spread to the bone, then cut out the bone and extract it, for no time is there healing where the bone is corrupt.
And if you see corrosion and destruction in the said part, then you incise it in one of the bones according to its memory, and then treat it so that it heals.
If there is a need for striking or cutting the fingernail due to intense pain, then you should begin by cleaning the area around the nail, and then with a sharp spatula, cut across the nail on its surface, and be careful that the cut does not penetrate into the flesh that remains under the nail, because this will cause the patient intense pain and lead to the formation of excessive accumulated tissue at the site; and then treat that place to relieve the pain.
However, this adjustment, which is natural in the bodies of many people, is entirely flesh in some, entirely bone in others, or partially in the nails.
And some of them originate in the inflammation of the joint, or it is the nature of them in some bones of the fingers. He who is born in any particular place does not suffer from any specific pain, and he who is born with strong joints experiences gout more severely.
And for those who are fleshly by nature, the incision is light, and it is that you must insert the blade of a scalpel into its root.
For he who is born with the root of the joint, healing is difficult; therefore, be careful about the removal of it.
In the case of those born with such nuts, be careful to make an incision at the beginning with a sharp knife, cutting into the flesh around the bone, and then close it with a suitable cautery, ensuring that it heals well.
The consolidation that occurs between the joints, whether due to frequent use or by nature in those who lack such, or due to hernia or fire burn, or similar conditions, therefore, be careful to remove that consolidation so that the joints return to their natural form.
And then place between their sheets, dipped in warm oil, so that they are not consolidated too quickly, and separate them with a thin lead sheet until it is consolidated as desired.
And if consolidation seems to occur in some part of the hand, then you should dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
From the incision of veins, there are varicose veins.
Veins, when they are varicose, are thick, twisted veins full of melancholy surplus fluid that appear in various parts of the body, especially in the legs, most notably in those who walk, work, and carry heavy loads.
Therefore, it is appropriate that you administer purgation to the body from black choler sometimes with strong expulsion, and then draw blood from the patient's basil vein.
The treatment of their ferulous limbs is according to two methods: one is to incise and remove that black ganglion, and the other method is to elevate the vein and extract all of it.
The incision is made according to this method: first, the leg is soaked in hot water until the thick ganglion is resolved, which is foul from the leg, then the leg of the patient is tightly bound at the superior part of the affected area with a bandage, and the vein is cut at one, two, or three places along its course, and then the black ganglion is lifted with the upper part of the leg below it, and from there upwards, until all the amount of ganglion that you wish to remove and that is sufficient to alleviate the patient's condition is extracted.
Then bind that one tightly, and order the patient to abstain from cold, black-generating foods.
And repeat the treatment through phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this causes pain to the patient.
The elevation of their legs should be done in this manner: you who hold the leg of the patient, if there is hair on it, then dip it into water and soak the leg with lukewarm water until the swelling subsides and the veins are relaxed; or if it has been exercised by intense activity, then do so without a bath while the member is still warm.
Then tighten the string around the vein at the right of its course, either near the top or near the bottom, depending on where the pain is.
Then loosen the string with cuts and extract the vein from all parts until it appears healthy, and the diagnosis of that disease, which you have seen to be darkening, must be made.
And so, after evacuating and removing the string, you should examine that white area to see which string it is.
And then you insert your fingers into the space that is elevated and freed from the cord, and suspend it with a certain delicate touch.
Then make another cut parallel to the first one, and carefully extract the cord from the vein until it appears.
Then elevate that one and incise it in the rear section, after the talon, and extract it while elevating it until it passes through the second section, and then extract it from the section above that one.
And do this until you extract the one from the highest or most superior section among all of them, while ensuring that all are removed; and then incise it.
And if you do not carefully extract and elevate it, then insert a strong, double-threaded needle into it and tie it off and extract it, or insert your finger into the space and turn your hand over all parts where it is stuck. And be careful not to cut yourself; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to raise that part and it will come back against the wound.
And when all of that is completely removed, then apply to the affected area a mixture of wine and rosin oil and un-rosined oil, and cure that until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted without twisting in which it is wrapped around the parts, and it is not straight as we have said, then cover that you make a cut on all parts of its twisting and at the places where it wraps around, and raise it up until it is entirely elevated.
And be careful not to cut the vein and not to injure it, for it will be difficult to raise it up, and use your prudence in that regard.
The form of the injury which is dried out:
It is not sharp enough like other wounds and it does not have an acute extremity so as not to injure the vein; on the contrary, its great flexibility allows it to pierce the vein due to its subtlety, as we have said. It has a superfluous thickness on the surface.
Of the extraction of the vein of the thigh.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot countries, as well as in the hosannas (or hernias) in Arabic lands and in the rear parts of Indian lands with little moisture and without grass or vegetation.
And a very small vein is generated in other parts of the body, besides the legs.
And the process of decay is such that it produces chains from within the body, serpents and worms and scabs and worms engendered between the chain and flesh.
And the sign of the impending onset of gout is this: a sudden inflammation in the leg; then the place becomes swollen; and then the vein begins to leave from that place of swelling, which seems to be torn from the inside.
And when the onset of gout becomes apparent, you will then know to wrap around that part a piece of lead whose weight is like that of a dragon. Within the lead, place the affected limb, and let it hang from the bed.
And whenever it occurs for some reason from within the body, wrap that in lead and know of it. And if the pain persists, you then insert a sharp object into it and wrap it; but do not insert that which is raw until it comes out, for if you insert one while it's still raw, it contracts and goes inward into the flesh, causing abscesses and putrefaction in the place, and creating bad ulcers.
So that it may be treated additionally and extracted little by little, until it is completely expelled from the patient's body, without leaving any cause for concern in their body.
And from this vein, some men have reported that it extends to the length of their palm and fingers, and I myself have seen it reach as far as 20 palms.
And if it is cut open during treatment, insert the ray into its opening and pierce that long passage through the body, so that everything inside the matter can be evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the place for some days with medicines; and then care for it for the healing of abscesses.
This vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it comes out most horrifically from each branch.
And so treat it as we have said in the division and pay attention to what is mentioned above.
Regarding the section about worms generated under the skin, and it is called bovine disease.
This disease is called bovine disease in some countries, as it causes visible swellings in the animals and it is characterized by a small worm that is born between the skin and muscle tissue. It spreads throughout the body, gradually weakening and disrupting the muscles, especially in the legs until the worm breaks free.
And the generation of these worms is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, which causes the formation of worms, serpents, roundworms, and hookworms in the belly.
It is feared by the evil of these worms, for when they enter the body and rise to the head, they affect the brain, strongly shaking it and destroying it, which should be feared.
And therefore when you want to cure and extract it, it cannot be done unless you understand its movement and appearance in relation to the body, and then you will grasp what is above it and what is left of it, and apply a strong compression and extraction over it.
And if it is embedded in the flesh and does not cause pain, then apply a hot cautery at the place where it resides, and the main reason to be feared is the corruption of it, which corrupts the place as we have said.
If you attempt to cure it near the root, then tighten over the brow with strong pressure, and apply a dry compress, extract it; and take care that the illness uses purification of the body through medicines that evacuate putrid bad humors, and beware of foods causing putrefaction.
On the section regarding the treatment of illness.
This illness is called nephritis in our land, and it is a pain that appears in some members, and then changes from one member to another.
And you have already seen that second one that I will recommend to you. You have been called to a village to see a sick woman, and upon examining her arm, you noticed a small inflammation in the vein at the elbow, which had burst an hour before. As it was oozing, you observed that the fluid seemed alive, moving from one place to another, almost like living silver.
Then, he applied pressure to that place to stop the pain, and left it on for about an hour.
And he repeated the same process on the other arm until it was healed.
And then I began to examine the whole body, as I had seen it, and was too amazed at the change of the disease and the speed with which it moved from one limb to another. And I had already seen this in my own feet according to that manner, but I have seen many which cause extreme pain to be changed from limb to limb. I have never seen this in the feet of a woman like this.
And I do not think that this is anything but that the woman was old, with a dry body and exposed veins, and in this state, the sensation of that changed wind is felt.
And it is necessary that this backward cure does not appear in those who have healthy and moist bodies with closed veins.
And when you wish to treat them and the patient feels that pain, do not immediately appear with that medicine as we have said, but tighten your grip on that part and leave it slightly pressed and dry over that area until that air flow is restricted, and cauterize the spot.
If you do not recognize it by the symptoms in your feet, then cure that which causes exhaustion to the body and that which expels air, and bind those foul-smelling pills and serpent pills and similar ones.
Extraction of arrows.
Arrows vary according to their species and the parts of the body they hit, for their diversity lies in those that have sharp points, and small ones, and concave, and dull ones, which are solid; and those with three angles, and those with tongues; and those with barbs.
And among the signs of the servant (the body), when you feel an arrow in it that pierces the bone and arises from the base of the skull due to intense pressure, causing migraine, dizziness, pain in the temples, inflammation and pain in the tongue, spasms, confusion in speech, and vomiting of bile, and often the word is severely cut off and the voice is destroyed; and there appears at the site of the illness a white humidity resembling powder, and pus-like liquid.
And if these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment and removal of the arrow, unless it is protruding.
However, if the arrow pierces the heart, so that it is near the left mammary gland, and you feel a hard pain where it is stuck, not a weak pain; and strongly feels the movement of the arrow similar to the pulse, and flows black plague pus, and there is a chill in the extremities, and shortness of breath, and fainting; then you will know that death is at hand.
And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung will show pus-colored plague from the infection, and the veins close to the collarbone are filled, and there is a change in the patient's color, and they breathe heavily, and ask for fresh air.
And if the arrow pierces the membrane in the foot, and the pain is close to the small ribs, and there is great pain accompanied by groaning, and all the muscles of the limbs are not at their best.
If the arrow strikes the stomach, you will experience intense pain from the harmful food poisoning.
And if the arrow pierces the abdomen and becomes lodged there, causing a tear in the plague (or wound or hernia), there is little hope of recovery from removing the arrow.
And if the arrow strikes the bladder and causes urine to leak outside, leading to severe pain in the patient, you should know that it is fatal.
The other members (face, neck, chest, shoulders, hips, and legs) can also be saved according to the best dispositions when the arrow does not strike a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
And I would advise this to those who have seen the nature of these arrows, so that they may understand their impact on healing.
The cause of which is that in a man an arrow strikes the lacrimal duct in the side of his nose, and it is extracted from him on the other side, leaving the bones of his auricle intact, and he is healed, and there is no damage to his nose.
And they extracted another arrow from a Jew which had struck him in the bone of his nose, leaving the eyelid intact; the arrow was concealed and could not be removed from there, except for a small tip which remained attached to his skin, it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, one that kills lions without leaving any auricle.
And the Jew was healed, and there was no bad consequence for his nose.
And they extracted another arrow from a Christian man which had entered his gullet, and it was an Arabic arrow, the one with the auricle; then they incised between two guides, and the arrow was already immersed in his gullet; then they subtily removed it, and he was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man that had fallen into his belly, and thought that he would die from it; therefore, after having passed XXX days without any change in his condition, I incised the arrow and manipulated it, and he was healed, and no further harm came to him.
And he brought a man in whom an arrow had penetrated his back, and the wound was deeply ingrained in him; after setting a fire nearby, he removed the arrow at the root of the injury.
And he saw a woman in whom an arrow had penetrated her belly, and the wound was deeply ingrained within her, not changing in its condition, and the woman did not become troubled or affected by any of her natural functions.
And he saw another man in whom an arrow had penetrated his face, and the wound was deeply ingrained, with the arrow broken but causing little to no pain, resembling these others.
And extract the arrow from the man of the prince of the king that was embedded in the middle part of his nose, and had already tilted to the right side a little, and hidden was all the arrow.
And you were called for the treatment of him soon after the arrow's embedding, within three days.
And then you carefully examined the arrow's infection; and then you inquired about that subtle attempt, not feeling it; but he felt a piercing sensation remaining behind his right ear, and thus you hoped that this piercing was due to the tip of the arrow.
And you applied plaster to the place where it has an absorbing and digestive effect, trusting that this location will reveal itself to you so that you may locate the arrow's position, and dry out the infection there.
And do not be concerned about the location of the injury where the arrow has struck; continue to apply the poultice over it for many days without incident; and as the wound heals between them, break up the swelling from the extraction of the arrow in intervals of many days until on one day you feel the arrow within its hole and reconnect it to me.
And then you should focus on treating the acute corrosive wound with specific medicines for many days until a fire opens up, and you should cool it, and try to remove the tip of the arrow, which adheres to the wood.
Then you should adjust the opening of the wound using that acute medicine until I visually see the tip of the arrow, and I will spend time on it for intervals of time over four months.
And when the wound has healed and I can insert my fingers into it, I will persist in this way, without hesitation, then I will no longer search for subtle and clever methods, until one day I use clever devices to pull it out, as will be described in detail at the end of this chapter, until I extract it; and then I will restore that wound.
And some physicians judged that the nasal cartilage was not restored, and they restored it, and the disease became consolidated, and the malady was healed entirely, without any damage to it for any reason.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows so that it gives this rule and meaning regarding what has not been said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those others are not understood from the narrative nor do those comprehend the book.
And the skilled artisans compare a little about what is said and much about what is absent; and from what is present, they find new operations and new instruments for the descent of foreign causes in the art when accidents occur.
Therefore, you say that arrows are not expelled from the members in which they are embedded but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place in which they enter, or on the contrary of the other part.
And that which is inserted or shot through the area where it enters, or proceeds from a fleshy place, is thrown and pulled out.
And if you do not adhere to the timing of when to eat, then you must leave it for a few days until the flesh around it is weakened and the attraction and exit of it are alleviated.
Similarly, if it becomes stuck in the bones and you do not adhere to your diet, leave it for a few days, then repeat the application of heat and movement each day, and it will be removed.
And if you do not adhere to your diet for several days, then you must puncture the path of the arrow in that bone at a subtle point until the location where the arrow is stuck is enlarged, and then extract it.
If the arrow is already embedded in the body and lodged in a sensitive area, then question the patient and if you sense any pain, use various stimuli to attract it.
And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, here there are neither nerves nor veins, then pierce the wound until it is enlarged and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
And if there are auricles attached that must be removed, carefully cut the flesh in which they are embedded from all sides with all the means at your disposal; and devise something, if you cannot remove the flesh from the fracture of the auricles and their torsion until it becomes possible to reduce them.
And when you perform the extraction of the arrow in any place, use torction with your hand and forceps from all sides until it yields; and with subtlety and care, so that the arrow is not broken and can be easily removed along with its tip.
And if you cannot reach it with your forceps, then leave it for a few days until the parts that are in the path of the arrow can be separated, and then repeat the procedure when the pain has subsided. If you experience difficulty due to bleeding, then administer what we have mentioned for treatment in its section.
And be mindful of your skill in incising veins or nerves, or string, and administer remedies in every possible way to facilitate the escape of the arrow; do this with ease and tranquility, delay and firmness as much as you can, both for yourself and as recommended by others.
And therefore, contract the arrow in such a way that the disease is according to the figure by which you must aim the target of the arrow, for this is more beneficial. If this is not within your ability, then administer what is within your ability according to the figures.
Consider the arrows that are shot against the opposite side or have already pierced through any part on the outside, or become stiffened at the tip due to the pressure from below, and twist those; then place your hand over it; and according to the quantity in which the forceps grasp it, cut it off; and throw it away, for it is of no use.
If it is held in the bone, cut your knife according to the direction of the arrow that pierces the bone, and deepen the cut until it exits, then remove it.
And if that does not work, leave it for a few days and then repeat the procedure as often as necessary.
If the shaft of the arrow is within the bone, then push it towards the arrowhead.
If the shaft has fallen off and you want to apply force, insert a sharp object and, if it is hard, strike it with force into the hollow of the bone at the base of the arrowhead, then push it towards the arrowhead.
If the arrowhead is concave, push it firmly with a sharp object while entering it, as this will cause the arrowhead to recede due to that pressure.
And if the arrow is embedded, then you must press all your concave flesh where it truly is, if you can do so, and tend to that area as best as you can.
And if the arrow strikes the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close enough that you can touch it without difficulty, and it is possible for you to do so, then grasp it and pull it out, and be careful not to cut into veins or nerves, and treat the wound as needed until it heals.
Form of forceps used to extract arrows:
Their ends should be shaped like a bird's beak, made with a saw tooth, to grip the arrow firmly so that it does not slip.
And these are made in various sizes, large, small, and medium, according to the amount of the arrow's thickness, and the depth of its penetration, and the extent of the wound, and the tightness of the area affected.
so that the arrow's intrusion into the concave sagita is removed and it is pushed out of there.
On venipuncture (vein cutting).
The veins for fleubotomy (vein cutting) of which usually flow blood, there are two pulsatile veins closest to the auricles, called the *carotid* veins; two appear on both temples; and two in the two lacrimal bones, called *lacrimal* veins; a vein prepared in the middle region of the forehead, one in the tip of the nose, and two veins at the nape of the neck; also, there are two veins on the upper lip, and two on the lower lip; and these are called the *alere* veins; and lastly, there are two veins beneath the tongue. When the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are considered, one is a cephalica, and it is the lateral vein; the people call it "the vein of the head", it is deaf, and it is the middle vein, composed of a branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalica; they call that one the people "vein of the whole body", the basilica is the vein that is paused in the domestic axilla, and it is called "citillar", and they call those common people "the stomach vein"; the end of the arm, and it is paused on the fossa, and it is the one where phlebotomy is performed, and it is the one that appears over the wrist by clear indication; and the savetelle, it is the vein that is between the said auricular and the smaller said vein, and only in it are two curves.
And on the foot and leg there are three veins; one of those is left at the curvature of the inner side of the lateral vein; the second is superficial, and its location is left at the camba of the domestic leg; and the sciatic vein, its location is left at the camba of the lateral vein; and on the camba there are other veins similar to those.
The treatment of the veins that are closest to the ears is for ancient cataracts, emigration, and inflammation and ulcers of the head and old malformations.
And the quality of bleeding should be as follows: it should be close to the patient's head, and the head of the patient should be rubbed on the occipital region at the location of both veins with ample friction; then tighten the patient's collar with a bandage so that the two areas appear where the ears are located, precisely where the veins are closest to the head; and seek what is called the 'good cut', and if you feel the pulse of those veins as described, proceed accordingly.
Now take the scalpel, which is sharp, and insert it into the vein in the neck until the incision reaches the bone. Then raise your hand over the vein and bone, and incise the vein with a sharp incision. And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, or as necessary; and make the cut as deep as desired.
Then tighten the bandages and leave that until it is healed.
And it has already been preceded at the beginning of this book with the incision of those and their cauterization.
However, of the two veins and arteries that are near the temples, the jugular vein is an ancient and severe evil, causing frequent headaches and acute overflows in the limbs.
And the technique of performing a flebotomy on those parts depends on what you have learned: restrict the patient's collarbone until the two veins appear palpable by direct observation and it is clearly demonstrated that their pulse does not change; and then you will know you are successful.
And then lift the cord over the vein at its attachment as previously indicated, and insert the sharp phlebotomy instrument beneath it, and elevate the vein; and cut through it in the same way as you have done with the two other veins; and make the incision flow blood according to the quantity of your need.
And then, close to the site of the patient's hernia, place the mentioned bandage over the vein for an hour, and apply pressure to that area, and tighten it firmly, and leave it until it is healed.
And now follows the remembrance of them, and from those, the incision, and the attraction at the beginning of the release.
And therefore, the application of phlebotomy to the vein in the forehead is appropriate phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for ancient facial illnesses, migraines, and putrid wounds.
And the quality of the flebotomy on the patient depends on what you have learned; so that the illness tightens its collar with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument named the "sucer" which is the shape of it.
Stop the point at the prominent end of the sucker over that vein and apply pressure to it either by inclining or another manner, allowing the blood to flow according to the amount you desire, and then remove the puncture from the patient until the illness is healed.
And in some cases, the vein is opened wide through flebotomy, but it is not known that the flebotomy of acute extremity is also like other flebotomies, but rather from a distant extremity, and flebotomize according to the transverse, because the bone there is very strong and would break easily if the flebotomy were too subtle.
Avoid the jugulation of the two veins that are the lacrimal ducts of both eyes due to inflammation and itching in the eyes, as well as to facial illnesses.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the disease constricts the vein at a certain point, and then you make a small incision there, and you stand over the top of it.
And the phlebotomy is made according to the transverse direction at a slight angle to the phlebotomy, as there is little flesh in the area; and if the phlebotomy is subtle, then only a small part of its end should be cut off.
Then let the blood flow as much as is necessary, and press upon that side, and tighten it for a night, and then release it.
Phlebotomy on the nasal vein is effective for acute fever and severe headaches, and for facial pains and migraines and redness that occur on the face, especially when it has been long-standing.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that the disease constricts its vessels, and then you take hold of their nose with your left hand, and insert a subtle, long phlebotomy knife at the center of the nose according to straightness, as the vein does not appear sensitive here, and soon after the blood begins to flow.
Ensure you complete the procedure of opening the vein little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; then close it tightly for a night, as that will restore it more easily.
However, the treatment of phlebotomy for both conditions should involve narrowing of blood vessels and beginning of healing, as well as alleviating severe pain and preventing destructive and corrosive ulcers with the help of potent remedies.
And the quality of phlebotomy for these conditions is that the illness tightens each one in its place with adhesions; and the healer should be on top of the patient's head, and the patient should lie on their side.
Then make phlebotomy on the vein deeply but gradually; and extract blood according to season or as much as necessary for treatment; and do it similarly on the other veins.
And then clean the ligament and tighten both veins with gentle pressure to prevent further inflammation, and place a bandage over the wound once the pain has subsided.
And regarding the juvenile aspect of phlebotomy for varicose veins, it compares to small apices and pustules in the mouth and inflammation of the gums and bad ulcers and cracks, as well as bad ulcers located on the nose and around the anus.
And the quality of phlebotomy for these cases is to cease the illness immediately, tighten the vein's collar with a bandage, then carefully turn aside the lips and locate two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; each should be identified by their darker appearance due to the small size of the veins in that area; and then incise them with a precise incision.
If there is any doubt on your part, and you do not know which one it is, then proceed with the incision of the larger one among them, and consider the presence of pus as an indication of those.
And make it appear as if there are two veins on top of their lips.
The cutting of both veins located on the tongue, when done properly, is called phlebotomy of the cephalic vein at its proximal parts, which are found in the throat, as well as for issues with the uvula and mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomy is such that it follows the disease among your fingers before the sun, raises the tongue, keeps an eye on the space beneath the tongue, from one side where the vein is and from the other side, and the color of each turns towards blackness.
And then perform phlebotomy on each one; and be careful not to finish with your hand in phlebotomizing those, because those are arteries.
And your veins that are flayed in the thigh are those through which blood usually flows in all men, and the flaying of their veins is done in two ways, either by using a fleabite with a myrtle or olive twig in a delicate manner; or cutting them with a scalpel, and this is called arteriotomy, and this is its form.
it cuts the width of the vein as it passes, and it opens the concave veins full of thick substances by proceeding apparently grossly, and to those containing thick blood clots.
And this flebotomy is of lesser depth and more delicate extremity, and it is suitable for the flebotomy of subtle veins that contain subtle citrus blood.
However, the jugular vein flebotomy, which is one of three veins, extracts blood from the illnesses left in the throat and neck, and from this, the legs and abdomen are purified.
And it is necessary for the flebotomist, when performing that flebotomy, to carefully preserve that vein and be wary of it, because if he deviates or misplaces the puncture of the flebotomy, he will incise that artery and cause bleeding of blood, so it is important not to flebotomize that vein with a sharp instrument, but rather to cut it gently.
And if the basil vein does not appear by clear indication, then you must know that you should leave that one and change to another, or seek some of its branches; or perform a flebotomy in its place at the end of the arm, because that one is clear; and carefully cut it with a gentle instrument as we have said.
If you wish to perform an arteriotomy on the leg, first cover in front of the narrowing of the arm that you touch the area until you know the location of the pulse, and then press over it tightly; and bring the arm close and dry the vein by making a concave section for arteriotomy as we have said; and be careful to avoid the percussion for any space in the location of the artery.
And when you feel, by strengthening the ligament, an inflation in the place that you have pressed tightly, then that inflation is an inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid that one.
And if you feel the blood flow in the arteriotomy as with a bell of a child, and the blood is thin and clear, then know that it is from the artery's blood; and immediately cut and press on that place for a long time; and soon after stopping the pressure, if the bleeding has ceased, tighten the arm and leave it be.
And watch the patient from the release of their moisture, and be greatly wary of them, and do not harm that for some days until it is healed.
If the vein is not severed and you do not have any appropriate medicine for it, then you cut into the artery if you see that it is constricted; because the end of the vein contracts and the vein is severed; or you take a piece of lint and tie that around it, and tighten it over the spot of the vein with tape, and leave it for another day.
And if the vein is severed, then it is good; and if not, treat that with the water as mentioned, in remembrance of the location of the powder where the severed flow of blood occurred.
And the removal of the vein from the patient is difficult due to the position of the affected area and the possibility of ligament attachment in the arm.
From the dark vein, phlebotomy is useful to extract blood from the upper part of the head and leave it from the lower parts of the body; for this reason it is composed of branches of the basilic vein and branches of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
And beware the phlebotomist who is overzealous in the phlebotomy of a patient, for there is a nerve involved; and therefore, when he locates the nerve during the phlebotomy procedure, it will cause stupor, making healing difficult, and leaving strong patients unsanctioned. This nerve causes movements that are felt; and if it is hidden from some men and appears subtle and not manifest, then you must pause the phlebotomy with which you are cutting into the vein and avoid the nerve with all your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length.
The advantage of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and relieves ailments of the feet.
And in this case, if you want to perform phlebotomy with olive or myrtle, it is the safest of all veins, as it does not leave behind an artery or a nerve.
However, in some cases, a strong fever may occur in certain individuals when not phlebotomized on the first percussion, but you should pay no attention to that particular fever.
The first sentence translates to: "The first of these is what you must know that amputation of the leg is only administered in the interest of health and with hope for recovery, and it is performed on one of the veins located in the groin, namely: the cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and amputations are carried out at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter, when signs of edema appear.
And amputation should be performed on the third day or, if it is the first pus, three hours after the operation.
Amputation may be performed when it is deemed convenient and necessary, day or night, at any time and in any place.
And it is known that a child should not be subjected to amputation before the age of thirteen, and a pregnant woman should not undergo amputation unless it is after the fourth month of pregnancy, and the elderly, those who have already passed sixty years, should not be amputated.
And when someone wants to be freed from fluid retention in any way, it is necessary to cleanse their bowels in advance with a lion's clister, if there is a significant gap retained, so that the veins do not throw off the excess fluid during the flebotomy of the purifying bowels, which are healthy, and they do not affect the main members.
And patients should not be subjected to flebotomy if they are naive, ignorant, or excessive in eating and drinking, nor should they avoid illness or madness while this treatment is being used, nor should it be performed when there is a drop in the body's strength, as it may cause colic, vomiting, abdominal pain, increased urination, difficulty in movement, work, exercise during meals or vigils, or any other cause that weakens the vitality, whether of the body or the animal.
And it is necessary to consider the subtlety of humors in relation to this, if the swelling is caused by heavy foods, drinks, and medications, then these must be avoided as far as possible.
And then immerse him in a bath, unless some cause prevents it or if there is exercise that should be done so that the swelling is reduced.
And stop the bloodletting from the patient's leg at around the third hour of the day, as we have said.
And pierce that foot to be watched on that day from all animal misfortunes, as there is pain, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, as there is excessive work and suffering similar to them.
And at his side, have the causes be present of the use of which herbs are customarily used by men for aromatics and perfumery and as balms and similar, according to the amount of possibility.
And have the flebotomist follow on another cushion that is softer than the one of the patient who was to be bled.
And then extract the arm, and with your hand, rub the fluctum-cauterizer two or three times; then tighten the ligament with a strap and wrap it twice.
And whether the contraction is severe, where the contraction is unequal, or the contraction is excessive, then it hinders the flow of the blood; or if it is for relaxation, and then it hinders the movement of the blood entirely.
And then apply the contraction, ensuring that whoever has been fluorinated rub their hands together between each other until the veins are swollen and visible.
And then the flebotomist applies their flebotomy tool to a small amount of anti-corrosive oil specifically; they place their left hand's digit on the vein, slightly shifting it to create a slight bulge, and to release the pressure from the veins; because where the veins are found to be hard, that is where the flebotomy should be performed, and when the flebotomist pauses the flebotomy over those, they become contracted due to the flebotomy, and if the vein ruptures, it becomes narrow.
And therefore, for this reason, the phlebotomy man must be stopped and be diligent in all these causes.
And then, after the phlebotomy, if the vein is swollen at once, it is not good; otherwise, repeat this another time, leaving that place a little or applying compression over it, if the location is not abscessed.
And if the location is abscessed or the illness worsens, then leave it for a day or two and do not strain the liaison, as it will severely increase the abscess and neither should you immerse it in water.
And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
And if the opening is small and the vein runs subtily, and you fear that it will not allow the quantity you wish, then repeat the phlebotomy on that spot according to rectitude and adjust the opening a little, and apply compression before that location becomes abscessed, because in many cases, a small opening is sufficient.
Sometimes that already formed deposit may not interest you, as it does not excuse any cause; and apply pressure to some part of the oil fissure, as it alleviates the pain in the joint. And it is better at this location than oil and other oils.
And it seems that the oil fissure is administered in all phlebotomy where veins must be drained to prevent the spread of venom, and it acts as a tire and wisdom when pressure is applied from one of those over the place, because the venom is subtilized and revolted when it becomes thick.
And if in the location of phlebotomy a large deposit is formed, because many times accidents happen, and especially to those who are not stat (bleeding) but rather cauterized, or at the sight of a thin vein, then you apply pressure, and place a sponge infused with water and salt, slightly heated, and tighten it for an hour, as it dissolves.
And it is necessary that he does this immediately after the blood clotting of that vein or another vein has been completed.
And if after some days a blackness or greenish color appears, do not pay attention to it; and if you wish, apply to that place a mixture of aloe or myrrh dissolved in oil or mint juice or warm water similar to it.
And often, accidents occur that require flebotomy of the basilic vein.
And therefore place your hand over it, and if you feel hardness, your compression should be on that part, for then the swelling is evil and bad; and thereafter beware of applying any cause to it that we have spoken about, for strong blood flows from the clotted artery.
And apply plaster to the area where there is stiffness, so that the place is made firm, and take care of that as well as the other treatment until it is healed.
And be careful to extract the pus from everyone according to the amount of its virtue and according to the dominant color above the pus as it appears.
If the pus is black, leave it to drain until it becomes thin; if it is thick, leave it to drain until it becomes thin; and if it is acute, wait until its sharpness subsides.
And be mindful of those who are full and strong and require the extraction of pus at once; in such cases, enlarge the incision into the vein and make the venipuncture wider.
And for those who are weak, do the opposite; extract it in several stages, and make the incision narrow.
The best approach for venipuncture is the transverse section, not the puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is free from blood flow and nerve incision, and it is more laudable and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
And in cases where syncope (fainting) occurs after phlebotomy, it is customary to treat that immediately with a small amount of wine or simply diluted oxymel; and extract the blood from the wound in three or four draws.
And if there is a chill from the operation, then take something to drink before phlebotomy with an infusion of myrrh or honey-scented mead infused with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar ones, or an infused syrup with a strong fragrance.
And if syncope occurs after phlebotomy and is due to a great deal of blood loss, then take care to drink water mixed with wine and a subtle-scented syrup; and use something aromatic like alkanet, and apply a cold compress to your foot at that area.
And use other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter of fainting for evacuation.
And here he will extend his arm and dissolve the fistula again, addressing the part from which fleubotomy is for strong evacuation, and its virtue is cold, which evacuates the small fistula little by little, according to the amount of virtue in continuous days.
He who wishes to extend his arm and repeat the draining of his fistula a second time, and his body is strong, should do this approximately seven or nine hours after the first fleubotomy.
He who wishes to throw the fistula of his body in the opposite direction from which it declined, should have it drained on the second or third day.
For a body in which there is much acute and severe inflammation that causes fever, it should be drained once of the pus and a large quantity of it should be removed, and the perception of pain should be intensified before fainting occurs, since you will have preserved all the conditions of fleubotomy; and you should place your hand over the area of the fistula in the body, so that it does not acquire death instead of fainting, because repeated attempts are necessary when the fleubotomist is ignorant or negligent.
And do not cover when you want to dislodge the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, if the orifices of the vein are already closed and it is difficult to extract the blood, press down on that part with great force and gently bend it slightly, for this causes too much pain.
Habituate the layperson to perform flebotomy secondarily; or retain this with the sharpness of the flebotomy that coagulates the blood in the orifices of the veins; or place over it a light compress of turpeth or of sage, and press until the blood is completely extracted.
And if the vein is infected, then do not touch it until the infection has subsided.
And if it becomes necessary to evacuate the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then you should draw the blood from that place or from the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called the "funnel of the arm" is punctured in place of the femoral or basilic vein when they are not found or are obstructed, as it is composed of those.
And the quality of the vein puncture is that the patient inserts their hand into the wound until the point becomes reddened, and the vein appears clearly.
Then apply pressure to that tight attachment with a strict bandage; and puncture the vein according to the transverse small, not longitudinally or according to the width.
And it should be an ample opening, and your vein puncture should be such that you puncture it over the joint of the hand slightly.
And if the flow of blood is blocked, then insert your hand into the water again and stop the blood from flowing in the water until you achieve your need.
If you were in the summer days, then you are excused from the movement of the hand in cold water, and in winter, the body of the sanitizing bath in cold water is more static.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is considered safer than all other veins, because it has neither pulsating nor nerve tissues.
And phlebotomy of the saphenous vein on the right hand is indicated for liver diseases.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that you tighten your hand strongly or with your other hand, since you have immersed it in cold water, as long as the vein is inflated and clearly visible; then make a transverse incision on it; and if you cut deeply, this will prevent any bleeding.
And be careful not to cut off your hand during phlebotomy, because it contains the nerves of the digits exposed by cutting through the flesh.
And then repeat the hand in the warm water and let the blood flow through that, for if you do not repeat that in the warm water, the clot will form in the opening of the vein, and it is forbidden to flow.
And once the blood is extracted according to the amount needed, you should apply oil and salt to the vein to prevent it from hardening; and be careful that you do this in a narrow space.
But the healing of the flebotomy of that with the left hand, is it applicable to the ailments of the right side.
And do the same for the flebotomy of him as you have done for the other.
And the treatment of the venous system from the flebotomy is for ailments that are at the edges of the body, as with ailments of the mother, and to stop menstruation, and for ailments of the ribs and ulcers of clothes and old beds, and similar to their ailments.
And the quality of the flebotomy on him is that the patient immerses his foot in water and friction until the veins appear; then he wraps it around the joint of the foot with a strap; and the location of the vein becomes visible after said pressure, and from there it branches out in various directions on the surface of the foot.
And therefore, the wide branch of the vein is left open after the flebotomy, with the leg raised, as it is better and more salutary.
And if you perform a flebotomy on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are left there on the surface of the foot, and place your flebotomy at an angle, as if you wanted to incise it.
And both the flebotomies should be successful.
If it is forbidden to urinate, then you should repeat the act of micturition in warm water and let the urine flow into it until it is emptied.
And if the fluotomist misses on the first attempt, then he should repeat the fluotomy in that spot a little, since the area is sensitive; and you need not fear any harm to it, provided that you take care of the nerves as we have said.
And do the same for the other foot equally.
And for sciatic vein, the area as we have said is below the knee at the passage of the wild branch.
And the incision of fluotomy on him is at the hip joint when it is for the purpose of draining the urine.
And the quality of the flebotomy is that the disease is bathed, and quickly and tightly it extracts the fluid from the deep layers between the skin on all four sides with a long, thin bandage, so that only this is seen.
And therefore when it appears, you make a flebotomy on that part according to each method that is within your ability and according to the direction, and this is best; either puncture it with an incision or cut it with a section, because the place of the disease is open.
It is in most people not easily noticed; and if you find it, and it does not appear to be painful at all, make a flebotomy on one of its branches, and that is the one that appears on the back of the foot instead of the little toe or the ring finger.
And be careful of the nerves, and allow the blood to flow from the wound as much as you want.
And then carefully loosen the tightness and place your hand over the site of the phlebotomy as strongly as necessary, for it is said to be beneficial.
Of ventilation and the qualities of use of those.
Ventilators can be of horns, or of metal, or of glass.
Ventilation is achieved through two methods: one involves the incision and extraction of pus, and the other involves ventilation through the same incision.
And this ventilation, which is through incision, is also in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
And the ventilators that are administered through incision and extraction of pus are twelve locations in the body, of which one is where ventilation is paused, and it is the last opening in the head; and two openings on each side of the neck; and ventilation from the jaw, below the mouth; and ventilators from two blades; and ventilators from a comb, over the end of the tail; and ventilators from two shells, at two arms' length; and ventilators from two pins; and ventilators from two cushions.
And the extraction of the sanium should not be from small veins scattered in the flesh, and thus does not catch the virtue through them, as is the case with phlebotomy; nor should it be covered with fire or heat in any illness caused by accumulation within, until the whole body is evacuated.
If it is necessary to induce venesection for illness or continuously, we should start it at the beginning of the month and end it at its conclusion, in the middle of its course and at any suitable time.
And therefore when it occurs for any reason from those (causes), and particularly if it is in the third or middle of the night, then ventilation should be done immediately rather than waiting two or three hours past day.
And the immediate benefit of ventilation (of the neck) is that when it relieves pressure on the head and what falls into the ears, it is more effective in evacuating all the body.
This ventilation is performed at the site of phlebotomy of the head.
And it is not advisable to use (a treatment) that involves friction or in which there is catarrh, as it causes great harm.
And for this reason, the use of those (treatments) on the feet and on the heads where injuries are confined is not advisable.
May it be done to him who is lying on his back that he experience relief; and for this reason you must instruct the blower to place his hand with a slight pressure on the suction cups, at the places where they have been left, lest there arise a generation of pain.
The use of suction cups (ventozacio) on the lower limbs can replace phlebotomy of the deep vein and basilic vein: and thus it confers relief from asthma, constriction of the lungs, division of the lung's air conduit, coughing, and congestion.
And it is necessary that the suction cup on the lower limb be slightly moved, for if it remains in place, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
And the suction cup application to the head (alhagdahan) confers relief from accidental pain in the head and eye, migraine, inflammation, and tooth root pain; and it is an alternative to phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
And be sure to order the fan bearer not to press his hand during the incision so as not to pierce an artery and cause bleeding.
And the ventilation of the mind is achieved by applying alcohol to the mouth, and it helps with the corruption of the gums and resembles the conditions in the mouth that require phlebotomy, which is done on both lips.
But the ventilation that is performed on both scales provides a capstone, which is made by repleting warmth.
And the ventilation of the two openings within the follicles provides youthfulness to the phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilic, superficial, and cephalic veins; for it draws blood from all those manual veins within the flesh, as well as from the smaller veins of the other, larger veins, so that it attracts to the three veins.
And instruct the bellows-man not to over-process the scarification, for the place is denuded of flesh, and leaves it with only nerves and arteries.
And it is a bellows that is blown over the anus and confers relief to hemorrhoids in the buttocks and to purulent ulcers left behind.
And you should instruct the bellows-man to be a powerful bellows, and of iron, for the place needs strong cutting; and it tolerates only strong, subtle bellows and is scarified with scarification.
But the bellows from the legs should be reduced in size by gradual decrease, for they draw the blood from all over the body, and provide relief to old pains of gout and kidney stones, and of the bladder; and they induce menstruation, and provide relief from pain and swelling; and they are used instead of a flebotomy of two phials, and also in place of the clyster, and of two pins.
However, these weakens the entire body and cause fainting in many men.
And from the openings (or vents) of the loin cloth, the moisture is naturally drawn to the openings on both legs.
And the quality of the position of the openings is that it stops the flow of air at the beginning, allowing for a temporary suction, and does not prolong the position of the openings - rather, it slightly relaxes them, and tightly holds those that are strained, and allows the humors to come to that place through occurrence alike. And it should be repeated until the location turns red and swells, and the pain of the gout becomes apparent.
And then, you carefully continue with the suction, little by little, and consider the condition of the body.
For that man who has thin skin, take care to scarify him once, but not too deeply, so that the place is not ulcerated.
Command the fan to enhance the scarification slightly, and apply suction to facilitate the process.
If the abscess is enlarged, take care to scarify twice; for in the first incision, the passage for drainage of the abscess and its fluid is opened. In the second, apply the scrutiny acquired from the extraction of the large abscess.
And if the abscess is very foul-smelling, make your third scarification so that you achieve its final release.
Lastly, when we wish to extract a small abscess bit by bit or a tiny one, a single scarification is sufficient.
And if we want to extract a hard stone, we perform a thorough scarification; and if we know that the stone is large, then we must make a deep scarification.
And the term "scarification" refers solely to the depth of the cut.
And if the stone is very hard, dense, and its pores are narrow, tight, and closed, then the places for the suction cups should be softened, opened, and resolved; if it is in summer, use oil of aloe or violet, or oil of crushed almonds, or oil of chamomile; and if it is in winter, use oil of narcis, or oil of larkspur, or camomile, or sage.
And if the excess is very thick and hard, use oil of amber, or balsam oil, or aloe oil, or oil of anise, and similar oils.
If the leech is of ample size and has tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and at these places where leeches are applied, their sucking should be washed with warm water or hot water mixed with salt, or water from a couch, or water from a vineyard, and similar things.
And that one whose sanie (leech's secretion) is of great humidity, washes their suckers with wine or water mixed with mint and sumac and similar things.
And for that one whose excrements (leech's waste) are abundant, wash their suckers with ancient wine or hot water mixed with fennel, marjoram, or chamomile, and similar things.
And be it known that leeching should be avoided immediately before bathing; it is advisable to administer it soon after or within two hours following a bath, and ensure the leech rests appropriately.
What is it that must be done to regulate the flow of blood after phlebotomy before ventilation?
When beginning the treatment: if the phlebotomist or the one who has been given bloodletting is irritable and shows signs of severe pain and inflammation, then you must consider causes of coldness, such as with milky fever, indigestion accompanied by vomiting and diarrhea, and similar conditions.
And they should abstain from their meals as with leeks, and lean meats, and foods seasoned with acid, and similar things.
And for those whose condition is severe, they should take in drinking water mixed with alum, or hemp seed extract, and sumac, and between meals use aromatic herbs such as fennel and anise; and it should be recommended to them that they consume little beer and food, abstain from leeks, cabbage, and grapes, and limit their intake of small birds and pigeons.
And it is important that on days of ventilation and phlebotomy, liquid intake should be greater than food intake.
It is important to give drinks containing almonds, garlic, or musk to certain patients at specific times, such as before ventilation or phlebotomy, in order to provide comfort to the primary members and reduce swelling; however, it is not advisable for them to take that scorching heat.
All ventilation that involves cutting should be done slowly on the abdomen, and also on the spleen and umbilical area, in places where joints are, and the opening of the anus, since these members do not tolerate cuts upon them.
And it is not desirable for those with blood congestion in the members, so they use a slow ventilation over the breast in cases of flux of blood from the nose; and this is used to dissolve the tight ventilation inside the member, just as they pause it over the stomach and umbilical area; because it rarifies the member, it scalds it, and relieves the pain as it resolves ventilation.
And it is held in place over the bruises when accidents occur in their compression or pressure, for by virtue of strong attraction, it improves the bruised condition and eradicates the pain from its location.
And it appears to be held over the liver and gallbladder, requiring ventilation in those enclosed areas.
And these ventilations are administered using suction, sometimes only; and sometimes they are administered over fire.
And sometimes they are administered filled with hot water in the gallbladder ailments.
And this is so that the ventilation be filled and bring forth pus, it is only hot water or water in which appropriate herbs have been steeped.
Form of a wound administered by fire: the size of the opening should be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the medicine should be the width of a palm; and in the length of it, at the place where it is in the circuit, half its length, the incision should be small according to the quantity that fits into it with a needle.
Use ery or citrus, with thick margins, lion, donkey, and turtle shells to prevent the member from moving out of its position.
And at the middle of it, a transverse cut of ery or iron, where the candle is stopped over the fire.
And this wound is the greater part of that which we have previously treated; and its size is smaller according to the illness and the state of him who uses it.
And the bellows of children and the weak are different from the bellows of young men and strong bodies.
And the method of stopping this bellow is to apply a piece of fire from a wood fire to it appropriately in front of a small amount of wax candle, and place it over the middle of the transverse branch at the exact spot of the bellow, so that the fire is lit around the edge to prevent burning the patient's body.
Once it is placed over the patient's limb, and the said cloth is over the previously mentioned area, as long as we have the bellows and do not need to use the aforementioned method, heat will be applied to that cloth, and soon after, the bellow will dissolve.
And adjust the fire according to your preference, and repeat if needed.
Place a cup that is administered in pleurisy with water, without transverse or torn membranes, and it should only be filled with water and placed over the affected member.
And this is the method: And the size of this cup, the larger it is, the better, as it can receive a greater amount of water.
Chapter .xcvii.
Bloodletting should not be administered in most members, but only in those where it is impossible to place cups, due to their small size, such as the nose and similar parts; or in a member devoid of flesh, such as the nose and its surroundings.
And the quality of using those that you have found bloodletting cups, which are in the infected wounds of pigs.
And then, at night and in the morning, it is laid in warm water until they are relieved and no further cause of pain appears in the belly of those; and then the body is evacuated through phlebotomy and enemas; and then the patient's limbs are rubbed until they turn red; and then they are placed on top of him.
When they are full and the case is closed.
And if it is possible to suck out the area with an enema, it is more beneficial for healing.
Otherwise, wash the area with warm water, then apply pressure with cold water; and rub and squeeze it.
And if the swelling of the sore persists and it is prolonged, then this indicates the presence of blood vessels, and you should immerse a cloth in cold water, and place it on top until the swelling subsides.
If the wound is enlarged, sprinkle on it vitriol trichate, or gall and substances similar to those from astringent causes, until the abscess is drained; or apply heat over the area with cooked fava beans, and leave them there until the beans adhere to the wound, and the abscess drains.
And if it becomes necessary, apply blood-letting, when it is possible to remove these.
If blood-letting is prohibited from suspension, then the place should be rubbed with a fresh wound or left with a needle in the place until it heats up; and they should be paused, because those that feel any pain soon will give way to the wound.
And when you want them to fall off, sprinkle on them a little aloe trichate, or salt, or ashes, and soon they will come off.
Thus begins the section on the third stage: restoration. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; it deals with the restoration of broken and dislocated bones.
Oh, my child, know that those who boast of this chapter are foolish doctors and common folk, and those who at any time have not studied the books of the Ancients or read a single letter from them.
And for this reason, this way of thinking among scientists in our land is hidden; and you should not forget it at any time; and I have only devoted myself to it after a long study of the books of the Ancients and an understanding of their teachings, so that I may extract science from them.
And now I will describe my experiments and studies over the course of my life.
And now, I present the guessed translation of the provided line:
First principle.
In summary, and as a collection of fractures of the bones, those whose mention is necessary before beginning the remembrance of fractured limbs and different cases of each one. Therefore, let us state in the prologue of this chapter the sums of speech; and the chapters to the understanding of which the artificer is forced at the beginning, and at rest concerning the truth of those; it is you and those who are quick to know or learn this noble art from you.
And therefore say that when you encounter any fracture or dislocation or twist or misalignment, you must then consider at the beginning whether to begin with fleubotomy or to separate it, or in most cases, if no other cause prohibits, with a certain strength of virtue, or as it presents itself, or weak in decrepitude, or there is time for vehement heat, or vehement friction.
And then I am satisfied with my diet of herbs, veal, and crabs; I forbid fatty meats and filling myself with foods, and all foods that fill the veins with blood, as long as there is no danger of gangrene, or if you do not fear an effusion of matter into the member.
And then return the patient to their previous condition, in which they usually recover from it.
And so when the bone is broken and begins to heal, it is necessary to cut off food that is nutritious but heavy and rich in fat, such as foods made from wheat cooked with water, and rice, and caps (perhaps referring to a type of grain or vegetable), and beef, and veal, and fresh fish, and large animals, and sheep, and lighter foods similar to these. And at this stage, the goal is to achieve coagulization of the fracture more gently and slowly.
And you should know that the bones in old people and the infirm are easily broken and cannot be healed or consolidated according to their nature due to the lack of blood flow in their limbs.
However, nature may adjust and heal over a broken bone from any cause similar to gout in which swelling occurs that adheres and tightens that part which is always glued together and compressed together, until the end of strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, or any cause that does not prevent it from performing its works.
And for this reason, it is necessary to refrain from the patient's food, food in which gravity, viscosity, and thickness predominate, as we have said.
And you should know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of members, for the fracture of a bone in the leg is different from the fracture of a bone in the head, and the fracture of a bone in the foot differs from the fracture of a bone in the arm; similarly, all other members differ among themselves.
And now, let's proceed with the line-by-line translation:
A great variety of fractures lie within itself. And they are diverse species of bone fractures in their innards; for some are curved fractures or what happens to them in the stars; and sometimes they are fractures according to the length of the bone: such as stage fractures and star fractures, and others proceeding and not proceeding, as is done in writing when preparing a script, and fracture by plague and disruption on the head, and small fissure fracture.
And every species has its own method or torment for restoration according to the recollection of its distinct places.
A sign of bone fracture. And this is how bone fracture is known: the curvature of it, and that prominence and appraisal from touch, and only when you compress it with your hand.
And therefore if there is no sign of deformation or obvious injury when touching the bone and the pain is not severe, then it is not a fracture.
It may be either a deformation or a small fracture, in which case you must apply your hand with pressure and compression throughout; once you have done this, place medicines as indicated at the appropriate time, and make it very tight due to the subtle constriction.
And you should know that if the location is curved and does not split into two or anything else without accident in it stagnantly, when the entire part of its compar (presumably a body part) is moved, then you must begin your correction from your hour (time or effort) to rectify the curvature that has occurred, with caution.
If it is an apothema (a medical term that could refer to a variety of conditions) caut, then leave it for a few days until the apothema ceases; and subsequently bind it with whatever means you can find suitable for elevation and support.
And you should know that the restoration and stitching of an intestine is more delicate than the bone in which it occurs.
And then strengthen that second one as the recollection of it comes.
If the bone is deeply damaged, it is necessary to extend this severed member from two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or one string and your hand.
And your position should be such that you place the member in its natural state while the extensions of the severed member are spread out, then pierce so as to cause them to return towards their proper places, using any means or method possible.
And take care so that you do not harm the patient with your operation, or cause any damage; and pierce according to your ability, applying one bone to another in its best form.
And at that opportune moment, apply your hand to it, and if you notice any different cause, correct it and engulf it with the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid violent stretching and compression; thus do foolish doctors often cause gangrene by their operations, or they cause contraction in the member as we have seen with their violent practices.
And the quality of the tightness of the member at rest is what you should observe, because you must know that the members are diverse in their size and shape.
And regarding those that are small like the arm and the wrist and similar to others, you must understand that the envelopment should be of very fine cloth.
For those that are thicker like the skin or the leg, understand that these should have a thick and firm envelopment, because the adjacent tightness connects the large member and makes it firm from all sides, so nothing enters inside.
And then, begin to expel the evacuation of the bowels, apply appropriate pressure to it, over the site of that fracture with three or four layers depending on the member; and tighten your hand slightly onto the ligature.
And then inspect the part above the fracture site to ensure that you do not further tighten the constriction that you have already created at the site of the fracture. Then gradually extend the wrapping around the fracture site, slowly relaxing the constriction until you can take away the wrap from the site, opening it up considerably.
Then take another bandage and wrap it around the other side of the fractured area, over the previous wrapping; and inspect the openings left by the fracture, both in the stricture of the new wrapping and in the mollification (loosening) of the first wrapping as we have mentioned above.
And then place between the wrapping strips a piece of leather or cloth to which is attached the contortion of the fracture, if there is any; otherwise, do not place anything in it.
And then place your hand over the other area, and wrap these sterile bandages decently around it as soon as there is no inflammation or abscess in the place, and pause on what caused the abscess and what has brought about the inflammation; leave it for a few days, and then tighten the bandages.
And the bandages should be of different types, wisely chosen; they can be made of canvas, wooden sticks, or palm leaves, and their width should be according to this form and figure.
However, pay attention that the bandage placed over the fracture should be thicker and wider than the others, and its length according to the measurement of the member in size and smallness; then tighten the bandages over the other area as per your initial structuring; and wrap it tightly towards them decently as we have said about structuring, and it should be according to your structuring regarding the location of the fracture, and the wider it is from the fracture, the looser the structuring.
And ensure that the threads are of varying thickness and many; if the threads are thick, as you have seen in some surgical operations where the thread of the cords is twisted, it is a great error when the constriction is not uniform.
Furthermore, very thin threads are not suitable, as you cannot achieve the desired constriction, and it does not ensure that there is enough space between one thread and another to accommodate a finger.
If the patient's condition is aggravated by the extremities of the bones, then apply constriction at these sites, using materials like leather or woolen thread, as long as it does not cause any harm.
Sometimes a fracture is as bad as an illness, causing disruption in the chain of treatment, and it comes to mind again, as mentioned in the second chapter, according to its particularities.
And you should know that a completely broken member is not tightly bandaged on the first day; this is because, when the member is large, it cannot be held by bandages alone, but must be wrapped properly after several days, or fifth, or seventh, depending on your confidence in the healing without apothema.
And this is the method of the plasterers that the ancients used, which are placed over fractures and dislocations and twists.
Method of plastering as a quick restoration for fractures, especially useful for complex cases and particularly for women and children, because it does not allow heat or friction: take flour dust, the very heart of the flour that prevents the movement of the millstone against the walls of the mill.
And if it is not possible to do so, then take a fine cloth, and prepare the composition not too thick or thin; and use it accordingly.
Another method of plastering to restore fractures and dislocations: prepare assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, which are crushed from dragon's blood, mirra, and aloe, each in equal parts; all these ingredients should be mixed with alichil water or egg albumen if the patient's wound is clean; then apply this plaster, as it is of good composition and gently restores broken bones, and will benefit many people.
Another plastering method for fractures and twists: prepare myrrh and gum Arabic from dragon's blood, each in equal parts; add myrra and aloe, each in dragon's blood five times; acacia, six times; and Armenian silk, eight times.
All these ingredients should be ground in a mortar to a fine consistency, mixed with water or egg albumen and administered accordingly.
Method for applying plasters to joints and bones separated from their places, causing pain in these and in cracks and fractures; take fine wool, submerge it in a mixture of wine and oil, and apply it to the area.
This plaster is not only without restorative power but also prevents abscesses and effectively relieves pain.
Another method for a plaster that restores closed bones: take dried fig leaves and poppy leaves, mix them together, and make a plaster of them.
A method for a quick-acting plaster used for bone fractures and to resolve abscesses: take cuttings from alder, chamomile, and violet flowers, also flour of earth (likely clay), mix them all together; make it into a paste and apply it to the affected area, unless the member is infected.
If it is scalded, then apply that water of cold cucumber or water and use it.
Another method of applying a poultice for stronger resolution than the first one mentioned is as follows: take alder bark and seeds of fennel, and lupine, and melilot, and marjoram, and violet flowers, and chamomile, from any source; all these should be crushed and mixed with lavender water or rosewater or vinegar, according to the quality of the member and the rest of the patient's condition.
However, Hippocrates does not state in his treatise that the affected member should be rested before its restoration, but rather recommends applying a mixture of wax and oil, nor anything else; he also advises using a medium consistency between too thick and too thin.
A hot compress can also be applied to the fractured member after its restoration and when there is lack of warmth due to cold, just as with myrrh, fennel seeds, and similar substances, in accordance with the causes previously mentioned.
A method of applying a plaster for injury and pain: take equal parts of lint, dried leaves from a man's beard or quail feathers, and salt, crush them together, mix and make a plaster.
The amount should be adjusted according to the extent of the injury and if there is no pain or discomfort or if the bone is not broken, it is not necessary to dislodge it immediately; then, you should not attempt to remove it hasty. And if there is severe pain, pressure, or inflammation at the site, immediately remove or dislodge whatever is causing it and stop applying the plaster.
Take a piece of linen and marine sponge, soak them in warm water, and apply this to the area until the pressure and pain subside; then let the member rest for an hour. Afterwards, place over it some clean wool soaked in vinegar or rose oil, wrap it up, and leave it for a night, ensuring there is no further infection and that the inflammation of the member has subsided and the pain has lessened.
And then repeat that narrow constriction, applying a small plaster and do not tighten it with your first restriction, but treat it gently until it heals.
And if the abscess, swelling, pain, inflammation and all other symptoms have subsided, and you find a need for further treatment, then repeat that process as you initially began.
And if no such cause occurs in the member from those we have mentioned, then do not remove it, but leave it for three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes everything is left for twenty days, as you may see from the loosening of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and draws close to the coagulation of the flesh over that.
And then adjust the constriction more than your initial constriction, and adjust in the thickness of the patient's food, according to the remembrance of that.
If you examine the site of the fracture, already dried and weakened, but it does not heal, then know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching there; so immerse that part in hot water every time you take care of it; and do this for all three days; slightly relieve the tightness, and by this operation, direct the nutrition to the member, and thus cure it gradually.
But here is what foolish restorers of a member's fracture do when it does not heal according to plan, as it should, and instead worsens in its course, which is an error in their operation, causing great fear; if it were possible, they would enlarge the ancient wounds in the freed parts and turn them away from this.
And you have not seen any of them do this, so it is all the more reasonable that it should not be done.
**Section: On Fractures When They Occur in the Head.**
The fragments of fractures are diverse, and their shapes vary, and the causes are distinct, for some fractures are caused by the impact of a blow that completely shatters the bone within its joint, leaving the bone thus shattered in the flesh, and the incision does not pass through the rear of it; and this type of fracture is called *levatio absoluta*.
And the extent of these two types of fractures is either great or slight, and they can be caused by compression or traction; and their cause is a blow with force or an unexpected impact on the bone.
And this fracture is either penetrating, causing the pannus (fatty tissue) to be close to the bone, or it is on the surface of the bone; and the severity of these two types of fractures can vary greatly.
And in fractures where the bone is shattered into small pieces within its joint, so minute as to affect only a few hairs, this type of fracture is called *capillary*.
And it is a fracture that is caused either by an accident or by the impact of a stone, and appears as if some layer of bone enters the cracks inside, and it occurs in the concavity of the place just as it happens with the bones of the leg when they are struck and their entry into the cracks inside.
And it is most commonly found in the bones of the humid body, just as it is in the skulls of infants.
And all these types of fractures, when the bones are separated like stars, are painful just as when stones are detached. And then come to the remembrance of all this in its place.
And I would recognize all these types of fractures by detecting them, and by questioning their attempts, and the outward appearance of the corrupted flesh that is upon them.
And a special capillary is known for being discovered over the bone, it is cleaned, and bandaged over it as the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, one must consider from the beginning the accidents of illness, and if you observe signs that indicate by their manifestation on evil, such as vomiting of cholera, extension, loss of understanding, loss of voice, fainting, acute fever, bleeding from the nose and redness of those parts, and similar symptoms in the vital organs, it is not considered healthy.
And if you observe non-corrupt accidents, you hope for health, then you begin the treatment of them.
Which cause is because if the plague comes to you at the beginning as it comes and this happens in the winter, then you should study the condition of the bone regarding its position on the twelfth day according to all dispositions.
And if it is during the summer days, you must be careful to cut off the flesh surrounding the bone on the fifth day, as what remains will be corrupt with panicula, and accidents that we have mentioned may occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the pannicula covering the brain and is in small pieces and inflammation, you must carefully incise the comminuted and inflamed part, as I have mentioned before.
For it is that you cut open the patient's wound, discover the bone according to its usual position and manner, as possible based on the form of the plague, and then close over the patient.
And if you encounter a bone fracture with pus or abscess, be cautious and treat it as follows: fill the area with soaked bandages in wine and rose oil, and let the plague rest until the abscess is calmed and be sure of the flow of pus; then begin with the circumferential incision around the bone and its removal.
And this is according to one of two methods of operation.
And the other method is that you insert the knife into the bone at an angle, and this is its form: Then administer another incision to this one, slightly wider than that one; and this is its form.
Then administer the wider incision than the second one.
You should choose the right number of incisions, some wider than others; and some shorter, with their tips more acute, made of iron or steel.
And use them with ease in percussion over the incision to prevent any conflict between its head and the wound.
And if the bone is strong, hard, you must pierce through its circumference before administering scissors to the incisions, which are called non-penetrating incisions.
And they are not called thus, but because they do not reach the end of the bone in the testis, so that when it is brought close, its rounded extreme or margin is over what remains of its head, sharp like a margin or small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take a great number of these incisions, as each one suits the specificity of every bone, provided that in all parts of the skull, the end of which should be sharp, the quantity in length and brevity is according to the amount of specificity of this test.
This is the method of three kinds of incisions: The quality of perforating through the circumference of a broken bone is to place the incision over the bone and twist it in your hands, as long as you know that the bone is already penetrated; then change the incision to another location, and stop when you have completely gone around the thickness or width of the ray or region.
And then cut with scissors what is between any two bones, and make that thin pus flow over it in a lifting manner, as we have said, to remove the bone, or with your hand, or with any other cause through some tools you prepare for this purpose, as well with pincers and forceps.
And be careful that the scissors do not touch any cause of damage to the patient.
So, once you have perforated the bone and it is separated from the tissue if it was connected to it, and you have extracted it, be careful that you scrape and clean it on the roughness of it from what is in the bone differently from the scissors, but nonetheless ensure it is both thorough and subtle compared to other scissors.
And if you encounter any fragment of small and thin bones, then use the facility at your disposal from among your tools; and then apply this to cure the wound with liniment and ointment as we have mentioned.
And another method of operation is light, free from pain, which cuts Gaul and praise for great merit; and this is the speech of it: It is necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to uncover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and evident, until when you have uncovered that space and have paused, leaving behind the extremity of this slow and gentle cut, of which this is the shape.
And the lenticular partition is round and does not cut any cause, and the acute partition is in two parts ahead in length, so when you have it; the lenticular partition should be adjusted to the shape of the face of the acute-incising one on the bone.
Then strike the cut of one partition with a small mallet until it cuts through the bone completely, thus revolving, and you should be sure of the pannicul that it does not occur in it by accident that you fear in any way, and if the physician14 was the most foolish among all men and the most ignorant of their; certainly, he would have been sleeping.
When a rupture occurs in any part of the pancreas due to some cause related to bone, he should incise it with a scalpel at its edge, and then deliver the pancreas from it easily, as it is freed from its pain and suffering.
If the bone fracture does not penetrate into the pancreas, and what has been severed from the bone is the face of it, containing asperities and subtle lines, then you must scrape off those asperities and eradicate those subtile lines with the razors you have prepared in various numbers, to be able to administer them in every location as most convenient for their use and most correct according to how your operation has left the broken bone and its shape.
And you must administer in your reasoning with which to scrape the bone at the beginning, using the subtlest of those razors, and do not cease doing so according to continuity until you have administered the most powerful and subtlest of all those.
Place a small glass tube in each of the other minor fractures, and break it gently; ensure you administer treatment according to what you find during correction.
And this is the cause that it is not preserved for all those who have studied this art. And let us dwell on what he has written; we have demonstrated this in great fractures.
And if the pannicul is contracted when you radiate the bone, then take cloth from it according to the quantity of the abscess, submerge that in warmed oil, and place it over the abscess; then take another cloth, folded or tripled, immerse it in wine and warmed oil, and place that over the first cloth, lightly pressing it upon the abscess without causing pain; and finally, administer a lat (unclear term) remedy to that, and do not tighten it unless the abscess is as large as it can be.
And leave this treatment for a day or two until you are certain of the absence of gangrene; then remove it and administer medicines that promote dryness, such as lint, flour of earth, powder of herbs and aristology, and others similar to these.
And you should make this powder that is to be sprinkled over the wound when it is dry; and generally, administer to them all medicines of the proper kind of which they abstain and do not bite.
And be careful according to your virtue that the wound in your treatment is clean; and do not leave any pus or other impurities; nor should you add violence to it; for when it is attached to the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts and attacks it, and causes great harm to the patient.
And it happens in the skull of the head, as from it the bone is softened and most when the treatment of it is delayed, and it becomes black on its surface; and therefore consider whether accidents to the patient occur, as we have said, knowing that they are harmful to all their skill.
And if the blackness does not disappear with the medication applied to it, but because of that same medication, then you should take some honey and olive oil mixed together in equal parts, and apply those linments to the affected area; and then use a cloth to cover it; and subsequently apply the appropriate treatments for healing as needed.
**Chapter III**
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
You know that the nose is not broken in two places, but rather one of those small bones, so it has two parts, and since the broken piece is cartilaginous, it is not actually broken, but suffers from attrition, deformity, and inflammation.
If one of the two parts of the nose is broken, then you should insert that small piece into its place within the nose and hold it there with the help of a specific instrument, until the bone returns to its original shape. And do this to facilitate it for yourself, and be careful not to cause harm in your operation on the patient's pain.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it does not heal there, then you should equalize the pressure at the end of the line where there is a slight bulge.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should make it similar to this.
And be careful to restore it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, hold the eighth or ninth day of rest for the healing of the wound cautiously.
And insert a piece of clean cloth in the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or two pieces, if the fracture is in two parts, and make sure it is as wide as to fill the nasal cavity.
And thus, some of the ancient restoratives are that the swelling be immersed in a bath, and changed throughout the day, as I have not seen; it is now known that the joint should be soaked in an alum bath mixed with flour powder; and then the swelling should be kept within until the bone is hardened and the cartilage strengthened.
And in some cases, it is encountered inside the nose instead of swelling, due to the high amount of pus, as it is wrapped in lion's linen; and it is that the fracture of the nose is already severe, and the evil does not prevent inspiration.
And this course is not necessarily required; and if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use swelling.
And if another case of post-operative infection occurs, apply a plaster to the nose with cerate or a bandage dipped in hot vinegar and rosin, or dust it with diachylon.
If you do not accidentally cause an abscess, then cover that external wound with flour of sizamin and powder of crushed herbs mixed with egg albumen, and place your hand over it, pressing the lion's stop, and do not let air enter for any reason.
If your nasal bones are broken or fractured, then you must carefully cut them and extract the fragments using suitable instruments; then with the cut, clean it using what is appropriate to that place, and consolidate it, and apply suitable plasters.
And if an infection occurs inside the nose, then you must carefully clean it with heat and insert lead tubes until it is completely healed.
**Chapter IV.**
**Restoring the Mandible After a Fracture**
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not severe, observe if the fracture is only on the outside, and not split into two and bent inward, then its healing will be slight.
And if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left little finger into the patient's mouth; and conversely, if the fracture is on the left mandible, then insert your right little finger, pushing gently from the inside to facilitate the healing on the inside, and equally from the outside of the bone's fragment.
And if the mandible fracture is already separated into two parts, then apply extension to both parts according to their correct alignment, so that they can be brought back into proper position.
And if there is a commotion of teeth due to disruption, then use those of which you expect to remain in a row with gold or silver or ivory wire; and place your hand over the broken mandible first, then place a doubled cloth on it, and a large, properly cut piece of cloth, or a single piece equal in length to the mandible; and then secure it as appropriate according to your equipment for binding it, so long as it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and be calm, and refrain from consuming spicy foods.
And if you estimate that the shape has already been altered in some way, then on the third day, you should cut and loosen what has become tight, and correct what has been altered by applying a poultice of flour, egg white, or chickpea meal, since you will have removed the cerate from it, and place over the paste a lion's hair.
And having thus placed and adjusted this poultice over him, and the arrangement of the bone is not altered, leave it, unless it becomes loose before the fracture heals; for generally this fracture will be tight in three weeks.
And if another complication occurs, such as an abscess, then administer what we have mentioned before in the treatment of it until it heals, and drain that abscess.
And if the fracture is a severe one, consider whether it's a complete separation of bone or dislocation, then you should carefully align those dislocations with what seems appropriate in the removal of those from the tools.
And if the opening of the fracture is narrow, you should expand it with a flebotomy according to the extent of your need.
And once you have aligned those dislocations, and if they do not naturally return to their place, expand the opening of the fracture; otherwise, apply a splint to that one of the appropriate tools and reduce it, until it heals.
It appears that the text you've provided is incomplete or missing context, making it challenging to determine its meaning or provide an accurate translation. The term "Capitol" could refer to various concepts depending on the surrounding text, such as a geographical location, a building, or even a concept in medicine or law. Without additional context, a precise translation is not feasible.
Regarding the restoration of the furcula (a term that could refer to various structures based on context, but often used anatomically) when it is fractured.
When the bones of the joint are broken, the fork-shaped part is fractured, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Whether it is broken, separated, or separated into two parts that do not involve additional injuries; it is easier to restore it; or it occurs in such a way as to cause complications, and it is difficult to restore it; or the fracture is like a plague.
And for the operation on that one, when the fracture is like a plague, you should have two assistants; one holds the adjutor and continues to hold the broken fork, while the other stretches the patient's leg at that point.
Then bind the fracture with ties as needed so that it takes the shape required; not in a slight prominence or concavity.
And if you need more extension, wait until the patient rests with the edge of the wound covered with a cloth or wool, and its size according to the amount of your necessity; then stretch and raise the fork and shorten the thread with your hand as you swallow the fracture as it suits.
And if you cannot stretch the end of the fork to the desired extent, because it has reached its limit, then wait until the patient's pain is relieved, and place a cushion over the muscles in a size half as large.
And the assistant should press the muscles on both sides until the bone of the fork is raised above the wound, then correct the fracture and bind it with your cloth.
If you feel resistance from the fork and it is stubborn, then cut through it and extract those threads with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, you will ingeniously make an incision of it with one of the instruments which you have prepared for this purpose, since you had left the fork, the instrument that serves to grasp; and it is an instrument of wood or iron, which has this form.
And it resembles a cup, from which this is the concavity; and its size according to what you have needed of it, according to the size of the bone or the weakness of it.
Make the length of it according to what is possible for the operation; for there should be two ends thus, with one end wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the plague which you have made when you extracted the tissue from the bone is wide, and there is no danger of infection, then you will adjust both edges of the wound with stitches.
And if the disruption is minor or you fear infection, use clean rags and poultices according to the amount of wound tissue.
If infection occurs, then apply a cloth soaked in hot vinegar and olive oil, and place it over the affected area.
And as long as the bone's fracture is not exacerbated; and so that you may observe the malady each day, if you see the ligament soften or the sternum already reformed, then correct it and strengthen the binding.
Then suspend the patient's sleep on their side, and place a small cushion under their thigh to prevent the pressure from sleeping on it at night; so that with that, the patient's helper is raised from the side of that area, and thus the fracture of the furcula is elevated due to the muscle, or the patient's arm is lying on the collarbone.
And do not loosen the ligament unless you notice improvement in the area or abscess within twelve days.
Then renew the bandage if you see any signs of deterioration to it, adjust the tightness, and restore it; leave it until the fracture of the furcula is healed and the wound is coalesced.
And it is strengthened and eased according to the most in 28 days, and sometimes in some people it is done in less time than that.
**Chapter VI**
**On the Restoration of Shoulder Fractures**
The blade of the spatula is broken in the lateral part of the patient, but it is not completely broken off, only the edges are damaged.
And therefore, when the lateral part is broken and it is broken in the middle part, and it is not known but by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture, you must prepare it and reduce it back to its natural shape in every way with the help of such devices as are at your disposal.
Then apply a powder made from almonds and stop it with; and apply a dust of doubled cloth; and place a thin wooden plank on the side of the table according to the whole or a little more of the spatula.
If the ribcage is concave in any part of the chest, then you should compress that concave area with your hand, and return the ribcage to its natural position.
And then tighten it strongly with a bandage, compressing the tongue of the ribcage until it returns to its proper place without any damage.
And consider the condition of the ligament each day; whenever it becomes softened, tighten it again and return the ribcage to its place if it has shifted.
And watch over the patient on their side.
And the ribcage will be restored in ten days or twenty-five days.
And therefore, when this period is complete, you will loosen the ligament, and you should be certain that it is from among the bones whose beginning does not cause fear or the dissolution of their union.
And if you proceed from the site of the painful bone and place a chain there, then split it open and hold it, and act as we have said in the fracture of the furca of the scapula of apoplexy if this should happen here.
**Chapter VII.**
**On the Restoration of the Broken Foot.**
The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, and this should be treated immediately; otherwise, its ends may become infected and shattered.
And one of the accidents of the foot when the middle is broken is that it tilts to the sides and causes great pain, difficulty in moving, and all symptoms including severe leukocyte count and vomiting; and it is manifest within the cavity of the broken bone and not hidden from sensation.
And the restoration of it is to lay the patient on their back, and place a cushion between their thighs; then press their muscles and adjust their ribs with the help of two assistants, and be delicate in the operation and disposition according to every possible manner that suits this case, so that the shape of the bone returns as it was.
And then apply a plaster and stopgap using a thin sheet of sauze or calig (a type of cloth) and similar materials in layers, wrapping it around; be delicate in binding the broken bone without causing further damage; periodically check the binding and tighten it as the swelling goes down; consider the binding at all times, and when it becomes softened, tighten it.
If it becomes necessary to cause the displacement of the fragment, or if there is corrosion, pain, or an abscess at the site, then cut and remove the plaster, and clean the wound, rectifying what has occurred by means of treatment; reduce the new plaster if needed; and adjust the binding so that healing takes place.
Chapter VIII.
On the restoration of broken ribs.
You know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur lightly, but in severe blows to the back; and as for their extremities, away from the point of impact, it does not cause compression to those parts because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not veiled from sense, you must inquire about its condition by examining it.
And its restoration should be such that it aligns with the fracture as mentioned above according to the method possible; if it is swallowed, then it should be extracted according to its covering, and a plaster applied to strengthen the broken bone, if necessary.
If the fracture of the ribs is declining towards the internal parts, it causes severe pain and piercing to the patient, just as piercing occurs to one who has pleured, and due to this, the rib puts pressure on the lung; it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of bitter liquid; and this is a condition of difficult cure.
And ancient remedies are ingeniously devised in that most cunning art.
And regarding these, they say: cover that which prevents the intake of food causing inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the fracture is forced out of place.
We would caution against this so that it does not cause a trivial infection to develop into a serious ulcer, if it happens; and if it already has, then help should be sought immediately.
They also said that some should be applied to the affected area to promote healing and strength, but it is recommended that suction be done carefully; this seems logical, yet there is concern that the wind could push excess fluid to the site due to weakness.
They also said: cover the area with cloth previously soaked in hot oil, and place poultices between the ribs until it is filled, compressing it according to its shape; this is also treated as a cure for pleurisy of food and with medications.
And if the disease causes severe constriction that cannot be tolerated, and the bone punctures painfully, fear for the disease, then cut away at the site, expose the broken edge, and place an instrument above it to preserve the shape, the memory of which is preceded, and cut through the bone easily, and extract it.
And it is appropriate to adjust the two edges of the wound if it is large, with stitching, and dress it with bandages until it heals.
And if an abscess occurs inside, cut it open and insert poultices in warm oil and place them over the area, and treat the disease with what covers the abscess inside.
And it is necessary to change the position on which he sleeps until it heals.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of the fractured spine of the back and neck.
Sometimes, the bones of the neck can fracture and their cartilage can be affected, resembling the fractures of the spine in the back. And when this happens to anyone and you want to know if they will recover, consider that if their muscles are already softened, stunned, and paralyzed, and they cannot move or tighten them, and when you press on those areas with your fingers or a needle, they do not feel pain, then you know that recovery is unlikely, and in such cases, the condition is fatal.
And if they feel pain in the areas of constriction and piercing, then know that the fracture of the bone is not severe and that the malady will heal with treatment.
And if you see the spine in the neck resembling this and want to know if it will heal, consider the patient's feet.
When you notice that the pain has already subsided, pay attention to the part affected, and when lying on their back, they experience difficulty breathing and movement, sometimes they rise onto their hands and cannot urinate, then know that it is a serious condition, and do not attempt its treatment.
If no specific cause occurs from those symptoms, the underlying cause is better and easier to treat.
And the treatment for it is that you pierce at the sensation of the abscess with a hot cauterize iron, or use lard or other substances; place this on the affected area several times a day until the abscess becomes numb by the cautery.
And then place a comfortable and firm bandage, tighten it over the affected area, and instruct the patient to rest and maintain tranquility, and not sleep on the side where pain is felt until it heals.
And if it is necessary to remove the atrophy of a bone or any cause that has already separated from it, you must clean any discharge on the wound and expose the bone; then adjust the two edges of the wound, suturing them if they are large; and tend to the healing of any incarnated pus from infections, as long as it heals.
If the end of the bone is broken and it is the last joint, then you must insert your left hand's thumb into the space between the bones and, as best as possible, align the broken bone with the other hand using the second position; then apply a plaster and bandage over it, if needed, and strengthen it.
And if you feel broken bones in it, then bind them and hold them still, and treat the wound with the cure that precedes its healing.
**Chapter X.**
On the restoration of the bowel.
The bones of the bowels are often broken, and if they break, the fracture of them is nothing but communication in the extremities of those parts and they are sharp at their length and decline to the inside; and it causes pain for the patient in that place and puncturing, and the leg is stunned when a fracture occurs.
And the restoration of it is that you place your hand over that area which is above the fracture, as the form of it.
And if the fracture is at the extreme of it, then you should bind that according to what you have learned by reason, making it similar to its natural form.
If the fracture is in the length or has already declined to the inside parts, then you should make the patient lie on their stomach, so that you can prepare for the restoration of that fracture. And so when you have secured that, place the plaster over it and then place a wooden or leather board on top, and tighten tightly so as not to fear any fracture or removal of the star (or bone).
And open the concavity until it accommodates that which fills it, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
If there is a risk of gangrene, stop the extension of the ulcer and its restoration until the gangrene has subsided, and apply to it what was mentioned before; then return to the restoration of the intestine, and tighten it as covered.
And if it affects the joints or bones is broken, then treat them.
Chapter XI.
On the restoration of the broken assistant (or: support).
The adjutori is what lies between the thigh and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is to take a plane of moderate thickness as follows:
And both ends of the ligament should be seen to be in two places, and then it is suspended from a higher place.
Then follow the patient on their side; and then throw your broken arm over the leg until it reaches the thickness of the limb in the middle where the curvature of the leg is attached.
And then suspend it over some heavy cause, or the physician will extend it to the parts below; and then the doctor should place his hands on the fracture, until the fracture returns as it ought to be.
And another method is that the patient be turned over onto their back and raise their chest with one hand while the other holds the area above the fracture with their fingers; then command two assistants, one to hold what is above the fracture with both hands, and the other to hold the pus from below. And each of them extends themselves according to their ability.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, tighten your grip on the fracture with the ligament and another ligament, and each of the two assistants extends themselves in two directions.
And so if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, you should stop half of the ligament over the tendon and the other side below the fracture towards the elbow.
And similarly if the fracture is close to the elbow, you should stop the ligament at that place and over the elbow.
Immerse this in easy water and perform the treatment, and then when it is immersed according to its nature and applied with good application, tighten it if it does not cause infection through cauterization.
If infection through cauterization occurs, then leave the tightness within the seventh day, place a cloth soaked in vinegar and rosin on it while the abscess is healing, and then tighten it again.
And the method of tightening it is to place a plaster over the fracture, then wrap new cloth around the plaster; adjust the arm onto the aid, and keep your hand open over its muscle.
And unroll the cloth and tighten it around the arm aid to keep the arm in place without any hindrance from the broken bone.
And then use splints.
And it is that it rests on the fracture that is both thick and strong compared to the other bones; and it places between each bone the width of the finger, and the length of the bones according to the break with an addition of three parts from the whole.
And then tighten the bones with the bandage or splint that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is that the bandage or splint over the fracture should be tighter. And the less the fracture is displaced, the looser the bandage or splint can be.
And so, depending on the position of the bones and the bandage as we have said in the moment when you restore the member to its normal position, this is how you proceed.
And if you fear gangrene, then leave the stricture and the stitches within until the seventh day as we have said.
And then consider the dressing on all parts for three days so as to prevent any occurrence of pressure or swelling at the site; and also ensure that food does not reach the member due to excess tightness of the dressing; and therefore correct everything as we have said.
If you are confident that nothing of this sort will happen, then do not loosen the ligature but rather wait three days or more.
And let the patient's rest in the supine position with their back and hands on the stomach.
And place a warm, fully packed compress of wool on the injured member, and consider at all times during the night or day that the bandage not be loosened or dissolved, or that the dressing become soft; therefore correct it entirely with your skill.
And hold the patient's food according to the order we have mentioned above, so that the food is subtle at first until it begins to tighten; and now you will notice that the food becomes thicker in them.
As for the custom of the assistant and the leg support, they should be tightened for 10 days, and you will notice that they become loose and should be given baths and applied with ointments that correct it.
And if the fracture is old and healed, you will not loosen that ligament and stitches within one day or within two months.
Chapter XII
On the restoration of arm fractures.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the humerus and the radius; of these, one is smaller, which is known as the elbow bone, and the other is larger, which is supported below the small bone, extending upward.
And if the main or secondary bowstring is broken, it is usually broken in two pieces at once.
And when the smaller bowstring breaks above, its restoration is easier, and its healing is faster.
And when the bowstring below breaks, and its fracture is severe, then healing becomes difficult.
And even worse is when two bones break at the same time.
Therefore, if the bone that breaks is the smaller bowstring above, it is good for the doctor, as its restoration requires less effort and time before it heals completely.
But if the larger bowstring breaks, then more extension is required, which is more difficult.
And if the two incisions are made at the same time, then be sure to apply pressure on the most painful extraction point.
And be sure to place your hand in such a way that you restore the intestine and extend it over one of the cushions, with the wrist of your hand away from them, more so than all the others, and the painful area lower than the rest, with the patient resting on a prepared bed.
And place a cushion in front of them at the appropriate height or angle, so that the patient does not struggle.
Then have the assistant extend their free arm below the patient or along their side, and another minister similarly above them.
Then the doctor should align the bones within to reduce them, according to the best possible configuration.
And if in the treatment of the bone there are obstacles, then you must perforate and reduce all the weight to its place with your skill.
And if there appears to be a separated fragment that will not respond to treatment and restoration is not hoped for, then you must cut it off and stop it according to the method we have discussed above.
If the fracture is severe and you have already dealt with this particular case in a previous chapter, then take up the care of that one as well.
And if an abscess appears at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line it with a cloth made of rose oil and white wax, using greater care between specific and subtle points, and stretch the cloth tightly over that area until the abscess subsides; then remove the cloth and apply a plaster prepared from powder of cornmeal mixed with honey, and place bands; and let the bandage that is placed on that fracture be both further and stronger.
And you should know that the names of the bones in the arm are arranged in major positions, either in a single fracture or in two fractures together.
Then apply your pressure over the site of the fracture more strongly and vehemently, and as the tightness in the parts above the fracture or in the lower parts of it increases, reduce the pressure a little more gently according to how the recall of the pain occurs at the beginning of the chapter.
And the bands that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, and the thread by which they are tightened should be of medium thickness, as we have recommended.
And consider the member and its ligament for several days. And if any cause occurs that requires correction, as soon as you notice the pain in the member, it is advisable to apply water or some other remedy until the pain disappears.
And allow the member to relax until it rests, then carefully return the constriction.
And if the tightness has already been softened and the bone has healed and appears like that, then correct everything with your virtue.
And consider more if the nourishment is blocked from reaching the member due to excessive tightness, then you must soften that slightly and allow it to rest for a few days until the nourishment reaches it, then strengthen it accordingly.
If the patient does not experience any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to loosen it within a few days or around those times.
And hold the patient's hand with your virtue to prevent restless movements, and make them sleep on their back.
And you know that this fracture is healed in 30 days or 33 days, or even earlier in 28 days, and all of this depends on the disposition of the complications and the state of the virtue.
**Chapter XIII**
**On the Restoration of Fractures of the Hand and Fingers**
You know that the hand and fingers often suffer fractures, and these do not heal well unless the cause of the injury is addressed.
And when an injury or fracture occurs in the hand, you must ensure that the patient remains calm and lays the hand on the affected area with equal pressure, and then place your own hand over it.
Then the physician should extend the broken bones and align them so that they are correctly positioned together.
And then cover it with a compress and stoppers, otherwise you risk an infection; then place the stepl (or bandage) over it according to the area's size, and you have already wrapped that in linen cloth.
If the fracture is in the inner parts of the hand, and it seems like a thumb's nail is broken, make the patient hold that part tightly; then wrap a long strip of cloth around it.
And the bandage of cloth on which the body is placed should be applied to the palm, and it should be tightened as needed.
If the fracture is in the outer parts, you should place a bandage on it and another bandage to the side of the palm, so that the hand is covered and straightened; then apply tightness, thus as the hand returns to its normal position between the joints.
If a fracture occurs in one of the bones of the finger, and it is the proximal phalanx, it should be immobilized according to its shape and close it firmly with the palm, and if you wish, hold the small right splint to elevate the fracture and prevent further damage.
If the fracture is in other fingers, just as in the middle finger, or in the index, or in the little finger, or in the ring finger, it should be immobilized on the finger to which it belongs; or all of them can be immobilized together, which is better; or a small splint can be placed on top of it, just as we have said for the proximal phalanx.
And consider, in your restoration, and return that, the order of the abscess, carefully and opposite - with respect to your operation - to what covers when any cause of those occurs, as described in the narrative.
Chapter XIV.
On the restoration of the broken bone in the thigh.
The bone in the thigh moves and breaks, presenting itself in pain according to its position regarding the fracture and the amount of pus.
And the restoration of it is done in this way that the ligament is strengthened over the fracture and another ligament left over the fracture, and the patient is placed on their belly and face down.
Then the surgeon extends the ligament to its position according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
If it is indicated for the thigh, then its ligament is drawn towards the opposite side at the joint of the hip, allowing for extension and preventing bending, while another ligament is left over the fracture.
And if it seems that the fracture is deep, then make the ligament proper to the joint, and extend it to the adjacent parts.
Then the doctor should align the bones with both hands, reducing them as much as possible according to their natural appearance, and when the bone is properly joined, cover it with a bandage and tightness; otherwise, you risk causing damage to the affected member. If damage occurs in the affected member, then leave it for a few days until the inflammation subsides, and then return to your treatment.
The bandage should be made tight: it should cover the fracture with a hard cloth, folded twice or three times, and removed when excess is present; then wrap the leg until it reaches the thigh and the root of the wound.
And insert a long strip of linen between the thigh and the leg near the joint, bringing the ends of the strip from the sides, making them dominant over both parts, and then turn it back over the leg and thigh, removing what is superfluous from the bandage.
Then place your hand over the thigh at the site of that fracture, and apply a cold compress to the bone of the leg.
Then fill the vacuum between the thigh and the leg with soft cloths, so that the constriction is coagulated.
And then commence with a strong compression from the middle over the site of the fracture using three or four folds, and as you stretch away from the fracture site, your compression becomes weaker and lighter and more moist.
And extend both ends of the strip to the sides until it reaches the toe joint, and strongly hold both ends of the cloth from the other side to prevent the ligament from shifting from its place.
And then gently tighten the bandage over it so that it does not cause damage to the affected member or lead to gangrene or inflammation and similar conditions; and if any cause from those arises, then pay attention to its detachment from you, and correct what has happened immediately, as we have mentioned before.
If there is pain in the bone itself, then cover it as best you can; otherwise, wrap it and apply remedies to it, and pay attention to the recall of what preceded the pain until it is healed.
And in some cases, this fracture of the thigh is so severe that it cannot be adjusted with bands, as we have mentioned in the aid and support for the leg.
However, in restoring it in this manner, do not cause the patient to limp; and if it is restored alone, then another bandage should be applied to the other leg, because it is necessary that he does not limp from the one that has been treated.
And you should know that the condition is severe in 40 days or a little less or a little more, and all of this depends on the variety of complications and other dispositions.
**Chapter XV**
**On the Restoration of the Broken Humerus**
You should know that the fracture of the humerus in the arm often leads to prolonged pain, and as a result, it may cause increased tightness and stiffness.
If it happens that the fracture is not just a crack or break in its parts, but rather a severe fracture, this is considered a great affliction, and it has been a source of suffering for many.
And the restoration of it should be done in such a way that it replaces what was broken, reconnecting and joining the parts together as best as possible according to reason and ease of fabrication.
And then apply a plaster and press it onto that round spot, if you need to; tighten around it with something suitable.
And then consider all the arrangements we have recommended in other fractures, thus taking care and opposing to any incident that might harm it until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of the broken leg.
Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is thick and is called the femur; and the other is thin and is called the tibia.
And it happens in some cases of fracture that the two bones of the arm are affected, and for this reason restoration is made to them equally as with the arm itself; the operation on them is one.
And if two bones are broken together, the leg is completely shattered.
And if the broken bone is a subtle fracture, the leg is shattered in multiple places.
And if the broken bone is a severe, complete fracture, you will feel a pop, and it is one of those causes that are not easily healed.
Then apply extensions, tension, and ligation of the bands according to that engagement.
However, if the leg fracture is open without severe damage, the extension should be less and lighter, and it will benefit from your skill.
And in the leg is any cause for surgery on the arm, and it is when you bind the stars and complete all the surgical tie, you will take pieces of wood from a thick tree where they are left with causes that are rooted alone, and they are made entirely of palm branches; align them to those that require slight roughness, and do not be stiff with your hands, and let the length of those correspond to the length of the leg, and from the inside to the outside at the deepest point.
And then wrap each drape in two layers according to its length, place one at the crotch of the leg from one side and another from the other side, and they should cover all parts of the foot.
Then attach the two stirrups in three places on each side and at the middle point, for this structure prevents the leg from bending at the joints, and it stays firmly in place.
And now a strap of leather is administered according to the length of the leg, and it holds the leg in place so that it does not move.
And most importantly, make sure you do this in cases of fracture, and when that pain is particularly acute.
And then consider each leg daily, studying it thoroughly to understand its condition, and observe for signs of hernias or inflammations or other similar causes; and when any of those conditions arise, take care to treat them until they are healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the fracture of the talus bone and the bones of the foot, and on their dislocation.
The talus bone does not suffer fracture entirely; rather, it is the bones of the foot that sometimes suffer fractures; and the joints of the foot rarely suffer fractures, but they do sustain wear and tear due to their mobility.
And if the bones of the foot do indeed fracture and these bones become dislocated among themselves, then the patient should lay their foot on the ground prepared in this way as they recover.
Then place one foot over what is elevated among these bones, and apply pressure to them, pressing and binding them until they return to their proper places.
And then apply a plaster and stop it, leaving the foot's belly on a small table with two legs.
Then tighten that on the foot with its natural flexibility, since you have wrapped it with cloth and other causes from which you need relief.
And as the condition passes three or four days later, you will loosen the ligament, since you will find the bones entangled, or broken or dislocated, and the operation on these is as well known to you.
But if someone says it is broken, then restore them, and engage them as well as you have learned in the restoration of the said bones with your hand. And then place this broken bone in line with its length and slightly bend it on one side; and put the foot on this table which is properly positioned, and tighten that with its natural flexibility.
If what is broken off from the bones is two or three pieces or more, then you should place over each part a cloth soaked in warm water, tighten the table at the bottom of the foot, and stand on one end of the table to make an opening in the foot's belly so that it has good retention.
And it is important that you do not forget to consider all the causes mentioned to you in the other fractures of accidents that we have discussed; and be attentive to any accident related to this.
**Chapter XVIII**
**On Fractures of the Hip Bone, Shin Bone, and Male Genital Bone**
When the hip bone is fractured, make it rest in a position that allows the broken part to be raised slightly, and place something behind it to support it.
And then the midwife fills the cavity with heat, applying it to the wound thus with hope; and the woman is made to bend, slowly raising her legs one by one, until everything is removed from within so that the wound is exposed before the removal of the cavity with hope and the broken bone heals.
Then she places poultices on the patient's back, and when they wish to urinate, they relax the wound with ease and urinate, then return it and place it according to the same method as before, and finally, return to their original poultice.
And she does so for seven days or around that time, for it is thus restored.
And if you wish, take a bladder of a sheep and place a tube of canvas over the wound; then insert the entire bladder into the cavity, and blow air into the tube until the bladder is inflated inside the cavity, for the fracture heals.
And then it is filled with a compress and remains for some days, according to our prescription, until it heals.
And when the bone of the thigh of a man or woman is broken, then administer in its restoration and healing the water that we have recommended for the hip bone.
And what is right should not be overlooked in these proximal fractures, which rarely occur, especially to those who have little knowledge or experience with this my book; for that fracture speaks to you in the greatest dispositions for a direct and strict healing.
But in the case of a man's broken leg, take a poultice from above and place it on the leg; then wrap it with cloth, and wrap it again, and lay it for three days or so, and it will heal.
Capital XIX.
On the restoration of broken bones when they are injured.
It is convenient for him who suffers a fracture due to an injury, especially if the bone is large, such as the bone of the thigh or its counterpart, or similar to that which requires incision and drainage as we have said above.
And if the injury causes pus, then you should incise it, holding back the discharge as you cover it with a clean cloth or bandage three times, unless there is another reason not to do so.
And soon after, begin to restore the fracture in that member, and do not prolong it, unless there is a risk of gangrene.
If an abscess occurs cauterize it carefully, then leave the healing of it within the ninth day, until the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third day and the eighth of every month, lest you cause further harm.
If a bone is broken and protruding from the skin, cover it to prevent further damage and use your hands or tools to gently reduce the fracture and align it with minimal extension.
If the extension is beyond your control and the alignment of the bone requires a specific tool, then use your hands or a suitable instrument; an ideal instrument for this purpose is one made of metal, with a length of seven or eight digits, and its width should be determined by the amount of damage; for this reason, a doctor must have several of these tools of varying lengths and widths for different types of fractures.
And once reduced, it should be secured with minimal pressure to prevent further displacement during the operation.
And it should be of sharp extreme on which the margin of its extremes; and the upper part of it should tend to thickness, and from the middle part of it within the divisions.
And this is the form of it:
And it is called "voluntary lip opening" in Greek, hence the term "paleta pauca".
For the purpose that the acute end of it is stopped above the prominent bone's extremity.
And it draws back all at once as the bone returns, and is wrapped around with some tension.
And therefore it tries to intertwine the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken end is thin and does not take the instrument for good leverage, then you must insert the end of that bone within the instrument's reach.
If you cannot return the bone to its original position, cut off that part which we have mentioned for him with scissors or saw it in any way possible to your skill.
And then cut off that which is rough on the bone with small chips.
And when the bone is returned, and the hernia is reduced, if the patient feels intense pain, know that the bone has not returned to its natural position; then do what you have found beneficial for the patient.
When your restoration to the bone is complete, then immerse a piece of black sticky fabric in vinegar, and especially if it's summer, do not place any seal or other material over the wound, so that it does not suffer putrefaction and corruption.
And then apply straw in the right manner for the complete restoration of the bone, leaving the wound exposed so that you can cut through it with scissors and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
And be extremely careful not to strain the wound towards the fracture, as you have seen foolish doctors do this, and they cause their patients great pain or even death from corruption or severe injury, which is unwise. And if the contraction of the wound is slight, flexible, different from the contraction of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you are concerned about further complications such as those we have mentioned, and you feel pain in that area, do not apply pressure to it, but rather use a hard cloth wrap instead of straw and tighten it around those parts.
And when, after one or two days, the pain begins to manifest, having been engendered in the joint, you should remove from its position the cloth that you had placed over it, and then administer certain remedies, those which by our custom are used to treat such plagues, just as we use tetracycline and similar substances.
And it is fitting for you to clean the wound and consider the plague each day and night until it is consolidated and healed, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a way that the pus can flow from it easily.
If the plague passes many days and is not consolidated nor does the pus leave the joint, then you should know that here are only remedies for the pain in order to prevent the plague from spreading. And of those remedies, some are separated and removed, those that are not separated and cause the member to swell and produce pain, pierce you to incise them according to what is possible for you.
And if the wound is infected with pus or ulceration, which is a sign of corruption and putrefaction, you must clean each one of them as is appropriate for their cure, which is preceded by a description in its chapter.
And regarding what I must say and you present your case: when the flesh is torn, it protrudes over the member, as if the bone of the thigh and its support are broken and resemble those of the larger members, and do not attempt to attract or extract it, for such actions may cause death; after leaving that open for a few days, perhaps 2 or 3, then treat the wound if you have observed it, and if not, leave it.
**Chapter XX.**
On the cure of nodules that occur at the site of any fracture.
Motas seen during this process occur in the aftermath of a fracture, particularly near joints, and are characterized by the shape of the member; thus, they greatly hinder the member's normal function.
Then consider whether the nodule is recent and administer those medicines that have been found effective for such cases, namely, aloes, senna, and similar herbs; if you take some or all of these, and they prove to be astringent, or contain albumen from urine, or are sour in nature, then apply them topically to the nodule in a compress, and constrict those around it with good compression.
And check for any restriction that does not release it every few days; then loosen that and apply another, as long as the nodule persists; or fasten a lead sheet over the area, since lead has the property of drawing out any swelling in the members.
If it is already decided that the stone has become hardened and narrowed due to necessity, then divide it by the most superior part of the stone, cut off the superfluous and prominent parts, or quickly extract it until it is completely removed; and treat it as it heals.
**Capitol XX1.**
Regarding the restoration of a broken bone, once restored, then the delicate member should be bandaged properly according to its nature.
When a bone fracture is healed, then the delicate member should be secured properly, not by any arbitrary means: one of which is for the solution of the ligament and the binding of the affected part according to what is needed; or due to an excessive tightness of the ligaments that prevents proper nutrition from reaching the member; or because of excessive swelling; or due to inappropriate movement at the wrong time; or because of a pus pocket in the patient's body and through the weakness of the member.
The treatment for this is to restrict food to the patient and make their body take in the swelling until the pus is multiplied; and administer baths; and carefully press and massage it.
And then apply pressure over the member, so that the pressure draws appropriate nutrients to it, or continue washing with warm water until the nutrition flows and returns to its natural shape.
Chapter .xxii.
On the treatment of broken bones that are distorted, their operation should be prohibited from what it covers.
When an incident occurs in the already restored member, then the healing of it from distortion and bending of the broken bone should be sought, and this is done by reshaping the member, however, the member is not prohibited from its natural operation; nevertheless, one must heed the advice of those who consider that member to be newly broken.
There have indeed been many foolish doctors and healers on our land who have performed this operation, and such an act is most reproachable, causing great fear at the sign of which it is mortal.
If the claudication and bending are recent, then they should be treated with tepid water containing herbs that soften them, such as alder bark and other similar ones; and a compress should be applied with this, or made from thick mucilage of alder bark, or mixed with hen's egg or olive oil, and applied to it; or the use of fig leaves, wrapped in cloth, like those used in certain medications called 'amermans' (soothing agents) for consolidation.
And sometimes it is dissolved by constant gentle friction against the moistest parts, and movement of the affected member should be given at regular intervals throughout the day.
If the deformity has already progressed and becomes severe, requiring surgical intervention, then it is necessary to drain the pus that has formed and ensure the continuity of the bone structure is maintained. This involves incising what is superfluous in terms of pressure from that part of the bone using subtle saws, and providing relief from strain and stress in that area through careful management.
**Chapter XXIII**
**On the topic of dislocation**
Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints from its normal position, resulting in a loss of mobility and distortion of the body's shape, causing severe pain and significant injury to the affected area.
Therefore, when you encounter some dislocation, it should be reduced as soon as possible, and not delayed, for if it is delayed, the location becomes inflamed and the reduction of the dislocation becomes difficult.
And also, do not think it is worse or stretched during the inflammation, because spasms and severe pain occur as a result.
When this happens, be aware that you must perform a flabotomy on the patient, and place something between their thighs to prevent further dislocation, and then immerse the affected member in warm water and oil, and reduce it gently.
And all members should be treated with the aforementioned water and oil, so that their memory returns to its proper place.
And you have already arranged the chapters of dislocation as mentioned above, in the case of fracture; from the departure of the upper body to the lower part of the body.
Chapter .xxiiii.
On the treatment of mandible dislocation.
If both jaws are dislocated, without any fracture; then the dislocation of both is caused by one of two methods: either they are slightly moved from their places with a little pressure, and they become soft for a moment; or they are completely dislocated and swollen, so much so that saliva from the injury cannot flow out, and neither can he close his mouth nor hold his tongue.
When the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its original position on its own with a little cause.
If the dislocation is complete and severe, it is necessary to gently reduce the jaw to its place, without delay.
And it is that the physician must have his hand on the patient's head, and the doctor inserts one finger of his hand into the root of the jaw dislocation inside the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is from one side; or he inserts both fingers together, if the dislocation is from two sides, and all the other fingers are outside them, which he equalizes; and he commands the patient to cease moving his jaws and release those that come from each separation; and the physician does the same with the jaw until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially when both jaws are simultaneously dislocated, then apply evaporation with water and oil until a light reduction of both is achieved without delaying the reduction of either. As we have said.
And so when they return and are aligned, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not relaxed, then place those powders from a bandage on cerot, and make it with wax and softened oil; and then gently lift them to facilitate the ligaments.
And the patient should sleep on their back with their head between two pillows, so that they do not wince to the right or left, and do not force any cause for pain; having their food well chewed, then when the pains are relieved and the jaws are loosened, they will wince where they wish.
And to this, facilitate rest should be given, and do not work on the perception of the mouth during eating, drinking, and excretion, as long as the jaw is loosened and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce the jaws when they are dislocated at any time and not returned to their proper places, then fevers and persistent vomiting occur, and a strong feeling of pain is felt in the patient's belly, and often they vomit pure cholera.
And when you see this, you will know it is a loss, and often those to whom this happens die within a few days.
Chapter .xxv.
On the reduction of a dislocated furcula (a bone in the elbow) and the end of the muscle.
The furcula is not dislocated from the latissimus dorsi (a muscle in the back) by following its continuation towards the leg; however, sometimes it moves to a position outside its normal location, and this is described as dislocation.
And the restoration is that the patient remains on their back and extends their arms. Then compress the area with your palm firmly, so it returns.
Then apply pressure to that compress and poultice, and strengthen it.
Place the end of the affected limb next to the joint, so it is not dislocated on any day; then cover and secure it as we have said and according to your equipment.
Then apply bandages, poultices, and compression, and command the patient to remain in tranquility and rest until it is healed.
In this medical procedure, the cure involves reducing the end of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI.
On reducing the displacement of the muscle.
You should know that the muscle is not dislocated in any ordinary sense, but it can be according to three manners: one of which is its displacement at the attachment from below.
And the first is that it is dislocated at the origin of the muscle, and this is done with difficulty; it is not dislocated in the back parts through the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in the front parts by the nerves.
And it is most often dislocated and comes out in the back parts, especially after injury, more frequently in those where there is little flesh, it is easily dislocated; but in those where there is much flesh, it comes out with difficulty.
And many people experience some accident due to a blow or fall, and the muscle of it becomes inflamed from the inflammation, and it is cut by what has already been dislocated.
Then consider that you have understood this as far as you are able to be sure of it, and now proceed to the treatment of it.
And it is known that dislocation occurs when the tendon slips; so you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, since you find a clear difference between them; and you find at the top of the muscle a hollow and place the tendon after touching the top of the muscle as if it were a ball, and the patient cannot move their hand to its proper location, nor can they completely immobilize that joint.
If a bone is dislocated in the foot or ankle and you find obvious bruising, it is not hidden.
And from this dislocation, light reduction is done when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of the dislocation is that the therapist raises the patient's hand to its original position; then they place finger pressure on the tendon below the dislocation, and gently push the joint back to its proper location, raising it with strength, and the therapist raises the patient's hand and extends it; and then they let go so it returns slightly.
It is not possible to provide a translation without knowing the exact context and nuances of the medieval language used in the text. However, based on the given segments, here is a best-guess translation:
And then place the patient back on their stomach, with the affected part elevated, waiting for it to be engulfed by swelling and tightness, and the doctor places his hand over the area, pulling the patient's limb away from the joints so that it is not damaged by movement, while another assistant holds the patient's head to prevent it from moving, for at that point it will return to its place.
And if you wish, reduce the second in this manner: make sure to have a man who is taller than the patient, and stand on that side, then insert your muscle between the affected area and the skin and elevate the skin until the disease is suspended in the air, and another assistant pulls the patient's limb away from the joints below their belly. If the disease is lighter, then make sure to understand what else may be causing it to hang suspended, for this will worsen the condition, as the dislocation will soon return.
And it is reduced in another manner: take a long stick with a rounded end, like a mortise chisel, neither too thick nor too thin, and place it under the patient; then drapes of lion's fur are placed over the head of the stick, and the hernia stands according to the length of the stick, and your hand is extended towards the parts on one side, and the other part is stretched away with force, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this cure: take a stick whose length is equal to the distance between two arms, and its width is four digits, and its thickness is removed from the center of the stick according to this form:
And then cover the top with lion's fur to prevent the stick from disturbing the hernia.
And then place yourself in the space between the thighs of the patient, and stretch your hand or arm over the chest within reach, lay the chest on the support and the arm on the side and the end of the hand.
Now place your arm across a scale according to the extent of the pain, and stretch your hand towards the space between the thighs, while the other hand is suspended on the other side, so that the joint can be reached soon enough.
And once the instrument has been inserted according to each possible method, and you have removed the thread that is as thick as it needs to be, apply a paste made from powdered earth mixed with egg album over all the muscles, ensuring it is thoroughly rolled on them, then tighten the thread gently; place the bandage over the paste, attach your hand to the patient's chest, and leave it for seven days.
And ensure that the patient's food intake is limited, as long as the member is supported, since it is easier to heal it.
Then the diet should be gradually increased and exercise practiced; therefore, if it is stopped and not softened, then healing has occurred.
If the joint is dislocated due to humidity that occurs to it or for other causes, then it should be administered a pointed cautery from three sides, as mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the plaster and compression are removed from time to time, and it is not strengthened and cannot raise that arm due to its nerves, which are at the top of the muscle, are already damaged or stretched or softened, then know that the joint will never stay in its place.
From the dislocation of that which is suffered, you must treat the foot and ankle or the posterior bones, reduction is done with pressure and extension with the hands, until it returns.
And both the other tightness should be treated, and care should be taken until it is healed.
And if the healing becomes critical in the member and delays the movement of it, then the disease uses frequent baths to remove that gravity until it is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
Chapter .xxvii.
On the treatment of dislocation of the hip.
You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; it is dislocated in all directions, most notably towards the front compared to the back, and the dislocation of it is not concealed by any vestige or touch according to some figure being dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip joint, this becomes manifest to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or touch its muscle.
And take care to cover them, and reduce the dislocation as soon as it comes near the apoplexy caut, for if it comes to the apoplexy caut, reduction is difficult, and its healing is incomplete; especially when it's in the back parts, because it's the most harmful of all other types of dislocation, causing great pain, and often leads to death.
And for the restoration of the dislocation, when it is possible to reduce it, the doctor's hand should be extended to two more points, and his arm expanded, with the hands of the assistants on the patient's thigh and buttocks, and he pushes the joint with his fingers or the edge of his palm until it returns to its proper place.
If the dislocation is in the front parts, then return the hand by bending it with the doctor's other hand, striking the thigh with the edge of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer violent extension and strong motion.
And indeed, two ministers should stretch their arms, and they must hold this object with two ministers to prevent it from slipping during the extension.
Then rotate the arms through all directions, as it is wrapped with a long, folded cloth over their hand, or lint.
And when the doctor touches the joint with their hand, they apply some oil to it in order to prevent those causes that lead to stiffness of the joint, and then gently push and massage the joint until it returns to its place.
Then return the intestine to its cavity, which is pressed upon that paste where it becomes stiff and is freed from tightness, lower the arm from the collarbone, and leave it for a few days.
Then it is loosened; and thus, if the joint is formed in its place, you loosen the ligament from it and leave that one.
And if you see the joint is not strained, continue with the application of the plaster and liniment, leaving it for some days until it falls off; then remove it.
If due to the gravity of the situation, reducing the joint is not possible, and its disposition is in movement, then administer moistening in a bath and subtle friction, and rest, until it is alleviated; or place a heating pad over the affected joint during the day and night, if it is a case of greasy motion. Then hold that position, and immerse that part in a bath; when the swelling subsides, rub the joint with warm friction, repeating this process three times daily, until it is no longer painful. using the bath, until it is relieved.
And if you wish, place your hand over that wet and scraped cow-flesh gap, pressing and straining on it; do this several times, as that part is moist and return it to its proper state.
Chapter 28.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which is in the joint between the arm and the hand.
In some cases, the shoulder may be dislocated, and its reduction upon displacement is delicate; in contrast to other joints, it is nevertheless crucial to act swiftly in reducing it as soon as possible after dislocation, lest the location become inflamed or develop an abscess.
And the reduction of the dislocation involves placing the patient's hand on a table, extending their arm, and the doctor applying his or her hand or palm over the joint, then gently pressing to return it to its proper place.
However, it is necessary to consider that if the palm of the hand has already been placed on the patient's abdomen, then the illness will cause the back of the hand to rest on a table facing the extent and reduction; and if dislocation has occurred prior to this, the position of the hand from within should be over the table so that the doctor's hand can act upon the impending joint.
And therefore, if this can be done soon, it is good; otherwise, tighten the bandages gently, give them time to take effect, and do not interfere with their action, for if you do, there will be no improvement or you will not be able to reduce the hernia as it passes through its days.
However, consider the joint as it naturally bends according to its stiffness; do not force the illness in any way, but rather soften the hand and do not apply any cause; for you will know that the nerves are torn or stretched, and no cause is taken hold of them except by gently applying a cautery near their location, which strengthens them and gives them some cause.
Therefore, when the disease returns, place your hand on the poultice that we have prepared and leave it there for several days; then loosen it and place it again, and the patient's hand should be exercised.
If the patient's movement is stopped and some discomfort occurs, apply gentle heat and friction a few times, until it is alleviated.
**Chapter 29.**
**On the treatment of dislocations:**
Sometimes, the joints are completely dislocated.
And when a finger is dislocated, either on the back of the hand or on the palm, tighten the finger and push the dislocation back with your thumbs, until it returns to its place.
And then support the head of the finger, suspend the part that is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
And then suspend it and extend it until it is completely healed on that same day.
And at night, according to this narrative, continue to straighten it and do not cease to loosen it during the day and practice movements, and do this for several days until it is tight.
And do the same thing if it is dislocated in the mother's abdomen, attach it to that part and make it the first operation until it is healed.
And do the same thing when it is dislocated in other parts.
Chapter .XXX. (Note: The number XXX seems to indicate the chapter number, rather than containing specific content.)
On the treatment of dislocation of the spine's vertebrae.
When a dislocation occurs in any of the spine's or collarbone vertebrae, it causes great pain, as they are pushed from their proper places, and in such cases, there is no cure, for death often follows the injury.
And the indication of this is that the treatment of the injury is beyond their control, and they cannot hold it; sometimes, certain members or both legs or both arms or one of these are weakened, or a vertebra is dislocated, for in many cases, and frequently, these are broken and removed from four parts.
So, the dislocation is already broken into parts, and it is then called a fracture.
The cure for this is that one must consider if the fracture occurred due to childhood, for in such cases, there is neither a cure nor a complete recovery.
In those cases that arise from chance or impact or similar to these, the ancients have already described methods of treatment in lengthy discourse, from which the greatest benefit returns; you have perhaps been familiarized and condensed from this one, from which I will now expand and shape it from diverse instruments with which I will demonstrate and spread this.
And of those, only the one that occurs on the back itself is cured with what you have recommended.
For it is that the disease has spread over its face so that there is no equal pain near the wall, and it has extended itself below with great distress so that the foot of the patient is not affected.
And then take a straight stick, place it under them in the middle of the thigh, and another stick across their feet at the other end of the thigh.
The minister should hold the stick, but not embed it in the ground; another minister should hold the other according to that form.
Then cover the patient's head and leave the cords loosely bound; extend one cord to the stick that is placed under their head, and tie it to them; then tighten the other cord around their hips where they rest on their legs, and attach those to the other stick which is under their feet.
Then the minister should carefully extend the cord to the end of the stick, ensuring that neither the sticks nor the cords in their placed locations are damaged, but not yet firmly tied.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he rests on one table, and then adjusts his feet on the table until it returns.
If it does not return in this way, take a table whose width or length is three bras long, and dig into the wall of which we have said that it is very near to where the disease lies. Then place the weight of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, pushing firmly until the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
And if you wish, open again the space which was closed with the hand; and it is that you place yourself on the ground, holding the patient's head in the last joint of two fingers, whose length is a brah, and hold their head firmly in the last joint of two eyes, and the distance between each finger should be about a palm, and make incisions in each finger where the flow turns back, and hold each one firmly on the ground so that it does not move.
And then a thin stick is inserted into which the thorn is fixed, and it is twisted in both directions along the two axes of the sticks.
And at the end of it is a groove in which the stick is formed, its length being about a palm, and it is twisted; and the other two sticks are similar to that.
Then tighten the ligaments that you have straightened on the patient's foot in the groove where the head of it should be, and the ligaments that you have tightened on their thighs in the turn that should be on their legs.
Then each turn should be held by a minister who twists the turn with his hand, and the doctor applies the sponge as we have said.
And when the spine is returned to its place and the area is cleaned, then apply a dry, albumen poultice, and stop; then place it over the poultice on a table whose breadth is about three digits or so, and its length is such that it covers the area of inflammation, and above the part of the spine.
And then it is necessary to see the patient as we have said, and use subtle nourishment for healing, within moderation.
And if any danger is perceived in the area at the end of healing, then medicines that soften and soothe should be administered through a long course, as we have recommended; and this is done by applying a thin layer of lead on that place.
And in some cases, danger occurs at the end of the spines of the back, and it is caused by dislocation; this bone is one that should not be subjected to these medicines, as they will strongly cause death to you if used.
Chapter .xxxi.
On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
You know that the joint of the hip and the muscle's joint should not be displaced, but only those affected by smaller removal and concavity; it does not happen to others.
And the hip joint is displaced in four ways: either inside, or outside, or front, or back.
And it is most commonly displaced inside, and rarely in front or back.
The sign of the hip's displacement inside is that, when you adjust the patient's leg to their body, the opposite side becomes longer and the pain is more acute than on the healthy side; the patient cannot bend their foot towards the affected limb, and this is where the 'long bone' is broken, as it were, by a specific cautery mark, so that the head of the fracture is already perceived here.
And the sign of that which causes dislocation is when parts are pulled outside, as the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
The sign of that which causes dislocation in the front parts is when the leg expands fully but does not bend in pain, and if it perforates to go forward and cannot return to the front parts; then the urine of it is retained and the pain of it is localized, and you must move the leg on the floor.
The sign of that which causes dislocation in the back parts is that it does not expand the leg, nor can it bend the front part where it bends, and the leg becomes shorter than the other, the joint becomes soft, and the head of the matter is turned to that place.
But the reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and ancient, it has already been corrected by itself or properly treated according to its position, then it is not in that cure entirely; and therefore it is not appropriate to make any further provision for it.
Place in that case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four types of dislocations, then you cut to it when you reduce the joint and extend it towards the inner and outer parts, and twist it to the right and left, for thus it returns strongly and does not need other treatment.
If it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong support and extend the patient's leg from the injured part, or apply more pressure, or a ligature that is tight over the leg; another minister should stretch his hand over the affected area so that he places his fingers between the bones of the leg; and another should tighten the ligature at the base of the thigh, and have yet another minister hold the end of the ligature.
And extend the leg or the inner part to angle it at the part of the fork, or from behind to the part of the spine.
And at the same time, while the patient is elevated on their bed and hanging slightly, the extent of all those parts becomes clear.
And this specific extension is unique to all four sides.
And therefore, if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; otherwise, it will be necessary to consider all kinds of things regarding their treatment.
In the reduction of the hernia, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is internal, the patient should be placed on their side; then, the ligaments should be tightened around the base of the hernia in the area between the top of the hernia and the point where it becomes painful; and finally, extend the ligament above the painful part to the highest point of the fork.
And then apply another strong force by grasping the patient's legs, pressing heavily on the painful part of the hernia, and extending it outward vigorously until it returns to its place.
And this specific type of treatment is a lighter cure which reduces this member to a state better than the others.
If it is excused from you and you do not obey the treatment according to this specific cure of all, then you should know that both feet of the patient must be bound together lightly, less tightly, on both the shins and both the ankles.
And the length of each of them according to their quantity is four times, and the patient's leg extended is more than the other by a quantity of two times.
Then the hernia is suspended over the top of the foot, and it should be in the middle; and the length of it from the ground is a quantity of two arms' length.
Then command a strong young man to cut off the head of the hernia, and suspend it from another young man, and the other young man must shrink the hernia with firm pressure, for the joint will return to its place at great speed.
During the proper reduction, when there is a dislocation to the external part, ensure that the patient keeps still according to what we have recommended in the immobilization; and tighten the ligament properly on the affected thigh and on the patient's chest.
Then use two sticks as supports: one on the patient's feet and another on their head; and place the sticks properly in the middle of the patient's infected leg, covered with moist drapes, so that the injury is not damaged by the stick placed between their thighs, so you can avoid any extension to other parts.
And each minister should extend their part, and the doctor with his hand continues the reduction according to art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, you must ensure that the leg is slightly extended, and according to this method, the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the affected joint, then with his other hand, he gently pulls, maintaining this position until the joint is properly aligned.
If the dislocation is in the rear parts, you must not ensure that the patient is extended at the joints, but rather elevated above the ground; once you have verified that he is resting on a hard surface, just as we mentioned regarding the placement of the body on two joints, and his face and limbs are slightly extended, as we previously stated, there is no further need for adjustment.
And it is necessary to apply compression with a splint on the area where the joint is dislocated.
Therefore, after the reduction is complete according to need — and the sign of the reduction of the hernia is not hidden from you, and it is that you stretch out two legs from the patient's condition, and when you see those folds and the patient extrudes their leg and you expand that as an excuse, then you know that the member according to need has been returned — and now you adjust the two parts, place paste and bind again so that the opening is not larger in any of the areas; and keep the patient at rest for three days or four.
Then carefully remove the ligament and paste, and compare one leg to the other.
Now, if you see those folds on the surface, then you will know that the dislocation is already closed, and therefore release the patient from rest.
And if you see any sign of softening, then return and paste that area, remove it according to your initial stretch, and release it in three days.
And then, he should be disengaged from that, and make him walk slowly for some days, until he is strengthened.
It appears that you have provided a reference to a specific chapter or section labeled "Capitol .xxxii." Without additional context, it is challenging to determine the exact content or meaning. However, based on the pattern, it seems to be part of a medical text or treatise, potentially referring to a particular chapter discussing a medical procedure or condition.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: when it is displaced outward, inward, or to the side, and not at all in front.
And the sign of a dislocated shoulder is that the patient applies their leg to the affected area; then you will know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And the restoration of all these ways is that you make the patient stop right there, so that he extends his leg if possible; attach his back to the bed, and hold his foot between your hands; then make him press his shoulder against your palms, and catch it between your fingers on both sides over the dislocation, until it returns to its place.
And the sign of its reduction is that their leg adheres to the thigh in a non-painful manner.
Then apply a plaster to hold the leg to the thigh, and then wrap those parts with bandages for three or four days, and then remove them.
And do not use the patient's mobility for some days, unless it is healed and comfortable.
If the reduction of the hernia is not urgent, then administer strong poultices to the areas mentioned in the preceding cure description.
Chapter .xxxiii.
On the cure of the dislocation of the talus.
The foot, at times, is deformed by small removals, and at other times it is dislocated completely; the dislocation occurs either within the joints or outside them.
And the sign of the dislocation is that the foot appears swollen proceeding towards the part where it is dislocated.
The cure for the dislocation is to reduce it gently, and it should be extended to facilitate the joints and then wrapped until it returns to its place.
However, in the cure when it is completely dislocated, you must stop the malady directly, and have someone hold a strong and brave position behind the back at the middle part of the foot.
Then with your right hand, you should hold the foot from the topmost dominant part, and with your left hand, hold it from the lower part of the foot at the location of the ankle.
And then position the foot towards you with your right hand, and with your left hand grasp it for two times, then extend your left hand; push the foot's toe towards the right against the leg support as you work.
And do this two times as we have counted.
And then push the foot's toe against the leg support on the third time, and you are at the ankle.
Therefore, if you return in one time or two according to this manner, and if you turn the foot upside down, it is good; otherwise, continue the operation over it again, for that is how it returns.
If it is forbidden for you to reduce it in this manner that we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and stretch out a hard piece of wood on the ground, and place the hernia between its parts, and you have already wrapped cloth around it so that the hernia does not come out.
And then place the minister of the patient in position, and another minister extend the foot with their hands or bandage that lies on the collar of the foot; and another minister extend this or that minister against the extension of his part, and the padding between the thighs of the patient retain it, so that the condition of him is not pulled away from what remains after its extension.
And then the doctor will reposition the dislocation with their hands, and another minister hold the healthy thigh at the opposite side, so that the dislocation returns to its proper place easily.
And when the dislocation returns and you declare the reduction of it as healthy, then apply a plaster and reinforce that with strong bandages, and bind the foot with bandage to the leg.
And be careful of the nerves that are behind on the sole, so that the bandage over those is not too tight and does not harm them strongly.
And then place a poultice on it for two or three days; if the swelling subsides, remove the poultice.
And on the third day or the fourth, remove the poultice, and forbid the patient from strenuous activity for ten days. If it is necessary to move the patient despite the risk of further displacement, there is little certainty that the dislocation will not become worse, and this can lead to permanent damage; therefore, such a course of action should be avoided.
And if the gangrenous infection progresses, then cover it with poultices in the manner we described earlier, instead of applying remedies and moistening treatments, until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxiiii. (Note: The number is written in Roman numerals, indicating the next chapter.)
On the treatment of dislocation of foot joints.
When a joint is dislocated, it should be reduced with gentle pressure; for what is not difficult should be done quickly.
If the dislocation is in one of the joints of the foot, you should then make the patient lie down with their affected leg elevated either on a pillow or table, and keep it in that position as if they were walking.
Then you should stand over the patient, place your foot on what causes the pain in the joints, apply pressure to it until the dislocation returns, and observe that it is reduced and does not reappear in the prominent location.
Then you should place a board under the patient's foot that takes the entire weight, with two ends, and firmly stretch it to its proper position for three days; then remove it, allowing the patient to rest from walking for several days, until healing is complete and assured.
Capitol .xxxv.
On the types of dislocations that are caused by disease or fracture or any other injury.
When any of these causes occur and you delve into the cure for it and the restoration of the patient, you often see successive episodes of death.
And for this, he does not presume to write extensively about the cure of it, but rather he who is skilled in the art, with great experience, mercy, and compassion, late, not hasty or presumptuous; and uses medicinal beginnings that give cautious step-by-step progress, leaving the judgment of the illness to divine providence, except for him from whom you hope salvation from destruction, relief from ill health, and in which some hope appears. And therefore he strives as much as possible to bring about the reduction of it at the beginning of the cause, before engaging in cautious step-by-step processes.
And then, if the member returns to its proper place, administer treatment with a mild poultice and care for the wound using appropriate dried herbs.
If a dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and the bones are separated, then you should drill through their joints, as we have mentioned regarding simple injuries in the preceding places of these.
And beware, according to your virtue, of the instrument in the ways of fear, as my instruction has preceded; for it is better for you to honor your Creator, and may it make your glory more permanent, and bring salutary care to your true body at the proper time. Thus, these words of Albucasim are perfectly completed, from which God be blessed. Amen.
