Oh, my sons, since you have completed this book, which is the last of medical science, through the fulfillment of its contents and by the examples and explanations it contains, I believe that you have fully grasped this treatise, which is a part of the most important operations, namely surgery.
For surgery, being the most complex of medical arts and sciences, facing a decline in our era and region due to the lack of understanding and study, only a few small descriptions of it remain in the books of the Ancients, which have led to many errors and misconceptions, as the intentions of its techniques are closed and its power and art prolonged.
And I have found it necessary to renew the order of this treatise according to the second way of exposition and declaration and abridgment; so that the forms of cautery tools and other surgical instruments be included as an addition to the explanation and as preparation for the operation, which is a necessary cause.
But the cause why our skillful physician cannot always achieve this in our time is because the art of medicine is complex, and he must first be trained in the science of anatomy to understand the growth of the limbs and their forms, the conjunction and separation of them; he must know the bones, nerves, and ligaments, their number, and the extraction of them; and also the pulsating veins and static ones, and the places of their emission.
And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name is fitting, as he is great in his work, especially in the art of healing.
We have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book; for those who do not know what we have told you about anatomy, they are not exempt from falling into errors that will lead to the death of men, as you have seen many of them who, having been trained in this science, believe they possess all knowledge and rely solely on their experience.
You see a foolish doctor who has incisioned an abscess with a sharp object on the thigh of a woman, and he cuts some arteries in the thigh so that a great amount of blood flows inside, causing the woman to die among her pains.
And you see another doctor who tries to pass a stone from a man who had been suffering in his state; the stone was large, and it comes out of him with a piece of his bladder, so that man dies on the third day.
And you have already called for help to remove it, and you see that because of the size of the stone and the disposition of the patient's condition, he will die.
And you see another doctor who is highly paid by a duke of our land for surgery; he operates on a black crust that was causing the patient severe pain in his side. Due to the doctor's ignorance, he removes the fracture without allowing the wound to breathe, using poultices and splints with excessive tightness.
And then, according to their desires, loosen the bandages, relax, and take rest for some days, and order that we loosen the ligatures; and thus, too, as long as the matter and the foot are healed, then we shall proceed further.
And they will be called upon it, and equipped to loosen the bandages, and by doing so, peace is achieved and thus, their pains are alleviated.
However, if the corruption is already confirmed in the member, it cannot be restrained, and the corruption will continue to spread throughout the member until the disease becomes perilous.
And behold, another doctor who perforates a cancerous abscess, and it is left to fester for some days, until the malignancy of it grows powerful under his care.
Which causes is because the acuteness of the pain is from melancholic humors, and it does not cover that it will reach him entirely, but rather, it should be in the member that suffers, so that it be completely hosted.
And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation be divided into two parts: one is in an operation associated with health, and the other is in a work which is perilous to major dispositions.
And you have already encountered this throughout all parts of this book where operations are discussed, which involve error and fear; it is therefore necessary for you to keep this in mind and set it aside, so that the people do not take the wrong path and slander you.
And therefore, take up your tools with diligence and the protection of God, and your patients with ease and firmness.
And use the best means by the grace of God for salvation and glorious success, leave behind the terrifying illnesses which are difficult to cure, and set aside your weapons of fear, so that cowardice in your faith and within your name does not abandon you: for more remains to your glory, both now and in eternity after your sanctity.
He already dissected in some of his wounds: Do not treat bad sicknesses improperly, so that bad doctors do not become famous.
And you have already devoted yourself to this book according to three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter ordered deals with the feet, in the forms of instruments and the devices of cautery, and all that is necessary for the operation.
Division of the second part. The second chapter deals with incisions and punctures, and vents, and plasters, and the extraction of arrows and similar objects, all chapters ordered according to the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and repositioning, and on the cure of twists and similar conditions; a chapter ordered on the inner parts of the foot, and on the shapes of instruments.
Understand what I have said about the quality of the youth of that cautery and the documents of it, and in what circumstances cautery is prohibited.
Therefore, it is said that the discourse on the quality of cautery's youth and the documentation of it is a long and prolix topic, subtle for knowledge, and secrets hidden; and already many savants have spoken of it, and there are disagreements among them, and to me, a small part of their discourse suffices, fearing prolongation.
And therefore it is said that cautery will confer to every complete whole universally, which is of matter or its matter, excepting two complexes, which are complexes that have their own matter.
In the complex that is dry and hard, matter becomes disconnected; some have said that cautery is beneficial to it, while others have said the opposite, that cautery is not appropriate for disease that is of a quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate that a disease that is dry and hard due to heat and dryness be cured by that which is hot and dry.
And those who say the opposite argue that cautery is beneficial for all dry and hard diseases seen in human bodies, because when you compare the human body and its humidity to the complex of fire, you find the human body rough.
And they say through the argument of that person, that they have already experienced this several times before in their discoveries.
However, it is not advisable to attempt this without prior experience and practice in the art of cautery, as he who has mastered the various techniques for treating different conditions and the causes of these ailments, as well as their symptoms and the passage of time, will be more successful.
In other complex cases, there is no cause for fear, especially in painful and moist ailments, as all doctors are in agreement about these, and they do not disagree on the treatment with cautery in such instances.
And know, my children, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and the goodness of it, are superior to medical cautery, because fire is simple; its action affects only the member being cauterized, without harming other members or causing great pain.
The action of medical cautery, on the other hand, reaches members distant from it, and strongly causes difficulty in healing the ill member, and greatly aids recovery.
Kindle the fire, for its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not make it superfluous; indeed, it is already known to us through experience and the long service of studying the art concerning the truth of causes; therefore you are excused from the length of this discourse. And if it were not that I wish to keep secret in this brief pause the fire's power, which reveals the quality of the operation on bodies and its expulsion of ill-health, demonstrated through philosophical discourse, which would serve to sharpen your minds.
And know this, children, that the time for making cauterizations and applying compresses is when it is most convenient in the springtime.
And you say that cauterization is convenient at all times, so that the damage caused by time's accident is overcome by the youthfulness of what cauterization removes; and especially when cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, severe and sharp, which do not suffer delay, because it is feared those that come later might bring further harm, it is better to seek relief as soon as possible.
And so you must not sit on your feet, oh sons, for it is only the common people and foolish doctors who do not understand that the pain caused by this illness, which is healed with cautery, does not completely disappear, and that is where the problem persists.
And the cause is not understood as such by those who treat it in that way, for cautery is but a place of medicine that alters the composition and dries up the humors which are the cause why pain comes.
Yet cautery may be superfluous over medicine because of the desire for its effectiveness, virtue, and the greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that their illness may return at some time in the future, according to the nature of the illness and the location of its pain, and the virtue of it, and what is prepared within them from the addition of excesses and humors, and what has been acquired by them through food and similar causes; for the illness on which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in few members with little excess and humor, so when cautery is performed for pain and similar symptoms like that, it is possible that the same pain may not return in them, but this is done in small doses.
And it is said in common speech that the cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a true saying, not to those who understand it, for they believe that it is not a cure that profit from medicine or any other cause with cautery.
And the reason is to the contrary; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when one applies the methods of healing in some illnesses, and those medicines do not help, and then at the end of the cause, one administers cautery, and it profits from that. And from here it follows that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding of the common people and too many foolish doctors.
And they said in antiquity that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
And they say that the place of cautery does not burn unless it is absolutely true, for you have already seen and experienced that this only happens in certain bodies, but cauterizing with fire from gold is good and better than what they said; nevertheless, when you apply fire to it, the gold melts by the heat of the fire, and sometimes some sheets fall into the fire so that the artisan can catch them because of the occupation.
And for this, cauterization with iron must be done more gently and precisely to ensure the correctness of the operation.
And you have already organized this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and you have organized those from the head down to the feet, so that later you can ask him what he wants from it.
The first chapter.
This cautery confers warmth and dryness to the affected part, which is twofold, being a cause of sudden and numerous rheumatic fluxes, called corss, from the head to the extremities of the senses and of the auricles, flowing with sweat, and also numerous pains in the teeth and throat, and generally in any malady that occurs through cold, as well as in cases of paralysis, apoplexy, and similar conditions in those maladies.
The method of this cautery is as follows: first, you must command the malady to be evacuated using a laxative medicine, for three or four nights, according to the severity of the illness, the patient's age, and their usual condition.
And then command them to shave their head, and make a cut between your fingers on a clean bench, and place your hands on the patient's feet.
And then place your palm's edge near the root of the nose between their feet. Yet, if the affected area of the middle part of the body has been identified, mark that place with a try, and then take the olive cautery whose shape is as follows:
And then place that over the clean area marked with a try, in a way that it descends, so that your hand is constrained little by little, and you remove that.
And then gently lift your hand and examine the area; if you see that some bone is already exposed, along with an amount of foul matter, raise your hand again, and if it doesn't return to that spot, or another from that one, especially if it's cold, as long as it's visible to the bone, which I've mentioned to you.
Then take a little salt and dissolve it over the area, and leave that for three days.
And then place your hand over the area soaked in borde and leave that on the inside to destroy the wall of fire. And then treat the area with a four-part medicine until it is healed.
And it is said that when the Roman plague opens up, the arm gets better and more youthful, so it is better and more rejuvenating.
They said that some of them use a cautery on the cord within the bone and hold the cautery until some part of the bone's specific nature is hardened.
And then remove this that is attached to the bone, and then cure it.
Others said that with the cautery to prevent the fracture, it strengthens the bone entirely, and this is the way to achieve small fractures: And they believe that from that place the vapours of the head escape.
And if the wound remains open for a long time, it should be treated until it is healed and consolidated.
I do not have the expertise to view these two types of cautery instruments as a whole, but according to some, it is better to use none at all if there is a risk; and in my opinion, when it comes to health, what works best is what has been proven effective; especially when the head is exposed due to the rupture of continuity, as we have witnessed in other parts, and most importantly when the nature of the malady is feverish.
And the specific type of cautery that comes first is indeed safer and better for me; and from there, to that instrument, I direct this work towards health.
Second chapter.
About the head cautery.
When chronic and prolonged pain occurs throughout the head and this persists in the disease for a long time, and various treatments such as herbs, combs, plasters, ointments, alums, calamin, dog's feces, goose fat, and similar things are used, especially if a cautery has already been performed which does not alleviate or benefit from any of those causes, then consider that the nature of the disease is strong; and if there is no significant inflammation or great pain, perform another cautery after this one. And then cauterize that part of the patient's head where the hair is parted using an internal cautery. Cut the hair and expose the bone as much as we have found, and cauterize that with a cautery at the back of the head in the area known as the 'base', which is where the wind is stopped. And apply your hand gently there, do not expose the bones, for this malady causes great pain distinct from all other burnings on the head.
And you should apply this cautery in its proper place, for you know that the cautery which treats the corns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than the one applied to the middle part of the head; this is its form.
Capital chapters.
On the treatment of old migraines.
When a severe headache occurs at the temples or there is pain within the skull, it is treated with medicated cap treatments and other remedies previously mentioned for head maladies; if these do not prove effective, then cauterization in two ways may be applied: either with acute medicinal fire or with iron.
You may use cautery or burning medicine when you take a hot compress, and cut it off and amputate both ends of it. And then you should incise the place of pain in the temple with a lancet, until it is felt to be in the right place, leaving the thread there, as long as it remains hidden.
Then you should apply a tight bandage to prevent further constriction, and leave it for three hours; afterwards, remove the compress and let the affected area rest for two or three days, and then apply a cold bath until the pain subsides.
And then you should treat it with a poultice until it heals.
And if you find that these methods are not effective, turn to some other burning medicines that you have written about in the two previous treaties on burning medicine.
Make the cauterization with this method: ignite a cautery whose form is as follows:
It is called a claw clamp because its head has the shape of a claw with some curvature, and it has a small prominence in the middle part.
And then apply pressure over the pain area, holding your hand—to prevent the wound from becoming infected—and slowly turn the iron at a controlled speed.
And if the amount of blood that clings to the specific part due to the heat of the iron is such that it equals or exceeds the capacity of the vessel, raise your hand so that the artery is not sealed, preventing the flow of pus.
Then apply a compress with salt water over the area and leave it for three days; also apply a lot of heat, and treat with ointment until it heals.
And if you see, cauterize the end of the knife with a cautery, and be careful not to incise an artery in this recent wound.
Capital quarter.
On the cauterization of ancient wounds.
When treating an ancient wound as described in the previous treatment and divisions of illnesses, and if the cure does not take effect and the pain persists due to a lack of adequate treatment with either knife cauterization or fire cauterization, then you should ignite the cutler cautery until it is whitened. Place your hand over the area of pain along the length of the affected part, holding firmly for a moment as you incise the artery and penetrate into the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to be careful about the continuity of the mandible, which is crucial for chewing, and that the fracture is not adhered and that the nerves, which are affected, do not experience spasms.
And if it concerns the prevention and care of the flow of blood from an artery that is damaged, as in the case of its injury there is fear, especially for those who ignore what they do and are not diligent or hopeful; and let the operation begin on them at the outset.
And now come to the recollection of the regulation of the flow of blood from an accidental injury of the artery according to their manner, in their place in this book.
And if you see that this disease does not respond to the cautery and the patient's condition is tolerable, cauterize them in the middle part of the head as we have mentioned, and treat the wound until it is healed.
And if you find that the cautery we have mentioned in the chapter on arterial tightness with two blades is effective, it is a better and more efficient cauterization.
Chapter .V.
On the treatment of ear pain.
When ear pain is caused by foreign bodies and is treated with cleansing and other remedies as mentioned in the previous division, and the pain persists, then apply heat with a cautery. This is known as the "puncta", which has this form:
Then apply the puncta close to the heat source, and it should be rotated around the entire ear or moved in a circular motion, depending on where the pain is located. Once the ear is treated with the cautery, continue to apply heat little by little until the area is relieved from pain.
And if the cautery with pointed points is done on the entire ear and some remain, then treat the remaining spots until they are healed.
Chapter .VI.
On the cauterization of tortuous (or twisted) parts.
The tortuous (or twisted) part that is cured and the cauterization thereof are merely of the species that come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of maladies.
A careful cauterization is necessary for the species that should be dried out or spasm of the nerve.
When treating that species of tortuousness with pulls and contractions and groaning, and you do not apply your treatment, then know that you cauterize the malady in three places: first, you pierce the auricle, second, you make a small incision in its temple, and third, you join the two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the affected part, for relaxation comes only from the part that appears healthy.
And the method of cauterization is that you cauterize the base of the ear with a hot iron, placing it slightly above the skin, and on the temple, its length according to the length of the finger, and hold your hand over the cautery until the amount of the substance of the cord is consumed.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is especially from the cutting tool, whose shape is placed before the table. However, it may be even more subtle, as it looks almost like a sight, and take care to remove any excess sharpness from the blade.
And then take care of the area that is exposed during the procedure until it heals.
Chapter .VII.
On the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and treatment with what has been said does not help and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize it with four cauteries: above all the parts of his head; also cauterize the middle part of the head as we have said; and cauterize the armpit. And the manner of the cautery is done as it has been said.
And it is cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is more posterior; and then it is carefully cleaned with what you have processed.
Chapter .VIII.
On the cauterization of oblivion performed by heat.
You should give the patient hot drinks and pills in the beginning, the servants will prepare them with a clean mouth.
Then shave the entire head of the patient and apply the plaster to their chest as described in the plaster treatment text.
And apply it several times, as that is the manner of cauterization. And do it according to the order of those steps that I have already mentioned.
And so if they are well, it is good; otherwise, make three cauterizations to them in the last part of their head, descending from the higher part of the head to the lower part of the neck. And between each cautery, apply pressure to reduce the swelling of the affected area, and properly take care of the cautery that follows.
If you can add more pressure and the patient tolerates it, perform the cautery on the middle part; and if you need even more pressure, cauterize both the upper and lower parts.
Properly care for the area that has healed; and the cauterization should be olive-shaped according to the form previously given.
Chapter IX.
On the treatment of parasites and the softening of the entire body.
Now that you have understood the process of purification for the head in accordance with what we have mentioned; then carefully remove the patient's hair, and cauterize the middle part of the head, and cauterize all parts of the head, and cauterize over the rear part of the body, and make three cauterizations over the spinal columns of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the case of softening the body from too much strain and the pain bears tolerance, but the pain is intense, cauterize with four cauterization tools on the spine of the back, and later apply cautery until the intense pain of the patient is relieved, and raise your hand. And then take care that it heals properly; this cauterization should be with olive oil.
Chapter X.
On the treatment of epilepsy.
Epileptics should not be cauterized; this is only done for epilepsy caused by phlegm.
And so it is necessary to purify the patient's brain from the beginning of their illness, as well as with other cures we have mentioned in the previous division when the disease is severe and resistant to medicine.
And if it is a child who does not suffer from medicines, then administer liquids and soft foods to the servant for several days, improving their diet.
Then shave the patient's head and cauterize it with a hot iron at the middle of the head, as previously described, and make another cautery on the occipital bone of the patient, and over any other corns of the head that have been cauterized. And if the patient is strong and resilient, then cauterize as described, while having a paralytic and soothing effect on the body over the cervical and dorsal spines.
And make the olive cautery as previously described.
If the patient is a child, then use a subtle cautery according to this method.
Chapter .xi.
On the cauterization of melancholia.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and thick flux, then cauterize those parts with the cauteries that we have mentioned in the case of paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excessive declination towards melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then he should drink something that purifies their brain according to what has been preceded in the division.
Then shave the patient's head, and make a decent cut on the circle around it, and place pressure on that in the middle part of the head.
And the patient should feel relieved, and be held from every side.
And then apply a soothing ointment; it is more worthy to be done before shearing sheep. And heat that above the fire to temper it to the desired temperature, which causes him to suffer when he is most in it. Then make a cut in the middle of the affected area on the patient's head in a circular motion, and release it so that it is cooled.
And do this to the patient every day for a week, with his food and other remedies as needed until he is cured; or if you wish, make small punctures with a carefully arranged cautery, one that moistens the brain equally. This is a special kind of cautery which soothes the mind.
Then apply that cold compress on the edges or in the form of goose grease.
Chapter .xii.
On the drainage of water from the swelling.
When the beginning of water in the swelling is declared according to the signs that I have mentioned in the preceding section, then it begins and provides the patient with something that purifies the top of the swelling, and watches over all humidity.
And do that immersion in a bath with herbs for several days.
And command the patient to shave their head, and cauterize that spot with a hot iron; and cauterize two spots with two irons over the temples if it is the beginning of water in two swells, or on one side if it is the beginning of water in one swell.
Cut with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are left in the leg; and the cauterization should be done at that length along the temples.
And be careful of blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see blood flowing from it, stop any further treatment, which is within your power.
And come to knowledge that is derived from arteries and amputation of those, and caution regarding blood flow.
Sometimes, the neck is cauterized between two bones using two cauterizing tools, which thus produces it.
**Chapter XIII**
**On the Cauterization of Ancient Tears.**
When tears from the eyes are chronic and through veins and arteries that are manifest in the external part of the head, it is observed that superfluity of fluid causes spasms of the muscles, then cauterize that with a cautery as we have mentioned in the chapter on the beginning of hot water in the eyes, and cauterize in the middle part of the head and two cauteries on the neck between two temples, and two cauteries on the neck between two bones. And if there is additional indigestion, then cauterize that across the entire surface of the coil of the eye above the upper eyelid with a small cautery.
Chapter XIII
On cauterization of nasal discharge.
When you treat a case as we have described in the previous section and your treatment is not effective, then prepare and make the patient drink the concoction for three nights; then shave their head, and cauterize with a middle-sized cautery or olive-shaped cautery. And then apply cautery with a clamp to both eyes, leaving the hairs intact.
And beware of the fire so as not to burn that.
And the form of this cautery with a clamp is as follows.
Chapter XV.
On the softening of the eyelids with a cautery.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or humidity, apply cautery to that eyelid with a clamp-like cautery; and this is the form of it:
And if you, apply cautery to both eyebrows with a small clamp at each end, and they should be elongated from the temporals. And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the hernia.
And do not press too hard with the cautery, but according to how much the third part of the eyelid is closed.
**Chapter XVI**
Regarding the cautery of the eyelid, when the hairs turn inside out and close the eye, apply the cautery to the affected area.
When the hairs of the eyelid are turned inside out and close the eye, apply a cautery to these parts, depending on whether it is to burn or to use medicinal cautery.
If the cautery is with fire, order the patient to close their eyes so that their hairs do not burn, and if you must apply it again, tighten the bandage around the eyes until the hairs are completely grown back.
Therefore, when the swelling and redness appear, place the patient's head on a low bed, and then gently press over the eyelid of the affected eye with your thumb, signaling according to the shape of a dead leaf, and this is the beginning of the signal near the hair.
And then apply a cold compress or a wet cloth over the eye.
And then apply the hot cautery whose form is as follows.
And then cauterize along the marked figure, little by little, in repeated motions, until the surface of the wound is completely sealed, just as if it were covered with a leaf of myrtle, clearly visible.
The sign of healing of the eye work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs raised above the point of the eye.
And so lift your hand and place it there for three days, then apply a hot compress to the affected area until the pain is alleviated. And then apply that ointment until it is healed.
If it returns through the skin for any reason and the eyelid becomes softened, then do again the cautery on that part as you had done originally.
If the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize that until it is raised to its natural position and sealed so that the hairs do not reappear.
But the cautery with a medicinal fire is that you command the patient to pull out the hairs so that they do not reappear and seal them; then make a paper cut in the shape of a fir leaf.
And then take soap known for its healing properties and a live root or, if that is not available, mix those causes together, making it into a poultice so that it is not chilled; and spread this over the paper which is made thus in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place that on one or both wounds; then leave the fragrant edge dipped in lard, and position the patient's head on a pillow.
And then cease speaking of the medicine and apply a small amount, not too much, so that the patient does not feel the sting of the medicine, for its sting is like fire within them.
And so, as long as the patient feels the sting of the medicine, leave it and apply it to them again in a smaller dose; and when the sting ceases, remove the medicine and wash that area with water; and then consider if the eyelid is lifted up just as it is washed after constriction by fire or incision, for that is good; and if it does not return to the application of the medicine on the area where the medicine was not absorbed and does not become discolored, then your operation will be successful and the wound will heal.
And then apply pressure to the area until the pain of adhesion is eradicated, and treat with a definite ointment or other until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you, in your operation, to exercise careful vigilance so that no part of the medicine falls from the eye, and if the eyelid after a few days becomes softened due to any cause from the hair in the eye, then repeat your medicine on that place which is softened from the eyelid, and indeed just as you did at the beginning, and surround it until it is healed.
And this is the form of the mistletoe leaf.
And you know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and therefore your treatment should be adjusted accordingly.
And it is not hidden from the way of correction for him who is studied in this art.
Chapter .xvii.
On the cauterization of a fistula in the tear duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula as we have discussed regarding the divisions of ailments and your treatment does not help, know that you cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place their head in a low position, and hold their head with a minister between their thighs in such a way that it is neither harmed nor agitated by their own head.
Then apply some warm cloth or a poultice of wheat flour on the eye of the patient.
And make the cautery of which this is the shape:
which is concave, thus in the shape of a cane or a feather, from one end where the cautery is made.
And if you look, they penetrate into the other extremity. And if you want to get out this way, try it carefully.
Still, he who is experienced is better at the work in hand.
And if the fistula is open, press it shut and draw out the pus and dry it up. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the abscess from them.
And place the hot cautery over it; but you must hold your hand a little away from the cautery at the root of the nose, so that neither your hand nor the patient is disturbed, and then apply the cautery to the gray areas of the nose and burn those parts.
And therefore, if at the beginning of applying the cautery it penetrates into the bone, that is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery once or twice, as necessary, and leave it in place for three days, then apply a compress with a drying ointment until it heals.
If after passing ten days it does not heal, then apply a corrosive medicine again until the bone is exposed and cut as suitable in its chapter.
There is another way of cauterizing a fistula, which some masters say: enter the place of the fistula and dry it, then apply a thin layer on the fissure; pour some melted lead there; hold your hand with good tension, so as not to aggravate the patient's pain, ensuring that you cover the patient's wound with white wax or oil, so that the lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it through wondrous cure.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cautery and treatment, it is good; otherwise, it will be necessary to apply a poultice and reduce the fistula to the nose according to its proper place.
**Chapter XVIII**
**On the Cauterization of Wounds**
Frequent accidents cause cracks in the lips, especially in children's lips.
Therefore, if you treat those cracks as we have said in the previous sections and do not benefit from your treatment, then make a small incision with a knife following this form...
and the cavity of it according to the thinness of the knife.
Place your hand carefully over those cracks until the cautery reaches the depth of the cracks.
And then carefully remove the cautery when it is healed.
**Chapter XIX**
**On the Cauterization of Fistulas in the Mouth**
When, in the case of an uvula, or palate, or dental abscess, it becomes swollen and broken, and an opening forms, and you apply pressure, and it heals, but then the wound reopens, you must use a cautery according to the extent of the fistula. Insert the glowing cautery into the fistula's tract and press it until the burning tip reaches the depth of the fistula, doing this once or twice; then care for the wound as we have said for its healing.
And if the infection is incurable and healthy, it is good; otherwise, it will be necessary to expose the location and treat the corrupted bone as it appears in its chapter.
**Capitol XX:**
On the treatment of teeth and the softening of arteries.
When arteries are softened by moisture and teeth are loosed, and these conditions are treated with medicines rather than surgery, then place the patient's head in a lower position, and shape the cautery so that it can be applied close to the tooth without causing great pain, holding the gum over the tooth with your hand while applying the hot cautery quickly, leaving a small gap so that the patient feels only the heat of the fire at the point of the tooth, which has been reached.
Then remove your hand, and repeat the application of the cautery several times as desired.
Then make the patient gargle with salt water and hold it for an hour, after which stop it; for the tooth that has been loosened will be firm again, the gums softened will be tightened, and the moisture corrupted will be dried out.
Chapter .xxi.
About the treatment of tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to coldness, or there is swelling or pus, and the treatment with medicine does not help, then cautery should be performed in two ways: either with cow dung cautery or with fire cautery.
Cautery with cow dung involves taking cow dung and squeezing it into a hollow in fire, then picking up some of the heated dung with a tweezers, wrapping it around the tip of the tent (presumably a kind of instrument), and immersing that in water. It is then applied to the aching tooth, pressing down firmly until the pain subsides due to coldness.
And repeat this several times until the heat from the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you see, dip some cloth or cotton in the wound on that side, place it over the painful tooth, and hold it there until the hot iron reaches the depth of the tooth's cavity.
However, the use of fire for cauterization must be done with care to avoid damaging the patient, especially in the case of an iron or steel tooth, and it should not be too hot so as not to burn the interior of the wound.
Then shape the cautery according to need, place it over the tooth, and hold your hand over it until the cautery cools down; repeat this several times as the pain may return either that day or the next.
And be sure, by pressing the cautery against the patient's mouth with good pressure and holding it for an hour, then pull it out; this is the shape of the cautery.
And apply the cautery as you have seen necessary.
And this is the shape of the cannula.
Chapter .XXII.
On cauterization of hernias.
When hernias are filled with fluid and humors that are not obedient to digestion due to medicines, and you need to drain them slightly, then apply the cautery exactly according to their form, having two open ends so that smoke escapes from one end while you apply heat from the other, and place the burning tip over the affected area as needed.
And if the hernia is small, then apply the cautery according to its size, and place a bandage over it for three days, keeping the affected area warm with a compress until the burned tissue has healed.
And then apply that healing ointment and bandages until it is cured.
**Chapter XXIII**
On cauterization of wounds and the constriction of arteries.
When humidity appears on the lung's surface, especially when it is accompanied by a chill from congestion, it is necessary to evacuate the malady at the onset with medicinal emollients, and then cauterize that part of the throat where the infection has taken hold.
And be careful not to harm the throat with the cautery or to irritate the patient's wound, but only slightly.
And apply a cautery to that or another cautery as needed to the joint of the neck at the last vertebra of the patient. The cautery of him is nailed in the manner previously described.
And then take care of that as described above until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII
On the cauterization of pulmonary maladies and cough.
When cough and pulmonary maladies are caused by excessive humidity, and the patient has no fever or phlegm, and it is an old condition, then cauterize in two places with cautery on the furcula at the affected spots of the lungs and another cautery in the middle part of the foot between two mamillary points; and both cauteries are nailed as described above.
And if you wish, your puncturing cautery may be the one called a point, the shape of which precedes the puncturing of ear pain.
And make incisions within these; and then carefully treat that as it is mentioned to be healed.
And now the cautery has three points for cauterization, and there are three ways to make cauteries according to this form:
Chapter 25.
On cauterization of the throat, which is the aid's head.
When the aid's head is dislocated due to slippery moisture and does not stay during its return, you should reduce its dislocation until it returns to its normal position, then place the patient on their back or side; and lift the thigh that was affected by the dislocation towards the upper part of the body, using your left hand, if the joint is dislocated inward.
And then light the cautery, which has two points; this is its shape.
And then cauterize the wound where that one penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will be when two points of the cautery are involved.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this rule, and thus the cauterization is made of eight points.
And then place the entire cautery on the wound with salt, and make the patient lie in tranquility, and do not move the member for any time until it is healed.
And if the dislocation is in the joints above and it persists, then cauterization is made over the muscle with a clamping cautery or a pointed cautery, for the joint is confirmed, the moisture is dried up, and the malady is healed.
Chapter .XXVI.
On the cauterization of the stomach.
When stomach pain occurs with burning and moisture within, causing the expansion of gas, if you continue with treatment methods without consideration, it will be seen that the illness will shift to the patient's back, spreading their intestines and organs, and so three cauteries should be applied: one cautery leaving a mark on the foot corresponding in size to a finger, and two cauteries on either side of the back's ribs, forming a triangular cauterization figure; and those that are not properly adjusted will cause gangrene.
And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And the shape of the cautery should be according to this form. If you wish, apply a larger cautery in the middle area of the stomach, also in this form; and this should be a circular cautery, like this:
And the stomach should be cauterized by puncturing it, as this cautery frightens some: you know how much point you want to apply, and then cauterize that with cautery on the points; and take care of the cure for what is preceded until it heals.
**Chapter 27.**
**On the Cauterization of the Vein.**
When pain in the vein arises from coldness or moisture or strong wind, and the malady has been treated as we have said, and it does not subside, then know that the malady is lifted onto its neck, and apply three cauterizations with this form and this much force on the vein beneath the hip bones, which brings about the recumbent position of a man.
And the space between each cautery should be according to its thickness, and the cauteries should be according to the length of the body on the right side.
And do not hesitate with the use of cauteries.
And if the amount of moisture adhering to the quantity of the specific nature of the wound, and it is not too adjusted; and if the illness stands on the patient's feet; and if it is not, then let them sit, who has already extended their things and raised their arms.
And with your skill and caution in the art, you can cauterize these cauteries with a cutlass cautery.
And be careful not to burn too much during cauterization, and focus the gaze of all present so that the whole body is heated and penetrates into the intestines, for here the cautery is delicate; and know this.
**Chapter 28.**
**On the Incision of an Abscess in the Foot with Cautery.**
When an abscess in the foot needs to be incised and you want to know whether the abscess is in the flesh or in the tunic of the foot, if it is in the flesh of the foot, the disease takes on great gravity and the pain becomes acute.
And if it is in the tunic of the foot, the pain is very acute and often exhausts the doctors in treating it.
Therefore, position the patient so that their neck is in the correct position; then identify the location of the hernia, and heat up the cautery that resembles a needle, whose form was previously described on the other page. And cauterize with that cautery, until the entire wound is closed, reaching the deep tissue, and until it heals completely.
And likewise, take care of that one for the healing of the other hernias until they are all healed.
And know that this form of cautery should only be used with the one that you have studied in the art of medicine is most effective, and for those of which you have removed many illnesses; however, on some occasions, it may be daring to perform this operation, but nevertheless, it is best if we follow these instructions.
**Chapter 29.**
On cauterization of pleurisy.
The ancient cauterization techniques of the school of Aristotle for pleurisy, according to this method, involve taking a long, thin piece of iron from the school of Aristotle, and making a point at one end, which is used on the inflamed part.
Then immerse that in oil and heat it over fire, and cauterize the area between the continuation of the furcula and the collarbone with a cautery, placing two small cauteries below, slightly inclined towards the part where the beard is, and two cauteries inclined between the fifth rib and the scapula, slightly inclined towards the back parts; and another cautery in the middle part of the foot; and another over the stomach, and three cauteries in the back parts; and a cautery in the place between the two shoulders, and two cauteries on both sides of the foot, leaving the cautery between the two shoulders.
And do not cover your hand with the cautery, but hold it over the wound in action.
And they also speak of other ancient practices where certain men use a hot iron cautery, like a ray and fire, to burn that area between the ribs, in order to reach that point and heal it, as we have said about the hernia.
One should not fear this cautery perforation, for it often happens in the infected area of the fistula, where healing does not occur.
Chapter XXX.
On cauterization of the melza (or esophagus).
When treating the illness of the melza (esophagus) using the methods we have discussed for healing in the hernia, do not apply your treatment without first cauterizing it; the cauterization should be done in one of three ways, all of which are correct: one is to make three or four incisions along the length of the melza according to the shape of the cautery marks on the hernia, whose shape has preceded it.
And between each cautery, the thickness of a finger or slightly less, and the manner of the cautery is the manner we have described for the cautery of the flesh entirely.
And do not apply the cautery with your hand; and the patient should be lying on their back.
And there is another way of cauterizing, which is that you ignite the cautery with two directions, causing the same effect as we described in the chapter on the dislocation of muscles, raising the cord that is at the end of the membrane so that it lies without pressure on the patient's left side.
And your elevation should be such that you raise the cord according to the length of the body, so that cauterizations are made according to the extent of the wound.
Then, with both directions lit, insert them into the space where they penetrate the cord from the other side.
And then remove the cautery; thus four cauteries are made.
And if you see, cauterize with a cautery having three comings.
Then you should care for the cauterizations so that they do not become infected for too many days, as it is more comfortable than other causes preceding in the treatment.
Chapter XXXI.
On the cauterization of hydrophobia.
Cauterizations do not cut into hydrophobics but solely into the throat.
When treating hydrophobia using the methods we have described, and if your treatment does not yield results, then know that you cauterize in the circuit of the throat with four cauterizations: one around the epigastrium, another on the diaphragm, another on the melsa, and two between the spinal processes, as well as a cauterization directly on the foot, and another over the stomach. And the depth of the cautery should be determined according to the severity of the wound.
And then apply the cautery gently so as not to cause pain for a long time.
And do not remove the patient from treatment just after applying the cautery, as two intentions should be added to it, and it will be celebrated with aids for healing.
The shape of the cautery used to cauterize the stomach should be according to the form that is previously done, and it is that which is used to cauterize the back in the shape of an olive as per its previous form.
Chapter .xxxii. (Note: "Capitol" seems to be a misprint, assuming it refers to the heading of a chapter)
On the Cauterization of Feet and Thighs.
When the feet are immersed in water and filled with salt water, you should cauterize the feet on the arch of the foot between the big toe and the little finger, holding the cautery with your hand, but do not twist it; then raise your hand, but do not completely remove it, as the salt water will drain.
The cautery should be performed as follows: Then make two cuts on each side with a cautery, and at the tip of the cautery blade, make a cautery on each part. And the cautery should be according to the length of the part: one should be placed on both ends and the other in the middle of the affected area; and two cauteries on each part.
And keep the wound open for a long time to prevent any water from remaining in it.
And then address those causes that we have mentioned.
Chapter .xxxiii.
On the cauterization of abdominal parts.
When abdominal parts are infected and humid, it is necessary to eliminate the foul humors, which are the digestive and retentive virtues located in the stomach and intestines. This is treated using curative methods and not through excessive cauterization, as often witnessed with patients suffering from malady who display exaggerated cautery on their abdomen. One should cauterize this area with a large cautery over their stomach, as previously mentioned for cauterization of the stomach, along with small cauteries in a circular pattern around the navel and four cauteries in a circular motion around the subtle openings of the bowels. Additionally, one may use a subtile clavicle cautery or two cauteries.
And if the humidity and malady persist, one should cauterize over the anus and intestines, strongly applying two cauteries over the stomach and near the inguinal region, as this is a perfect cure for a condition that does not return.
Chapter .xxxiv.
On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When there are old hemorrhoids in nature, caused by a thick humor or corrupted humidity, and they do not heal with the methods mentioned in the previous section, then cauterize them with three cauterizations over the pus left on the spinal ridge, forming a small triangle, and another cauterization above the navel on both sides.
And if it is observed that the patient's stomach is chilled and their food is not digested, and their face appears pale, then cauterize over the stomach with a large cautery as mentioned before; also make a cautery on the tongue, and another cautery on the patient's palm using a nail cautery, leave the cauteries open for some time, and then tend to them until they heal.
Chapter .xxxv.
Regarding the cauterization of hernias, they remove them through incision.
When you remove the hernia, you use a cautery that resembles a ray. Next, insert that flame into the hernia incision, and finally place your hand over it to ensure the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
And do this once or twice, for if the hernias are too numerous, you cauterize each one as we have mentioned, and then care for them with ointments until they heal.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on something, it is better to do so later.
**Capitol .xxxvi.**
On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the natural openings of the body.
When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its proper place, and the patient is afraid of it, then use cautery for healing.
Therefore, when one sees a fistula in nature that is old and corrupt with corrupted moisture, then it is most fitting to attempt to heal it gently, and afterward, carefully consider the quantity and depth of the opening to be treated as previously mentioned.
Then bring the cautery close to the opening that is similar to a ray. And then apply that ignited cautery to this fistula, according to the quantity in which it intercepts the attempt.
And apply the cautery repeatedly until those corrupt bodies are consumed after one or two or three times, according to your need's quantity.
And be careful of nerve and vein combustion; if a fistula goes to the bladder or intestinal cavity, then pay attention to all those areas; and do not perform this unless the fistula is in fleshy tissue and you think it is not penetrating.
And tend to the area until it is healed.
And if the area is sealed and all foreign matter has been removed from it, and it remains thus for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
And if the foreign matter is not from the body, then know that it is penetrating or causing corruption in its place, and falls under those causes of which there will be remembrance in its location.
Chapter .xxxvii.
On cauterization of ulcers.
When ulcers cause pain due to cold or excessive heat, and the patient's condition worsens, it is necessary to cauterize them using a hot iron over each ulcer, especially where they are most painful.
And we should cauterize very gently according to a small space, so that three cauterizations will come in succession, and thus they will be more easily healed.
Chapter .xxxviii.
On cauterization of the bladder.
When the bladder is weakened and softened by friction and moisture such that the disease cannot retain urine, apply a cautery to the discharge point on the bladder, starting from the hairline, and cauterize with a needle at another point on the right side, and at another on the left side.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the depth of the pain; apply a cautery at the deepest point of the pain, or two cauteries if necessary.
And the cautery should be driven in according to the process.
Chapter .xxxix. (Note: "Capitol" is likely a typo, as it seems to refer to a chapter number)
On the cauterization of the breast.
When fever and moisture appear, conception is prohibited, and the patient's menstruation becomes corrupt, making conception delayed, and causing pain during their period, then the place should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said about the cautery of the bladder; or with two cauteries, one on each side, or a 'key' cautery.
**Chapter XL.**
**On the Cauterization of the Dislocated Ankle.**
When moist mucous membranes infiltrate the ankle joint, causing it to dislocate, and this condition is characterized by one side of the joint being prolonged over the other when compared between them. And the location of the dislocation is compressed in it by the weight of the body.
Then apply the cautery to the hernia at the opening of the anus, making it circular like a ring, for you will have already tested the tightness of the circumference around the opening as it is rotated, and thus the opening falls in the middle of the ring.
And the cautery mentioned above, its shape is also used in the cauterization of the stomach.
If this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three large olive-shaped cauteries.
And make the cautery according to the severity of the inflammation in all the body, and take care that only the healthy parts are treated.
Chapter XLII (42)
On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain appears in the lower part of the body due to friction and moisture, the ailment is treated with the water we have mentioned and should not be ignored, as it is an ancient practice. Then you should drain the malady from thick humors using foul pills or artificial pills or similar ones; and apply a cautery to that area.
And the application of the cautery in that area follows two methods: either with medicinal burning agents or with fire.
It follows two scientific methods, one of which involves cauterizing that area across the leg opening with three triangular cauteries according to this form and making sure they penetrate well. And the space between each cautery should be according to the thickness of the said area, and whether the cautery is olive-sized or large.
Sometimes, four cauteries can be applied over the middle area on top of the anquas (belly button).
And if you wish, cauterize the circle from which the form is derived in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, one that is a circular band containing and burning away all the inflammation.
And this is the manner of cauterization in chronic pain when it is confined to the ankle and not extended into the thigh.
If it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize two points on the thigh at the place where you apply the malady that causes the pain; and one cautery on the shin for four days, slightly above the inner part.
And if the cautery is cuticular, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the amount of inflammation in the vein.
And if the malady causes the pain to spread close to the place of the feet, then cauterize here with a number of points, three or four, or as many as you need.
And if the patient feels pain in the area where the cushion is placed, then cauterize it with a cutting instrument.
And be careful in all cauterization so that you do not harm nerves or cause great pain, and thereby do more harm to the patient or cause contraction.
And you have already seen some of those who cauterize on the shin and complete the cauterization, and the bed of fire is inflated until the tumor has reached the foot, and the fire penetrates and corrupts the entire foot. And then apply a strong acid solution of the belly, and thus it causes death.
And if the pain is in two parts, then cauterize each according to this manner.
And the wise ones say about the cauterization of a pointed cautery, of which this is the manner: make it like a circular iron ring whose circumference is the width of a palm; and its orifice should be according to the thickness of a date palm bone or somewhat less.
And within that circle, there should be another third; and the space between them should be the width of a night's rest; and those circles should be cut in two parts; and the length of those sides should be one or two nights, and they should be decently garnished with iron along the edges of the circles; and this is its form.
Then light it in the fire until it curls and sparks, and then stop it over the opening of the water, placing the patient on their side. And thus, cauterize that area with three pointed cauteries all at once.
And then apply a poultice to it, leave it open for three days, cover it with a border again and keep the ulcer exposed for several more days, and continue treatment with ointment until it is healed.
Albuscas (or Albucasis), sons, of this kind of cautery we have used little due to the fear of regard it, and because few have we found that regard it.
Apply the best cautery to him who suffers from it, and find a suitable place for it.
The best cautery as a medicine is that you make two circles with a perforated armature made of iron, in which the keyhole of the door is placed; let the length of the wall be such that their diameter or width is two nuts or the like.
And if the space between certain parts is such as to match the thickness of your finger, leave them open above and below, and place others around them that hold them according to this form.
And then apply pressure over the area where the ankle pain is felt by the patient, and take your hand off the swelling; and take some cold water, and pour it between two circles, and its quality should be such that the fire diminishes little by little, and you hold it for as long as an hour, and the patient endures the biting and tightening of the pain — for that tormenting bite is like fire — until the biting ceases.
Then raise your hand with the instrument and drain all the cold water from the affected ankle with warm water.
And then wrap it up for three days, applying pressure on the affected area until the swelling subsides, and continue this for several days, as it is effective in healing; this is the best treatment for young patients.
And then treat it with a poultice until it is healed.
And if the pain is spread within the thigh or leg, make him lie in a position that retains water as it is done in a bath.
And this is the manner of the water treatment, and you have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Prepare a solution of alkali and cause no exting in both parts, then tie them and place in a new wave from which the opening is perforated by a small tool according to the quantity that enters it.
And then let the bottom of the wave rest on another wave filled with hot water, and place over it the live alkali and cause of the hot water, taking them in your hand for a moment, and then press them to the tieua ma (presumably a medical tool) for good compression, and leave the wave that descends from the hot water into the opening left by the cold wave.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another living cause and another alkaline renewing, so that it becomes a very powerful sharp substance, which is administered in many medical operations and in the cauterization of the other members, because operation comes from fire.
And among these medicines are some that are cauterized widely, thus quickly and skillfully combined and cause a strong reaction so they may be mixed.
He then recounts an ancient man's operation and cure for the pain of water (possibly hydrocele) and sciatica, marveling greatly at this method, saying that it requires no other treatment, as it heals entirely with a single procedure, strong heating the intricate part in a bath until it is completely healed.
And it is that it should be done near a certain green plant, and if it is not possible to obtain the green plant, then take a recent fig; many times twist it with a little salt and place it in the water where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the leg, and let it soak.
And it should be left for a duration of three hours or for as long as the patient's condition allows for relaxation from the adjustment.
Then immerse him in water and when the patient's body is warmed, insert the hot compress into the sole, as the pain ceases and healing occurs.
And be aware that under no circumstances should anyone use these remedies with cautery unless it is for the purpose of cleansing the body.
You may already know that when the vein in a goat's foot is cauterized with a narrow flame, it benefits the animal; and the cautery should be applied to them according to this method: take wool and dip it in ancient oil, then place it between the toes of the foot and between the bones.
Then take a dry goat's vein and apply it to the flame until it is charred, and place it on the wool, letting the inside expand. And then repeat this process, and do not cease to do so until the sensation of the bite disappears into the water and the pain is alleviated.
And this method of cautery is called the cow cautery.
Chapter .xlii.
On the cauterization of joint pain.
Sometimes the pain in the back is caused by various reasons, such as tension or impact, or excessive evacuation, and for similar causes, due to the introduction of foreign, irritating material.
And cauterization does not apply to any other type but this specific one, which is caused by the effusion of irritating material.
Therefore, to achieve evacuation of the malady, one prepares pills that resemble them, which are applied on the side where the pain is felt, in three lines according to its extent, and uses cautery on each line as much as necessary, depending on the severity of the malady and the strength of the treatment.
And cauterization should be done with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or four using the middle claver cautery in this manner:
Chapter XXXIII
On cauterization at the onset of jaundice.
This malady often manifests in young children, and the sign of its onset in children is that their small joints become stiff, evening hindering elevation and motion.
And it examines the last vertebra of the spine and the nerves that begin to protrude over the other vertebrae.
And so when you observe this and wish to prevent it, you use a pointed cautery to make a circle in the following shape: that takes the cautery over all parts of the spine thoroughly.
And if you wish, use the pointed cautery on the circular spine to make two or three lines. And the points should be appropriate among themselves.
Then carefully tend to the area until it is healed, as we have said.
Be careful that cautery is not administered to a yellowish condition caused by spasm of nerves.
Chapter XLIV.
On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And thus, when gout caused by cold is treated in this manner and the pain does not subside, then the remedy is cautery.
It is because you cauterize the immediate evacuation in the circulation of the joint of the foot using fire cautery.
And take an olive cautery, whose form is as follows:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. If the pain intensifies within the toes or other joints and this persists, then cauterize each toe with three or four of these olive cauteries from all sides.
And if you find that these cauteries are sufficient for your needs, then cauterize the area and do not press too hard with the cautery, just sufficiently to target the specific part of the body.
If the pain persists within the toe and its surroundings, then administer the cautery as described in the previous chapter.
And if the pain is only in the feet and it is called gout, then points should be made on the course of the filaments as they turn, on those two lines.
And if the pain persists in these, then make points on the course of the filaments around each knot and on the pinch of the hand.
And if the pain can also affect the joints or muscles, then apply cautery to some parts of the limbs.
And do not evacuate the malady without proper treatment and reception of medicines; for if good regimen is followed and the inflammation is drained with this cautery, it will be healed, God willing.
Chapter .xlv. (This appears to be a roman numeral indicating the title or chapter number, rather than a translation.)
On cauterization of fractures.
When there is a fracture in the angles and the intestines are exposed due to the hernia pushing against the genitals, treatment begins as follows: it is important that the patient fasts on the day of the procedure and uses gentle means to reduce the hernia to prevent it from protruding from the abdomen.
Then guide the patient between your hands on their back, and instruct them to breathe deeply where the hernia or intestines protrude or are about to emerge.
Then return the intestine to its place and gently attempt to reduce the hernia over the os of the penis, marking the end of the hernial orifice similar to a circle on the upper openings of the body.
And now, light the cautery whose shape is as follows:
Within which there is much heat and inflammation. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then place the cautery over that sign with your hand, and apply it straight, focusing on the bone of the toe within the middle of the foot; and repeat that another time if you have not achieved it in the first attempt onto the bone.
And observe wisely the position of the hernia during the cauterization, lest you injure it and cause the hernia or other great malady to return onto the patient.
And be aware that when you use a cautery, do not touch the bone, do not interfere with your operation.
And take care that the cautery on children should be delicate according to their size and measure.
And be careful with the site of the cautery for three days, applying hot compresses until the burning sensation subsides.
And be careful with those who have other burns, taking care of them until they heal.
And the patient should be laid on their back for ten days until the site is sealed and the pain subsides.
And be aware that the diet of the patient should be adjusted according to the duration of their recovery, so as not to strain their abdomen, and prevent the intestine from protruding due to effort during healing.
And when it is deemed fit to remove it after approximately ten days, then administer a suitable treatment, and continue for another forty days.
And it should also reduce labor and the intake of food and drink, and avoid loud voices, for when this regimen of healing is followed diligently, complete recovery will follow.
And now I will describe the treatment for hernias in other parts of the abdomen, which begins with cauterization of the hernia using a red hot iron, according to its size, and this should be done when the hernia is protruding from the abdominal wall; then apply the care as mentioned earlier, and do not tighten it.
And some experts have said that the hernia should be cauterized with a triangular iron in this manner, as it is easier to apply and effective.
And it is a pause line that they use for the width in the skin above the rupture, and another line on top of it; then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Chapter XLVI.
On the cauterization of twists.
When pain in other parts of the body is caused by injury or impact and continues for a long time without yielding to treatment with medicines, then it is appropriate to cauterize using a pointed cautery.
And the cautery should be done on every member according to its size and depth, and the nature and location of the twist and pain in it.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, good; otherwise, repeat the cauterization on it; for usually these pains are punctures in the members closest to it, so you must achieve those with cautery until the illness is healed.
Chapter .xlvii.
On the cauterization of leprosy.
Leprous people sometimes require cauterization due to severe damage, especially if it is the type of leprosy caused by putrefaction of flesh and melancholy.
So, when you wish to cauterize it, consider whether the leprosy is progressive and if it can be cured with what we have mentioned in the previous division, nor does it retract or spread, and fear regarding the disease that corruption might encompass all of the body and all its complexities. Then cauterize it on the head using a cautery: at the middle part of the head, and at the second position beneath it, treat the forehead at the end of the hairs; and both on two horns; and also behind, over the nape or serve accordingly.
And finally, with your hand apply the cautery slightly so that it creates a slight impression on the bone, and dislocates the scabs, so that the expulsion of thick vapors is facilitated from it; and cauterize over the poultice as necessary.
If leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize those places with those cauteries that we have mentioned above; cauterize on the tip of the nose, and make two cauteries on each eyelid, and make two cauteries on both spines of the neck, and make six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large cautery on the spines near the coccyx, and one over the scapula, and two on each ankle, and one on each toe, and two on each thigh, and two on each muscle, and cauterize the tendons of their feet; cauterize over all the joints of the hands and feet, and on each heel of their feet, and on the sole.
And be mindful of the nerves that are on the leg, do not irritate those.
And in some cases, cautery is performed with a hot iron on the bone of the thigh, and on another part over the mouth of the stomach, and on another still over the sinew.
And you know that the more precise the cautery, the greater its benefit and effectiveness; and also know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery, as they do when their wounds are left open, for thus the body is already stunned.
And understand that the size of the cautery should be great or small according to the members and joints, as previously mentioned regarding the kinds of instruments.
Then be careful with the cautery, applying it to the wound with fine flour mixed with honey and other remedies, as long as it heals.
Chapter .xlviii.
On cauterization (the application of heat) for stupor.
When a member is stuck or numbed and treated with medicines, oils, and bandages, but remains unsanated, then you cauterize the stuck member with a cautery according to the size of the member or the extent of its numbness.
And the hot cautery should enter the deep tissue slightly. And then care for that area with an ointment until it is healed.
And sometimes stupor (numbness) is cauterized in areas such as the hands and feet, the spine, and around the nerves which cause that member to lose sensation, and the numbness is relieved.
Do not attempt to treat this without someone who is knowledgeable about the anatomy of the body's members and the exit of nerves throughout the whole body's movement.
**Capitol .xlix.** (Capitol 49)
On the cauterization of moles that are infected.
When moles are old and do not respond to any of the medicinal applications, then cauterize them with a pointed cautery for a short time according to the quantity of the specific type of cord within, until the white and color of it is reduced, and its color changed.
Then prepare a mixture of flour from oats and lentils with warmed oil and arnica leaves, or pigeon dung or owl dung, each in equal parts, and apply it to the area until it is healed.
Chapter I.
On the cauterization of cracks.
When cancer begins to form and you wish to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference as it is turned.
And the sages say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery on the middle part; but to me, this does not seem right, as I fear it might become an ulcer, and I have seen this a few times before.
It is much better to cauterize around the hernia in a circle as we have said, or with several cautery points.
Capital.
On cauterization of abscesses.
When an abscess is delayed in maturation, it may be due to excess moisture, or the state of the illness, as it grows old and weak, with little vitality, or because of time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize around the hernia with several small punctate cauteries; and apply pressure to it, as it will aid in its maturation.
If you wish to make the incision with a cautery, then heat the cautery whose form is thus: and pause it in the middle place of the thickest part until the thread penetrates.
And if the cautery is applied at that place which is most painful, in order to relieve the pressure on the arm, then take care that it heals properly.
Chapter II.
On cauterization of corrosion.
Corrosion is a spreading decay in the member which corrodes it as if fire were consuming dry wood.
Therefore, if you encounter that corrosion in a place which is to be cauterized with fire, then heat cautery claws, both small and large, as appropriate for the location where the corrosion is.
And then apply a cautery all around until you eliminate all corruption and do not leave any cause for it.
Then bind it for three days, and apply oil mixed with the cautery marks on the areas cauterized daily, until all scars are completely eradicated and all corruption eliminated.
Then take care of it with a poultice of fresh meat.
It may be three days before the meat is completely healed without corruption, which is good; if not, repeat the cautery on what is broken in the corrupted areas.
And corrosion is treated occasionally with sharp medicine, because it takes the place of cautery. However, cautery with fire may be more beneficial for young people.
And you have already spoken of the cure for him with sharp medicine in the division, so take that which you will need from him immediately.
Chapter LIII.
On the cauterization of wounds and similar conditions.
Occasions where cauterization is indicated for the parts around a malady of the foot, which is called a claw, and it's a protrusion, causing pain; and cautery on these takes place in two ways: either with hot fire or with cold water cautery.
The hot fire cautery is done by igniting the cautery instrument similar to a bird's quill, made of iron according to the quantity of the claw in all its parts, and it should have fine edges.
And then apply heat to the joint, and carefully turn your hand with the cautery around the joint until the cautery reaches the depth of the joint. And leave that for three days until it begins to heal. And then apply a paste made from wild mallows mixed with salt to the affected area, and leave the paste on for one night so that it purges the root of the issue.
And then dress the wound with a ointment of generated flesh until it heals.
And if these remedies do not help, and painful incidents occur on the surface of the body, especially in the joints and feet, then apply your cautery with water, taking a small pipe of earth or iron or a needle, and place it over the joint; pour a little water into the pipe, hold your hand, and turn the pipe around with compression from your hand until you feel the water begin to drain out of the base of the joint. Wait for the patient to experience the burning sensation of the water for about an hour, then remove it, as the joint will have released its toxins at that point.
And thus they do to those who have it, bringing all of them together in the body.
And then they take care of those pus that the roots of the clots have been eradicated with these ointments which nourish the flesh.
Chapter III.
On cauterization of tremor.
When you encounter any tremor caused by irritation of the nerves or fever from a painful cause or other similar reason, you must cauterize it with four cautery points or two on each side of the spine, between each vertebra with one cautery; and also cauterize the foot, and over the stomach with olive cauteries.
And the tremor of the patient ceases and hastens the healing of the painful illness.
Chapter .LV.
On the cauterization of accidental burns on the body.
When burns appear on the body and pustules open up due to corrupt, thick matter, begin by treating them with a pointed cautery or a thin piece of wood, extending its tip over the fire; or shave off the long barbs with a razor; or apply a lenticular cautery.
In some cases, cautery is also applied at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; they are not hardened, and by removing the excess, they heal those affected.
However, it may be necessary to perform an evacuation through phlebotomy.
Chapter LVI.
On the cauterization of flux of blood from an accidental wound through incision of the artery.
Wounds that exhibit flux from an artery incision must be treated with caution, as this indicates a severe condition or the onset of apoplexy or cauterization of the limb, and it appears difficult to control.
Therefore, when this occurs to anyone, you must apply all your strength to the horrific wound of the artery, and place your hand over it immediately to stop the flow of blood, until the flux of blood is halted.
And then apply hot olive cauterization to the wounds, both small and large in number, blowing on them until they are ignited.
And then cut from those one small or large according to the location and the affliction in which the artery is ruptured, cauterizing it swiftly over that vein you have previously cleaned, until it is incised and the flow of blood stopped.
And if the blood clot is expelled from the orifice of the artery as you remove the cautery and extract it, take another cauterization tool carefully from among those prepared in the fire, and continue doing so until the clot is restricted.
And be careful not to damage the nerves here, as other evils may arise for the patient.
And you should know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the clot in those cases, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: either by cauterization as we have said, or by extraction when it is not extracted, for when its extremities are burned, the clot is restricted, or by binding or lacing with firm tension, or by applying medicines of which the virtue restricts the clot; and they should be tightened on a cushion at the armpit or groin.
He who administers a decent restriction of it with bandages or by reason of burning causes and similar ones, does not bring relief but only pain.
If this must be done for someone and neither the doctor nor medicine is present, then open at rest the indicated spot on the affected vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction of it within that the blood flow from the superior part of the plague is stopped, and above the constriction, the said vein is not inflamed; and wash it with cold water of great freshness until the vein is frozen and thickened; and consider if cautery or medicine is needed.
Regarding incision, piercing, pustules, flebotomy, and plagues, and similar conditions.
We have discussed in the first chapter all diseases in which fire cauterization is appropriate and medicinal burning, their occasions and causes, and the instruments required for them with the forms of cauterization; I have arranged the chapters on the hierarchy from head to feet.
And you will proceed in this chapter in this manner, so that the desire of anyone who seeks it is fulfilled, when he has asked for it.
And before you begin this, know, sons, that in this chapter it is for the fear mentioned in the first chapter of cauterization.
And because it is in great caution that you should be, for the operation which is in this chapter often causes evacuation of cat's blood, which is precious to life; you must perform the aspersion of veins or incision over the abscess or perception of discharge or purification of the plague or extraction of an arrow or beginning of a stone and similar things. And all of them are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in most cases, death.
And I warn you that it should not fall on you in whom there is a predisposition, for sometimes you must be aware of the ways of men, as well as the sudden ways of illnesses. And of them, some will go to their illness and despite all efforts, they cannot escape death; and this is due to the severity of their illness, and for its prolonged duration, and because it is a terrible illness that means death.
And it is those people who, when they come to you, give hope and comfort, expecting health from you; and their illness is deadly.
Therefore, do not agree with anyone who comes to you with this manner of illness; let your caution be greater than their despair and greed; and do not presume any cause for them except with certain knowledge that verifies what they have come to you with, and to which you have successfully succeeded.
Use in the treatment of all your ailments the knowledge and indication of that which is turned to health, for it assists you in acquiring fame, memory, praise, and glory.
Oh, sons, God will inspire your understanding and does not allow you to stray from His guidance and protection, for it is in His hands.
And you have ordered this distinguished chapter into sections according to what precedes in the chapter on cauterization, from the treatment of the head down to the feet, so that it may be easier for you regarding what you ask about and what you will need.
First Chapter.
Regarding the treatment of water contained in the head of children.
You should know that this malady causes complications during childbirth, and when the head of the child emerges, it is necessary to cut the umbilical cord.
And sometimes, for hidden causes that are not apparent, it manifests during childbirth.
This malady is often seen only in children; and to all those whom I have seen die from it, I have observed this work done upon them.
And you have seen that a child whose head was filled with water, and the head was always thus magnified to such an extent that it could not move due to the size of its head, more so because the humidity increased within until death by fire.
And this humidity is either added between the bone and the skin, or it is added beneath the bones upon the head.
For the operation, if the humidity is between the tendon and bone and the abscess is small, you must make an opening in the middle part of the head as a slit in the width, and the length of the slit should be two fingers deep so that the humidity can drain, and this is the shape of the sponge.
And if the humidity is greatly increased and the abscess is larger, there should be two slits according to this manner:
And if the humidity has penetrated into the bone, it is a sign that you must fully open the commissures of the head and squeeze the water out when you press with your hand on the openings inside, and this is not something you should withhold. You must make three slits in the middle part of the head according to this manner:
And then remove the incision and dry it; tighten the wounds with drapes and downy fabrics; drill over it with a bore and apply oil within five days, loosen the adhesions and treat the infection with herbs and ointments, tighten the head in equality; and feed the patient dry food with little moisture until the member is comforted and healed.
And there is another way of incision that considers the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, sometimes it appears at the back of the head, or in front, or on the right, or on the left; so pay attention to the incision where the abscess and the accumulation of water appear, and do it as best as you can.
And observe that do not incise the artery and try to make flows of blood and pus from the malady through that flow of pus with evacuation of moisture.
**Second Chapter**
When there is an event or injury to the ears or feet, and it is old and does not respond to medical treatments, then the final cure in this case is the incision of those two arteries.
And so when you want to incise those that the patient's illness has formed as its head, rub the place with a rough cloth so that the arteries become visible, and then tighten the patient's collar with some cloth; consider where the pulse of the vein is; and the locations of each over the places that are close to the auricles gradually become obscured, especially in certain people.
And then place a clamp on the artery at the site of the cut, incise each one with a scalpel, making sure to reach within the bone, and do this according to the size of the head.
And if you wish, insert the spatula between the artery and cut it at the point of its attachment to the partitions above.
And the length of the incision should be about two fingers, because when any vein is incised, the blood tends to escape pulsatively, which can quickly become excessive.
But if the artery does not appear at the bandage, then you must measure from the edge the quantity of three fingers, and carefully cut through the tent, and insert it into the bone.
And the amount of blood drawn from the vein should be about a wine unc., and it must never be more or less, and all this is according to the quantity that appears from the strength of the patient's condition and the extent of the artery's retraction.
And consider the plague, and therefore if there remains on the bone any cause of the pain, then cut it through so that it does not lead to gangrene cautely.
And then apply a strong compression with feathers and linen cloth to it, and take care of the wound until it heals.
**Capitol III.**
From the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When ancient or acute migraines occur due to seasonal humidity and the state of the membranes in the temples, or sudden old age resembling these, and it does not yield to medical treatments such as those mentioned here, then we resort to the extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those areas as shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction of those is to target the ailments that reside in the temples; understand the visible artery in the temple where it is indicated by its pulsation, and it is concealed from most people due to its severity.
And if it is concealed, then tighten the collar of the ailment with a cloth; and rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery appears visibly to you. And now you take the sponge that has this form: And then you cut the thread with your fingers as easily as possible to reach the arrowhead; and then you open it where it is located and extract the arrowhead from its free parts while you remove the thread from the tunic that is left behind, from every part.
If the artery is thin, then you wrap it around the end of the finger, and then cut a single part according to the amount by which the ends are extended and contracted, and if they are not cut, the blood will not flow completely.
Then empty the vein of blood, three times.
And if the arrowhead is large, then you cover it with two pieces of cloth or strong cord, and do not allow it to putrefy before the healing of the wound and make sure blood flows.
And then incise the superfluity which is between two ligaments; do this at that time or another time.
And if you wish, cauterize that with a hot iron within the bone; cauterize the ends of it after they have been incised, and hold in place that piece of work.
And it is better work if the patient has fever or there is a combination of heat; for cauterization is one of the remedies that aid in drying humors, and therefore it is better in youth.
And then cover the extraction of the bones that have moved from their place, and they should be placed over it properly, and after that, use dry medicines to make the flesh and the joints heal until it is cured.
And if while you are working another complication arises in the form of bleeding from the bone, then you must restrict that blood, either with cauterization or what you place over the joint, and strengthen your hand until the bleeding is stopped. And if any cause of those is not present, then apply your finger over the area until the swelling subsides, and wash the place with water of strong coldness until the pain ceases, and tighten it according to need.
And what is more commonly removed from an arrow wound is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades, after you have cleaned both places, and then apply some fire, until they reach the bone and sever the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities of it can be elongated, as it is not solidified by this cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And the sharpness of both blades is an example. But it may still be better with just one blade, as if it is sharper than two, it can cut through flesh more easily and quickly without severing the vein.
Therefore, when there is any swelling, the heat of fire is retained in that area and the flesh is severed slightly.
And this work is better than all other works and is most delicate.
And the space between two joints is determined by the thickness of that.
Capital quarter.
On the treatment of acute and acidic eye pain.
When there are acute eye pains, and it is the veins just above the orbit of the eye that are affected, and no medical cause for this condition can be determined, and the patient's face becomes discolored and he experiences a sensation in his forehead similar to that of walking on ants, and the eyes of the patient are exhausted, moistened to the point where their lids become loose, and the eyelids are chafed by the intensity of the tears, the ancient remedies used for the treatment of such conditions in this procedure are as follows: it is called a gentle cure.
And it is that you command the patient to shave the hair on their forehead, and then make three incisions in the forehead equally distant according to its length. And if the length of the incision is two fingers: one incision should be equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle part of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small portion of the skin where the tears are in the lacrimal, and the third from the other side.
And be mindful of the incision of the arteries which are in two cuts, and extend your hand along the continuation of both mandibles. And if the space of each incision is three fingers wide, adjust it accordingly.
And if you have a piece of sponge or dry cloth handy, squeeze it to extract the blood.
And then insert the knife with its two sharp points, which is the form of the incision for it. What is removed from the temples during the second incision. Remove entirely the cord that is between the two incisions on the ciphas, which is over the bone, and then make this from the middle incision during the second incision. And then take this knife and insert it into the first incision again with another tool called a cuttle, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And place the sharp edge of this tool against the flesh attached to the tendon, and the blunt edge against the bone, and use it to reach the middle fissure, and cut away all the vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
It may be continued the incision to this appears from the coccyx, and then make it in the middle fissure between the other fissures.
And as the flow of blood decreases, squeeze the locations of the frozen parts of the san (vein or artery).
And then place in each fissure some cold oil or vinegar and wine, and apply it over the places that are infected with pus, ensuring not to cause further infection with the cauterization.
On the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large enema of lukewarm water or herbal tea, and then apply to it basilicum (or rose oil) and other herbs until the sores are healed.
(The end)
On the treatment of bleeding through catharsis and the descent of humors from parts inside the head.
When acute catharsis occurs and continues, the patient's wounds become exhausted, their eyelids are ulcerated along with their eyelashes, and in the region of the head there is severe pain accompanied by subsequent discharge, at this point it becomes clear to those knowledgeable about these accidents that the materials and catharsis do not come from outside but rather from veins within parts inside the head.
And the best treatment for these is this: command the patient to wipe their forehead, and then make an incision at the middle of the forehead just above the bone (and begin at the incision in the left temporal bone and extend it to the right temporal bone; and cut through the bone; and with your hand remove the lacerations on the temples that are most painful after mastication), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, then fill the space between the two lips of the wound with cotton wool or cloth. Then apply fresh, clean powder over the wound to prevent it from becoming infected.
And when you have dressed it and seen that the infection has decreased, then you should know that the inflammation begins in the bone inside them, and so treat it with a drying regimen as if you were taking two parts of flour and four parts of colchicum, mix them together to make a poultice, and apply it to these wounds, both on new flesh.
Chapter VI.
On the treatment of what affects the ears.
All causes that create heat in the ears are one of four types: either a mineral or something similar to stone, such as iron and copper, or from plants, such as peas or beans, or fluid-related, such as water and wine, or something resembling them, or any animal.
And therefore when a stone or any other cause similar to those causes that do not fit or grow in the ear creates heat, and the ear is exposed to the sun, and if the stone is broken, it distills into some cause of foul oil or pus, then promptly administer its extraction, and do as conditions dictate for the occurrence of sneezing. And then place some soft cloth or wool around the ear canal, and extend the ear away from the source of these causes, as moving away from them helps alleviate these conditions.
And if it is not removed, then administer its extraction with the instrument called a delicate epichirurgical gear, of which this is the form:
And if a wound has been forgotten, it is well; otherwise, administer the extraction of the hernia from where it protrudes with gentle pressure.
And if it is not forgotten, make a catheter of thread and insert the tip of the catheter into the ear canal, then close around the catheter with wax and softened oil so that only the catheter is opened. Then extract the small intestine with strong traction, as we have described.
If this method is not forgotten, take a hot lamp or some other heated appliance with which the outside of the limb is gently warmed, and pause at the point of pain, then wrap it decently. And then insert it into the ear canal easily, and remove the ear from any moisture.
And therefore, if all the causes we have mentioned are not forgotten, then cut away the part that causes the abscess or spasm.
And the manner of cutting away that part is that you begin by cauterizing the infected vein and extracting the pus according to the nature of its strength, then make an incision between your fingers and turn the edge of the wound towards the parts above, and make a small slit in the base of the tongue where the pus has gathered. And the slit should be made in such a way that it reaches the bone, and if the bone is exposed, stop there if you can with appropriate instruments; then quickly close the slit, and treat it until it heals.
If the cause of the pain in the ear is an inflamed and swollen grease, then administer treatment and extract it; but if you do not obey your own observation, then take a small and delicate spatula according to this form: and administer to that the removal of that great thing which has fallen into the ear.
And do not attempt this if you think that the thing is already moistened by the ear's vapor and becomes hard, then place it in a heated mass, or extract it with incisions or subtle gestures, as we have said, for this facilitates its extraction.
In water which has entered the ear, use the patient's sneezing to determine the beginning, and fill the ear with as much wool or some other soft substance as possible. Then pour hot stones over that ear, and if the water is discharged through it, it is good; otherwise, take two smooth pebbles according to their length, warm them slightly in the fire, and let the patient insert one of them into the opening of his ear and leap on it with all his might, striking another pebble against the one inside the ear. Therefore, continue applying pressure until all the water has been expelled.
Therefore, continue applying pressure until all the water has been expelled. And once the water has been completely expelled, take some paper or cloth and place one end of it in the armpit and extend the other end over the fire until the whole length is burnt.
Then take another cloth and do this several times until all the water is expelled, and remove the catheter as is usually done with the extracting pear.
In the extraction of a foreign body entering that armpit, if it is small and similar to a pear, it should be treated as we have said in the previous section; however, if it is a large object causing an appearance at the site of the wound, then administer the extraction with gestures and incisions, and the cause of it is a pus infection from all other causes that affect the armpit.
During the extraction of worms born in the ear, when you treat that which we have mentioned in the division and in the treatment of distills, and do not follow through with your care, then you must protect the ear from the sun.
And so if any cause of the worms appears, then extract that worm or use subtle gestures, but if no cause is apparent, take a tube that is narrow at one end and wide at the other whose shape is like this: And insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the amount of suffering caused by the malady; then suck with a strong suction and do this in turns until all the worms are expelled.
If you do not adhere to the above instructions, then compress and seal the canal of the tube with wax as we have said; administer distills which have already been prepared in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the section on distills.
And let your flow be the one that pours medicinal oils onto the ear with this instrument, whose form is as follows: And make one of silver or bronze, leave it straight, in which there is a small hole, and smooth its surface.
And therefore, it should be used where it is in the cavity of the container here, it will be necessary. And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it around the end of the instrument neatly, then pour oil into the concave part of the hearing aid, or juice from some herb, or any medicine you prefer for this treatment—into the canula, which is in the ear—and then insert the ray into the cutout on top and press with your hand to expel the oil into the concave part of the hearing aid, while the patient feels the oil inside.
And what is inserted into the ear should be already scarified with fire at a small point. And be careful that the cause which you extract from the ear is not too damaged, because the ear medications do not withstand this.
**Chapter VII**
**On the Treatment of Ear Inflammation**
Sometimes children's bellies can become inflamed without perforation, and this also happens in some adults, either from inflammation of the ear tissue due to illness or from an injury; and this inflammation sometimes occurs at the point of the ear piercing that is not noticed, or it can be outside the ear.
And the one that occurs at the piercing point, which is not noticed, is in the most difficult situations for healing.
And when you have achieved the incision, take care to place the patient's thigh on the sun (or light) and observe it carefully. And if you notice an accumulation (or swelling), open that thin blade from which this form extends.
If the end of the blade where the width is narrow, with one side sharp and the other not; and the blade is of two lengths so as not to cut into the thigh.
And if the swelling is due to flesh in the thigh or its muscle, then take those fine scissors and make an incision there gently so that all the flesh is removed.
And if the swelling is in the groin area, take a fine blade and heat it slightly with fire, then insert that into the flesh of the groin.
And so if you feel an increase in this condition that the disease attacks and facilitates by its gravity, exert pressure on it to facilitate; and be careful not to hurt the nerves of the ear.
Then apply a bandage to the ear according to the amount of space between the folds, which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are certain of the consolidation of the wound; or take some and immerse it in water and sprinkle over it after every third day, and use it; if the ear has already become infected, be careful not to pour the liquid and replace it with another liquid that you wrap in a bandage made from oil that is smooth, as long as the abscess cauterization yields; and then tend to that until it is healed.
If there is an occurrence of pus discharge, then immerse a clean cloth or drape in hot water and apply it to the ear, using other healing methods that you have mentioned in the distillation treatment.
Chapter .viii.
On the treatment of atherosclerosis that affects the eyelids.
Atherosclerosis that affects the eyelids of the eyes; sometimes they are moist, other times dry.
Therefore, you should have these tools or pliers at hand, and remove this plaque from its roots, and then place your finger over the incised areas.
If there is severe pain due to the flow of blood, then you cauterize these with a delicate antilptic cautery.
And the best cauterization is to make incisions and close them when there is no further cause for their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Chapter .ix.
Treatment for a severe condition that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Occasional appearances on the eyelids of the eyes, caused by some matter that resembles a large and firm mass, hence it is called grandiose.
And it is characterized by the addition of thick moisture on both the lower and upper eyelids.
Therefore, the operation on them considers, when the grandiose is proceeding from the matter appearing from the eyelid and is reduced completely; and the cause of it is trivial.
Therefore, open along that fissure with a lance, and extract it completely with ease, and then suspend the one attached and sever it.
And if the hernia is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and care for that until it is healed.
And if it is small, then you will not suffer greatly because the hernia's pain is restored and incorporated.
And if the hernia's size is decreasing within the eyelid, you must examine the surface within, then raise the eyelid and suspend the hernia with a bandage, other than what you need for the initial opening, and press on it from all sides; and if the eyelid is elongated by incision, it will not be noticed for any reason.
Then open the incision, wash the wound with salted water; and care for the area with what has been incorporated until it is healed.
Chapter X.
On the treatment of an abscess on the upper eyelid.
An abscess is an inflammation of the tissues under the upper eyelid, which often occurs in childhood and can lead to the closure of the eyes, preventing them from opening fully due to excessive tearing.
And you will have to apply these remedies to their faces day and night, and as a result, the eyebrows over their eyelids will become moist, covering the swelling and the imminent discharge becoming apparent in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the accumulation within.
And one way of operation is to have the patient lie on their back with their head raised and wrapped in a cloth, applying heat and making them circular according to the quantity they contain, taking care not to add too much pressure so as not to cause additional damage; then place that over the affected area and press gently with your fingers throughout, so that the discharge is collected in the middle of the circle, and stop when the middle of the affected area becomes moist from the heat and the application of sputum.
Insert the probe into the wound completely until you reach the cavity, for in the most advanced cases, the cavity is reached through an opening according to the form of the white granuloma.
Therefore, remove those cloths which you have wrapped around the parts outside and turn them inside out with your right and left hand until they are completely separated.
And be careful not to tighten the wound so that the spatula does not reach the other side and tear it.
If it does not appear to your assistant at the beginning of the fissure, then tighten the fissure a little more gently until the process begins; and then remove those cloths as we have said, and immerse them in water and wine and place them over the area and sprinkle those with powders.
And so, they squeeze salt and place it in the concavity of the fissure so that what remains of that moisture evaporates.
And then attend to that which needs to be healed.
If an injury occurs at the posthemous site, then treat it with bandages until it heals.
**Chapter XI.**
On the ways of touch therapy.
When the eyelids of the eyes are formed by unnatural growths and are ancient, these our enemies towards the eye cause various maladies, such as frequent tears, softening of the eyelids and tissue, until it becomes the cause of the destruction of the eye, which is called 'tactile damage to the eye', and its cure is in four ways: either with a cautery using fire; or with acute medicine as mentioned before in the chapter on cauterization; or by incision and suturing; or with canning, as I will explain.
And so take care that you place the head of the patient in a vertical position; then turn the eyelid with your left hand, and if it is turned, it is good; but if not, insert an needle into that part where the fold of the eyelid meets, and let the needle pass through the fold, close to the edge where the hairs are, and pull the thread away from the eyelid towards its root.
Then open the space within the eyelid, removing the hairs with a precise scalpel; then extract the thread and place it under the eyelid using small cotton or linen threads, and secure it firmly with a bandage, keeping the eyelid in its original position, like a young shoot of a plant.
However, take care that it is in the form of elevation of the eyelid; for this varies among men, as those with greater elevation of the eyelid require a deeper incision to soften the eyelid.
And then cut open the space between the two lines you have marked, starting from the lacrimal gland major to the lacrimal gland minor. And if your fracture is near the natural hairs, it should also be as thick as the king's.
And then place the lion's claw in one of the two angles of the wound, scrape it thoroughly, and adjust the suture with silk thread or fine wool, clean the pus, and make what is superfluous of the cloth adhere to the two eyebrows for some reason entangled, if you want to do so, otherwise, do not cure.
And then change the suture of the cloth every three or four days, and take care of it.
And if you wish, leave the plague open for its suture, and treat it with what dries and constricts, as the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the wound and the addition of pus; a tighter suture is better. Therefore, I tell you the ancient practices of taxanir.
However, be diligent in your care of the patient, as it is a good operation and there is no cause for fear.
And there is another method in taxation, which involves noting the shape on the eyelid resembling a myrtle leaf, and then raising the eyelid with three precise cuts, separating and gathering it according to this form:
If this is not possible, then have the cuts made, and this should not be neglected; take a needle with a thread and insert it in the middle of the shape, then pass another needle close to the lacrimal nerve, and the third one slightly farther away from it; adjust between these two threads so that they are equal, and then raise your hand at an equal angle as you did before, raising all the eyelid on which the shape is drawn.
And then adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches, and heal that which is sane.
If an abscess occurs after your incision or wound, treat it with cheese and similar materials, and apply heat to it.
And in some cases, it happens that the patient's hair turns white on their eyelids, so use what we have mentioned about incision; however, stitching is more artificial in some instances.
To insert a cane, do it in this manner: and it is that you turn the eyelid and divide the form within, as I have mentioned; then, with art, insert two canes or two thin splints whose length corresponds to the length of the eyelid and whose width matches the width of the space. And you have already made incisions at the ends of each piece where the threads are located.
Nearby, add any subtleties to what is superfluous on the eyelid, and constrict the canals of any broken parts with strong tightness, and leave it for a few days, because the inflammation due to tightness will die and become negated, and it will fall off by itself until it gradually dissolves.
If it is delayed, then break open the abscesses, and treat the wound until it heals.
Therefore, when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised, and the hairs do not hurt.
And this is the way to make two canals according to this form: and it should have the amount of length and breadth neither more nor less.
Chapter .xii.
About the elevation of sharp pimples on the skin with an agule when the skin is hard.
When there are unnatural, hard, and sharp pimples in the skin, the operation on them involves taking a subtle needle and pricking that delicate thread of silk, and then adjusting the ends of it very carefully and subtly. And the length of the threads should be about the quantity of one palm.
And then you compose another delicate thread beneath it shortly, and adjust the ends of that one if you wish.
Then place the patient's head in a small bed, close to the sun so that your work is revealed, for it is a delicate and minute operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the hair, adjusting it with skill, and make it penetrate the eyelid swiftly until you extract it from its natural hair.
Then pull the hair from its root and insert that in the ointment, taking care that it is one or two or three hairs and no more.
Then gently pull your hand away from the hair once it is completely freed from the ointment on the eyelid and its natural growth.
If the ointment is not pulled out with the hair and it remains attached to the eyelid, pull the ointment off in the same manner that you applied it, so that the ointment comes out from above the wound.
And then you will have the sight of the wound, when you remove the ointment and the bandage, and wash the wound with water, and close it with a bandage for two or three days, until the hair sticks to its place and the skin grows over it.
And if the hair is very short, then you should adjust a longer natural hair and lift it to that which you observe as being elongated appropriately in space, and then you lift it.
**Chapter XIII**
On the treatment of a condition that appears on the eyelid above.
When you observe a condition on the eyelid, and it is contracted when closed, to the right or left side, due to poor healing of a wound or section or cautery, and it is called leukoma, this inflammation or is natural or accidental, caused by the consolidation of wounds or sections or cauterization, or similar to them.
The manner of the operation on it is that you open up that consolidation and separate the folds of the eyelid, and place in it what is between them a piece of lint cloth, and bind them together until they heal.
And be aware that you must not treat it from the causes that dry out, restrict; for if you do so, it will only make the condition worse and there will never be a cure.
Use those causes that soften, as fennel does, and steep them in hot water with the seeds, or in vinegar, which is liquified with any of the oils, and immerse the affected area in it, and treat it thus.
And the treasure of your cure is that you pierce with a sharp instrument any part that is not consolidated according to its original form, as you saw at the beginning.
And this operation that we spoke of is nothing but a correction of the deviation that does not return the form of the place according to what it was before.
Chapter XIV.
On the care of the eye, which is done on the eyelid.
This care, which is done on the eyelid and is often called "alxacrati," is not properly called "alxacrati"; it is either of natural origin or accidental.
An accidental alxacrati may be caused by a plague, or a cut, or a cautery, or other similar means.
And the method of operation is that you take a needle with a double thread and insert it into the flesh, passing from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, so that the thread goes through both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh apart with the needle and cut with a scalpel, making an ample incision. And so return the shape of the eyelid according to what it covers, as it should be; if not, take a string and hold that in the split shape, then turn the eyelid around, and make both slits on the edge of the eyelid.
And the ends of both slits should be at two angles from the incision you have made, where they meet, and so formed that when they converge, their shape is evident.
And this shape is the Greek letter lambda.
Then press the flesh with your finger that is as thin as the eyelid has left space.
Then adjust the separated parts and attach them with a thread; and care for those with what we have said about softening medicines and applications of heat, so that it heals.
And if you need to increase the opening by incision or suture or cautery, be careful to make a flat incision over the skin of the eyelid as previously described. Then separate the calculus between two lips as we have said.
In the final stages of the surgical procedure when it is elevated or left open, the flow of operations should follow according to the preparation for the operation in the form of incisions, and that one is in the form of various spots of diversity.
And the skilled artisans always prepare tricks in every way possible so that within him it returns the figure to its natural form, or close to it, and treats that malady according to what suits the operation and the tools in their best dispositions.
Chapter .XV.
From the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this adhesion occurs in many people, it seems to be solidified, making the eyelid less flexible and hindering its natural movements; therefore, you should insert a thin instrument under the eyelid's edge, raise it up, or stretch it gently towards the nose.
Then you should incise the adhesion with a thin instrument that is not sharp enough to cause further irritation, making it slightly blunt so as not to disturb the patient during the operation, and remove the spatula that does not damage the eye's sensitivity.
And your incision should be made in such a way that it frees the adhesion while allowing the eyelid to return to its natural shape, and ensuring that all traces of the adhesion are healed.
And then you immerse it in warm, salty water or distill sun-heated vinegar into it.
And then you separate the eyelid from the globe with warm, salty water, place over the eye a compress of wool infused in egg white, and apply the third day treatments that promote healing.
Chapter XVI.
On the knowledge of the cause and prominence of the tear gland's flesh.
You know that the tear gland is of two manners: either it is nervous, resembling a subtle hard bone; or it is non-nervous, resembling white ice water, which when pricked, is easily separated and the point does not remain in it.
And both spices do not begin until the larger lacrimal canal narrows gradually, covering the vision and blocking light and motion.
The manner of operating in the incision of the eye is that the patient's head is placed under the knife, their eyelids are opened, and with one hand the upper eyelid is lifted, then the fingernail is used to make a small cut (or slit) on the surface of the eye and extend it towards the sides. Then take a needle and insert it into the eye using a horsehair, or goat hair, or cow hair, or similar, slowly extending the needle tip and placing it in the middle of the pupil, then piercing the eye with the needle, tying the eyelash to the needle; extend it towards the sides, and remove the hair from the surface of the eye which blocks the pupil. And so you also remove the hair within the back of the eye.
And then, you incise the lower edge of the eyelid with a thin spatula or small scissors, and you open the flesh of the eyelid naturally so that by incision of this one does not cause continuous flow of tears.
And some also use an oil or balm, as we have said, and then with a thin spatula, they apply it in the form of this one.
And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tunic and cause its rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
After the incision, put a little salt or a fine cloth on it and leave it for another day; and then take care of it until it heals.
And if the eyelid is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it stuck in those places, then look for this type of eyelid being cured with medicines, and thus it is healed as well.
And if you wish to dissect it, open the wound of the patient and take delicate spatules with sharp points according to this form: with delicacy And if it becomes stiff and resistant in that incision, slowly extract it from the wound using a clean, sharp tool or a clean needle, and close the wound within the next day.
Then repeat the operation until everything that is foreign to it is completely removed, otherwise a foul wound will form in the incision, for if you leave it, the infection will spread until it is healed.
And repeat your operation on that wound until it is healed.
The intensity of the tear gland's secretions, if noticed in a significant amount, should be suspended immediately; cut off one portion at a time, and do not close the incision to prevent the flow of tears.
And then distill the main tear duct carefully, making sure it heals properly.
**Chapter XVII**
On the incision of abscesses and what arises from flesh attached to the wound.
Sometimes in the eyes of certain individuals, infected flesh arises, and it is so swollen that it covers the pupil, or it protrudes closely towards the eyelids and strongly pulls the eyelids away from each other, and it is assembled like a castle of cards.
The surgical procedure involves that the patient holds their side; then open the wound of that area and gather all the flesh with suitable scissors, and to this attach a forceps or basket; then cut the flesh from the beginning until everything is finished with the knife, and be careful of the wound so as not to damage your operation.
And your incision should be the one that incises those or scrapes off the debris we have removed during the operation of the ungla, or small forceps that are gathered carefully according to the shape it takes as this chapter approaches.
Therefore, once your incision is complete and all that flesh is removed, fill the wound with fine salt or sprinkle it with powdered rogues similar to corrosive medicines, and place a warm compress over it with cotton until it is assured of no infection.
And if there is any cause for concern and the wound becomes infected, and you fear an abscess, leave the wound and treat that abscess with what works to heal that abscess, and then repeat the operation until it is healed, and in this way care for the flesh that has been affected by the wound of this type.
Nevertheless, you should be aware that any cure for a painful joint should be done with care, either through natural or accidental means, by skilled hands, and do not place your hand on any of these operations until you see that the affected member is able to withstand that operation.
**Chapter XVIII**
**On the Collection of Knowledge in Disease**
Knowledge comes in various forms, some of which are difficult to comprehend and seem locked away like turtles in their shells regarding disease. These complex issues should not be rushed into operation without proper understanding, for such hasty actions may prolong the illness for many days.
Therefore, at the beginning, it is essential that you consider whether the knowledge in question is strong and if there are no other illnesses present that also possess that knowledge—it is then that you should gather that knowledge.
And make the patient hold their head in your hands, and suspend those veins with a needle or two according to your discretion; and let that needle have a thin, double fold according to this form:
or two needles gradually inserted according to this form:
And then gently collect those veins with subtle forces, in subtlety, and immediately wash the wound as soon as you see those veins filled with blood and turned red.
And be careful not to hurt the wound at the ends of the knife; and if you perform your operation in the morning facing the sun, and are strong in your action, only pierce those veins.
And when you have finished, pour distilled vinegar or rosewater into the wound to corrode what is left from the needle.
If it is not possible to collect all of these things at that hour, then apply a plaster to the area where the pain is and leave it for a few days until the pain is relieved and the risk of infection has passed.
And then repeat the process according to the patient's condition until they are healed.
And this is the method for forks:
Chapter XIX.
Of reducing enlarged noses.
When treating enlarged noses with cautery or sharp medicines, as described in the preceding narrative, and if it is not healed, do not attempt to close it until the abscess has matured, and extract all the pus that is within it until the bone is exposed.
And so when the bone is exposed and appears corrupted or black, you cut it with a tool that has this shape:
It is called a sharp knife, and it should be made to cut, and the head should also be rounded so that it can be punctured with a needle or with fine scraping (just as in the following form).
And place that over the corrupted part of the bone, and then turn it between your fingers, and press your small hand little by little until you know that corruption is gone.
This should be done several times, and then the place is restored with drying and stopping agents.
So if the place is consolidated and there is good flesh and the body is separated from the sanies and pain for forty days, and it is not renewed or inflamed and no accident occurs in it, then you know that it is healed.
And if it cannot be brought back into place except by narrowing the fissure to its natural shape, then do so in this manner: uncover according to the bone or acute medication, and as soon as the bone is uncovered, take hold in this form.
The end of the instrument should be triangular, and the shaft of the instrument should first be extended to the tip in this way as it turns.
Then place your hand over it, and that should be the location of the lacrimal; extend your hand a little further, and then rotate your hand over the bone until it penetrates completely through the bone, and you will feel the pain as air escapes from within.
Therefore, you will restore the area using hemostatic medications that dry out as required.
Therefore, when the flesh is no longer inflamed at the site, the matter that was discharged from the openings returns to the body, so this is less concerning regarding the illness.
Chapter XX.
On the reduction of hernias.
When the hernia protrudes completely and does not yield to gentle pressure or decrease in size, it is necessary to relax the patient, and then continue with the treatment, making incisions in the neck for proper drainage and applying a liniment made of alder and aloe leaves, herbs, and sarcolla, and then firmly secure the bandage over the hernia using powdered motz.
And the way of the powders is to take linen cloth from the coarse moss, and each cloth is folded in four parts; and make those mosses.
And then arrange them one on top of the other according to the amount required for the hernia. And then apply a strong, firm pressure to those parts with the aid of a rigid, well-tightened bandage; and repeat the suction with the scarification; and remove the bandages and leave the wounds clean during the day and night.
If, meanwhile, the ligament becomes softened, then it must be made very tight.
And likewise, rest the ligament during the day and night as we have said.
And if the wound has already been reduced, well, that is good; otherwise, repeat the application of poultices with powders and compression and suction until it heals.
Chapter 21.
On the incision of the tunic's eminence (uvae).
When there is a rupture in the uvular tunic, and it protrudes and processes the eyelids as if with a grain of sand, and the shape of a man is formed by this, and you wish to incise it, then the operation on it is as we have previously mentioned, so that you insert the needle into the edge of the uvula at the point where it has come out from its place above, and then insert another needle through which the double thread of the lacrimal part passes, and cause it to penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; and then incise the location of the double thread and lift that part of the uvula along the path of the needle, and tighten that muscle.
Then remove the needle and place it on the humid wool soaked in chicken albumen, and wait until the thread falls off the uvula.
Then dress the wound with that which will soothe it until the plague is healed.
And sometimes it is gathered from all parts around the wound with a great emphasis on adjusting the bandage tightly, and then it is perforated with a thin spatula that comes to the surface of the wound, and allows the albumen moisture to escape, and the bandage is then lowered and applied quickly.
And then apply heat until it is cured.
**Chapter XXII**
**On the Cure of Alconati**
This malady, called alconati, is nothing but a health condition that presents as a swelling resembling water flowing downward, and it is not the same as gout.
The method of treatment is as follows: grasp the affected area firmly on both sides and right above it; then take hold of the head in your hands from two different directions, and press until you feel the swelling move away from the joints, prevent it from descending, and stop the pain; thus, the disease will disappear in due time.
And if it does not descend, you will know that it is water.
If the descent to the bedpan has not been prepared as we have said, then make the patient stop between your legs and take a delicate spatum and remove that over the panniculus, just in front of the continuation of the conjunctiva (within the desired location), until the sanie is emptied.
Once the sanie is emptied, you should then distill the warm water that you have mixed with honey or water in which fennel and honey have been boiled.
And then it should be cared for regarding the other causes until it is healed.
**Chapter XXII.**
**On the treatment of water coming from the feet.**
We have already discussed the types of water in its divisions, and it is fitting to perforate on the tongue as declared, according to the health.
Now hold the patient still between your thighs on a couch, tie their hands, and make them shiver with cold.
Then place your left hand near the patient's left eyelid if the affected eye is the left one; or your right hand near their right eyelid if it is the right one.
Then hold your right hand, if the affected eye is on the left; or your left hand, if it is on the right.
Then grasp the tip of the thumb near the corner for the thickness of the tear in the patient's eye, and gently pull the thumb towards you while rotating your hand.
Then press into the eye socket, and feel that the thumb has already reached the back due to the pressure.
And measure the path of the almond to the pupil with the measurement of the space which is from the pupil to the edge of the blackness, and it is the rim of the eye; for you will see that pupil through the clarity of the cornea.
Then press the almond into the area where there is water, and release it downward a few times, and as soon as the water descends, you will feel the malady on which its sight was previously fixed, and the almond in its eye.
Then rest for a moment; so if the water has descended, you will relax that other time before the almond is thrown out.
And so when it is dried and does not descend, then extract the almond easily, and turn your hand a little at a time, and dissolve in the water a small amount of clear salt from a gem, and wash inside the eye with that lave; and then pull out the eye lid or stop or wool infused in rose oil and albumen of egg and apply it to the eye.
May we and those of our time place ourselves over this treatment as it has been described in books.
And if you do not adhere to your knowledge when using the tool on the hernia, because the hernia is hard for some people—of whom many suffer from this condition—then you should take the sponge, which is called a "ball" and has this shape:
And therefore, perforate this joint, do not release your hand from the tool, and do not stop until you have made a subtle opening in your knowledge.
Then, insert the tool according to what we have said.
And you must complete your task, prepared for the patient's sleeping place to be made comfortably in a dark room where they sleep on their back at home, and all movements are prohibited.
And hold it in place according to its nature so that it is cleared of its impurities, and do not twist its head towards the right or left at all.
And the bandage should be according to its disposition within three days.
Then carefully open that in this dark manner, and examine the foul sight, and discover some causes, and return the bandage within seven days.
And do not cover this during the time of treatments or perhaps, immediately apply the infusion. It is known that you remove this because the water can slightly evaporate due to great and violent heat of regardment.
If an abscess occurs after cauterization, then open the wound again on the seventh day, and straighten out that which has deviated due to the abscess.
Now, let's translate line by line:
And then gradually and carefully examine the patient and discuss its causes.
And you should know that in surgery, the pupil of the eye is not to be avoided at all times, and then you will be daring with the operation.
And we have already mastered some of those who are under the art, and one says that fire should be made in the air with a tube through which water is sucked out.
Yet perhaps you have not seen this perfectly in our land, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books; and it may be a novelty.
And these are the forms of the spices that serve for those who ignore them:
And they are made of iron or bronze, and their ends have this triangular subtlety, the acute end also like that shape.
**Chapter XXIV**
On the treatment of nasal flesh injuries.
When in the nose there appear various attached flesh injuries, whose cause is sometimes due to a swelling of the mucous membranes, or to polyps; this illness is called polyps because it resembles that particular foot (or rather, growth) represented. And it is cancerous flesh, pale, of dark color; and from it comes the lion's flesh, not of a dark color.
Therefore, in that which is not fraudulent or cancerous lion's flesh, you should open the wound between your fingers and place it in the sun, wash the nose of it, and apply honey to those parts. And then carefully extract it from the parts outside, and cut what you have understood of them with a delicate knife between the parts, knowing that all the flesh is held; if any cause remains of which the dissection is possible, then quickly take hold of it with one of the subtle instruments as an aid. If it is a benign or acute apthous ulcer, then apply to it what covers it; but if it is a malignant abscess, then cut and cauterize that part until the san is completely removed and all cavities are healed.
Then carefully insert into the nose, the incision tool, and use either water or oil. If the nose is blocked and you feel humidity in the palate during the process, then know that it has healed.
If the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then know that inside there is flesh full of pus between the bones of the nose to which the dissection has not reached.
Therefore, you should then insert the instrument into whoever has any obstruction, and move it around gently, and between each joint apply the amount of force necessary, and manipulate the illness, and insert one end of the instrument into the naris either by force or for other reasons possible to them.
And moreover, when this is done, it should be held so that its smell enters the nasal canals and settles on their soft parts, for several times witnessed, these actions make children in schools sneeze, and it is a minor cause to anyone who wants to do so.
Then hold both ends of the instrument: one end should protrude from the nose and the other should be inserted into the naris, and apply pressure on the flesh with the fingers that are around the instrument, and do this until you know that the flesh is already around the instrument's edges.
Then remove the instrument and place a warm compress on the nose for three days or more until the swelling has completely dissolved what is broken in the flesh.
And then, at the end of the treatment, place a lead tube in the nose for several days until it is healed.
If treatment comes to an end, use this method.
And this is the design of the instrument, called an alchemist, which distills oils and medicines from herbs:
And make it of silver or brass, which is similar to a small lamp with an open top, having a small cavity, and a handle that resembles it.
And if you wish, make a closed tube as well, with a handle, and the tube of the alchemist's instrument should be flat and open; to which you should have access when you dig into it with oil or water that you want from the succeded causes.
It appears that your request is incomplete or lacks context. The text "Capitol .xxv." does not provide enough information for me to discern the language or content it refers to. If this is part of a document you'd like translated, please supply more context or the full text for better assistance.
They grow on the tips of the nose.
Frequent occurrences are noticed as a growth on the tips of the nose, which becomes enlarged and noticeable within a few days, requiring medical attention.
And for this reason, you should pay attention at the onset of its appearance and eradicate it completely. And then apply over the area a cautery or medicine that burns, which is located in that place.
If the operation takes too long, it should be suspended, and consider whether it is inflamed, hard, of a dark color, and lacks sensation; in this case, do not touch that part with a hot iron as it is a sign of gangrene; for signs of danger indicate that one should retreat from this wound due to its great malice towards the patient.
And if the abscess is tender and not dark in color, and it is possible to operate on it anywhere, then empty the pus and cut through the affected area without fear, and treat the place with a liquid that will heal and tighten until it is cured.
Chapter .XXVI.
On the suturing of the nose, lips, and earlobe when continuity is broken due to an ulcer or similar condition.
You should know that when there is a rupture of continuity in one of these cartilages, it causes little trouble to those operations except in some people.
Therefore, when you detect any cause among those, considering it a fresh plague or its pus, then adjust the two edges of the plague with stitches and, afterwards, take care of the inside so that it heals properly.
And if the edges of the rupture are already separated and each is healthy, then you should remove each piece from its connection ensuring that no pus escapes. Then, adjust the two edges with stitches and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood on them and cover them with fine plaster or any other consolidative dressing, leave it for two or three days, then remove that and replace the dressing, leaving it until the wounds heal by themselves, and take care with ointment so that they heal properly.
The technique of sewing is that you add the solution for continuity or use needles as we have recommended in the suture of the abdomen, or add the solution for continuity with silk as you have been taught.
**Chapter XXVII**
On the removal of those causes that come in both lips in the internal parts.
You will often see these growths in many people inside their lips; some are hard like dry flesh, resembling the hardness of erysipelas, and others are better or larger.
Therefore, you should open the lips and remove each of those hard growths from every part, and then fill the place with a clean stitch while that wound is restrained, and subsequently wash it with vinegar and treat the place with water that has been mixed with salt, until it heals.
Chapter .xxviii.
On the incision of tissue attached to the gums.
Cut carefully over the attached gum tissue, which the ancients called 'albus', then either suspend it or hold it with forceps and cut it away, allowing the blood to flow or the pus to drain.
And then apply over the area a sage compress or other astringent or drying powders.
And if the tissue returns, cut it again secondarily and cauterize it, for near certain the cautery will not return.
Chapter .xxix.
Because of the tooth's root.
When on the surface of teeth within jaws and between gums there are tight, rough, scaly edges, sometimes blackened, and these are caused by corrosion through the gum tissue, then the adjacent teeth become loose.
And so you should remove the patient's discomfort between their thighs and rest their head on a pillow, and clean the teeth where these rough edges and similar debris appear, so that no further cause of pain arises, and this removes the blackness, yellowing, and other conditions as they are cleansed.
Therefore, if it is left as it is in the beginning of the rational treatment, well and good; otherwise, you should repeat the treatment on these parts for several days, second and third, until you reach the final statement regarding what you wish to achieve.
And you should know that teeth require various types of precise cuts and shapes depending on how they are prepared for your operation. For this reason, the scissors with which the tooth is separated from within are different from those used to shave between teeth according to other forms, and these shapes of scissors must be prepared for you as you will see shortly:
Chapter XXX.
Eradication of teeth.
Understand that you cure the tooth of its pain with all care and take your time in its complete eradication, for there is no cause to replace it once it has been extracted, as it is a sublime substance whose absence justifies the difficulty of its extraction.
When the disease is forced to extract a tooth that causes pain, you must be certain which tooth is painful, as the pain can sometimes deceive and lead one to believe it comes from a healthy tooth; therefore, extract that tooth, and the pain will not cease until the diseased and painful tooth has been removed, for we have seen this through the operations of barbers.
Therefore, to determine which tooth is painful, and as you already know, you must cut into the gum around the tooth using a scalpel in which there is some virtue, until it is completely detached from the tooth, and then carefully use your fingers or fine forceps, starting at the root, bit by bit, until the pain ceases.
And then use pliers with strong teeth for good speech or firm extraction; hold the patient's head between your hands that they do not move; and treat the tooth according to its straightness so as not to break it or cause greater pain to the patient.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten, take one of those instruments and insert it into the affected area with ease and effort to remove it as it was done at the beginning.
If the tooth is broken or corroded, then know that you must cover it with cloth and twist the fragment with a thin thread so that it does not come loose during your constriction over those areas where it holds.
And be sure to perform the scarification precisely around the entire gum line and take care not to break or tear that part, then return to the patient for further treatment, as the pain may be greater than the first time.
And beware that you do not do as some ignorant barbers do in their hasty and reckless attempts at removal, for they do not administer what we have recommended; indeed, time after time they bring about great hardships for men, whose roots are so deeply embedded that it is much more difficult to extract them. And we have witnessed this on numerous occasions, where, after much effort, only some of the teeth or even just a few bones from the jaw remain.
And then proceed with the eradication of it, wash your mouth with wine or add salt to it.
And if there are pus and swelling, then cut off some amount of it and sprinkle on the affected area; if this does not help, cauterize.
The shape of the forceps should be subtle, with a long and thin end, a short handle, and a thick base, so that they do not bend when used for such delicate tasks.
And similarly, when the handles have thick ends, they should be short in length; when you first use them, they should not bend.
These are made of Indian iron with straight ends, and on the ends of those are teeth that fit into each other and tighten strongly when pressed together; sometimes, the ends of these forceps take the form of a bird's beak, which is curved and very strong.
Chapter .xxxi.
On the eradication of teeth and the extraction of broken bones from the jaw.
When it is necessary to eradicate a tooth that is impacted for some reason, you should place your hand over the area with a bordered edge for one or two days until the area is softened; then insert pliers or tongs whose ends are assembled in the shape of a beak of a bird called a ciconia or guanta.
The ends of them should be done inside with a file or chisel.
And if you do not obey this instruction with these pliers or tongs, then you should press down on the root and expose all the flesh and insert the instrument which is called a small lever whose shape is like this:
And take a thin but sharp instrument, small in length, so that it is not bent.
Therefore, if the treatment for this is overlooked, it is useless; otherwise, assist me with these other instruments, of which these are examples: the shape of the first instrument has a triangular end with some thickness.
The shape of the second instrument is triangular with a very thin end.
And now assist with this instrument, which has two slopes; the appropriate shape is as follows: and with other instruments that are used for tooth extraction; since it is delicate work, use this instrument which resembles a large claw, and its shape is:
From the rounded or pointed end of the triangle, which may have some thickness, but is not covered so as not to be squeezed.
And you should know that the instruments with many teeth are similar to other instruments.
The skilled and subtle artisans, by observing the symptoms and various ailments, can determine what treatment is required; for there are ailments to which the ancients did not give attention or apply their specific instruments due to their diverse forms.
If the jawbone or other bones in the mouth are squeezed, then apply gentle pressure at that point according to what is suitable for these instruments and the forceps used in extracting teeth, and aid yourself with the gesture which this shape demands.
And if there is any small defect, tighten or hold it with the mouth so that it does not escape or rupture until the bone of all is completely healed; and then restore the area with appropriate medicines for this.
If there is a small hole in the bone, quickly remove the dirt and darkness from that hole and treat it until it is healed.
**Capitol .xxxii.**
On the care of teeth that stand out among others.
When teeth stand out abnormally from their natural position, especially in women and more so in the most sacred parts, one must consider: if it is not possible to extract or heal the tooth, then it should be uprooted; rather than being attached to another tooth, one should cut it with a surgical instrument that resembles a pig's tusk, made of sharp steel from India.
And your incision should be made over the tooth in several days due to the tooth's hardness, and it should not affect any other teeth.
And if the prominent tooth is exposed to caries, then you should file it with a steel file from India that has this shape:
And all of this is made of Indian iron and the edge is precisely; it has small points as if with a lime, each one sharpened little by little over several days easily, so that there are no other teeth broken or falling off. Then prepare the thread at the end, and sharpen those with other razors.
And if it is the tooth from which a piece has broken off and affects the tongue, you must then file the edge of that fraction until its roughness becomes smooth and stopped, and apply it so that neither the tongue is hurt nor the word is corrupted.
**Capitol .xxxiii.** (Note: "Capitol" is likely referring to the chapter title, with xxxiii indicating Chapter 33)
On the restoration of lost teeth with gold or silver wire.
When teeth are affected by severe impact and removal due to percussion or extraction, and the patient cannot bear the pain, having tried various stricture-inducing medications without success, then it is necessary to resort to those that are tightened with gold wire, not silver, because silver becomes weak and cannot be relied upon for long-term use.
And the wire should be of such subtlety and thickness as to fit between the teeth; the shape of the clasp is that you take the wire and hold it twice its length between two healthy teeth, and then twist the wire in a serpentine fashion between the two damaged teeth, or if only one remains, until it reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And repeat the stitching within the opening from which you began, tightening your hold with facility and wisdom, lest it be damaged again.
And your tightness with which you tighten the wire should be such that it does not dislodge the teeth.
And then carefully cut off the surplus filament with forceps or scissors, and place them in any desired position by manipulation, and turn them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so as not to harm the tongue. Then fasten that quite tightly with a Roman bandage.
If it becomes separated or torn, strengthen that or those with another thread in the same manner for as long as necessary.
And this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the correction for two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, thus binding these together:
And when it is done so that a tooth or two return to their proper place in each location and have grown again as we have rectified them, they will be stronger.
And this is only done by skilled artisans and wise men.
And sometimes it is caused by a bone from a cow, and it is made in the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the same place where the tooth was missing, and it is tightened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
**Chapter XXXIV**
On the knowledge of the ligament which is found in the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament which is found in the tongue sometimes exists naturally or accidentally due to a condition that has already set in.
And the operation on it is to open the mouth of the patient, so that its lower part exists in the sky; and he raises his tongue, and then cuts into that nervous ligament according to its extent until the tongue is freed from its attachment.
If there is any stiffness or resistance in that area, and it has formed due to the consolidation of an illness, then you apply oil and cut through it according to its extent so that you can incise the ligament and dissolve the nodule.
And be careful not to cause any rupture in the muscle of the flesh, and cut through the rearward attachment, and let come a flow of pus.
Then clean the traces of the incision with water or wine or rubbing alcohol; and place your hand over the opening; it is necessary that the patient keeps their tongue outside during these nights so that it does not become consolidated again.
If pus comes out, apply vitriol over the area; if the pus is smelling bad, cauterize the area with a poisonous cautery that suits it. And then address the other causes within that it be healed.
It appears that you have provided a reference to a specific chapter or section, "Capitol .xxxv.", but without the actual content or context of what is being referred to. To provide a meaningful translation or analysis, I would need the text itself.
Remove the ranula with the tongue.
Sometimes, an accident occurs where the tongue becomes paralyzed, resembling a small, rigid block, preventing its natural movements; and its extreme hardness is greatly magnified within the mouth.
And the operation on it is to open the patient's mouth wide, facing the sun, and consider the paralysis.
And if you see it is of a pale or dark, hard color, by which the patient feels no pain, then do not touch that part as it is brittle.
And if it turns white, in which there is moisture, then place your finger in it, and insert a thin spatula, and cut it apart; and if the bleeding occurs at the time of your operation, then hold pressure with three bandages, preferably made of vitriol, as long as the bleeding is stopped.
And then return to your work until you have thoroughly cleaned it with water and salt; and attend to the other treatment for this until it is healed.
**Chapter .XXXVI.**
On the extraction of abscesses from two auricles, and those that occur in the throat, and other abscesses.
When a throat infection occurs, there are glands that swell up, which protrude outside and are called two auricles. When you treat this as we have mentioned in the previous section and it does not heal, then consider whether the abscess is hard, of a dark color, with little sensation, and do not touch it with a knife.
And if it is of a foul color and the base is thick, do not touch it with a knife due to the risk of infection; instead, leave it until it has naturally matured, and either you will extract it or it will break off by itself.
And if it is of white color, radiant, and its texture is delicate, then that one needs to be incised.
And the procedure for it is that you consider, in relation to your operation, whether the abscess has rested after being cauterized completely or if it has diminished to some extent; and then stop the malady facing the sun, place its head in a low position, open its mouth, and have the servant press gently between their teeth the tongue, using an instrument of noble form, which is as follows:
It should be made of silver or bronze, and be sharp with a delicate blade.
So, when you press the tongue against that and show the abscess to your patient, then take this sharp instrument and place it into the opening, and pull it out as far as possible. Another thing that removes some cause from the tunics, and then cut with an instrument whose shape this is:
Another thing that removes some cause from the tunics, and then cut with an instrument whose shape this is: It is similar to forceps, however, the ends of it are curved, so that the points of each of those are in the right angle of the other, very sharp, made of iron then coated.
If this instrument is not available, then cut with a spatula whose shape is like this: And it should be sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
And after you have cut a wound, cut the other according to this same manner of cutting, and then close the incision with clean water.
But if there is a flow of pus, cleanse with water from the decoction of fennel or mint leaves and similar things until the flow of pus is stopped, and then treat it so that it heals.
And in some cases, if other remedies fail, or if both ears are affected, incise them as you have seen and said in the incision of two wounds equally.
And you have already treated a woman for an abscess that was located in the groin of her, an abscess that tended to a dusky color, with little sensation, which had already closed the groin of her, and the woman was breathing with great difficulty, and she had forbidden herself from eating and drinking water, and she was close to death if more time passed, even one or two days.
And the abscess had already caused so much pain that it had opened two ruptures through which pus was oozing.
So, you should listen to me carefully and follow these steps: first, open the abscess surgically and remove the pus; then place a bandage over it; afterward, apply pressure to the area from which the pus originated; next, make an incision where you suspect the other wound is located, and press on it; then seize their tongue to prevent them from swallowing; finally, keep the wound in that abscess.
And then you cut out a large part of it, and there flows little blood from it. Therefore, it is essential to treat that woman immediately, and she should begin drinking water, and soon after, consume food. Thus, you must not delay making incisions on those inflamed spots again for a long time, but rather succeed in each subsequent location, which helps prolong the treatment.
Therefore, you should apply and cauterize the ulcer of the patient, thus adding to it; then you must walk around and not clean what God has done for that particular case.
**Capital .XXXVII.** (Note: The lack of context and the use of Roman numerals suggest this is a section title or part of an index)
On the incision of the hernia when it is swollen.
When catarrh affects the uvula, and it is inflamed and elongated, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the pharynx it is thick and round, and it is then called a bubo.
If treatment is as we have described above, and your physician does not agree with this method, and indeed, it has already been tried several times with cautery, but the hernia remains, and it appears rounded, then you should realize that the addition of a sharp object is necessary; and if its length is such, and it is bloody, with a dark or black color, and does not cause pain to the patient, then you must be cautious in making an incision, for fear of worsening the condition.
And when you observe it according to the method I have described regarding its whiteness and length, you must free the hernia and press the tongue with the instrument that shapes its form, and then return it to its cavity, and make an incision with one of the two instruments used in making a double cut.
And be careful not to cut anything except what is suitable for the natural term of its addition, for if you cut more than necessary, you will harm its function.
Then, make the incision, use what we recommended in the incision of two wounds, and care for it until it heals.
If the patient was frightened by the incision, use skill in the cauterization of it to ease their fear, and the manner of applying the cautery is with sharp water, for you must place the head of the patient on a suitable surface, and press the tongue down with the instrument we have mentioned, and take water as described in the chapter on cauterization, and apply this as a living flame, and do not make it too thick or too thin, and fill the concave space of the instrument whose form is thus:
The extremity of the instrument, in which the medicine is placed, should be concave like a spoon's edge, and place the instrument with the medicine on top of the wound, then have the patient lie on their side so that saliva or mucus from their mouth does not escape due to the intrinsic action of the medicine, preventing any harm to the throat and securing it.
And then apply your hand to the medicine, and squeeze it onto the uvula until the space in the back of the throat is filled with a dark, calm fluid from the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take care and wrap that around the end of the ray, submerge the wrap in the medicine, insert the ray into the wrap in a supra-canula until the wrap adheres to the canula, do this as many times as you need until you achieve the desired effect from the cauterization of the uvula, and then let it dry so that it falls off after three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and then clean the cauterization of the uvula with a wrap soaked in medicine around the edge, wash it with water mixed with the medicine, and treat it externally with embrocation, and internally with purgatives until it is healed.
And this specific type of treatment is more effective than incision and free from fear.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with something more subtle than cautery or incision, as it is treated in this manner: take calament, hyssop, oregano, rue, Arabic rhubarb, camomile, broadleaf, and similar herbs, and address all of those causes, or some of them, in a single mixture, and submerge them in wine; then boil; and let the wave be beaten decently with a wooden instrument placed at the appropriate location on the wave. It should be made of silver or bronze.
And the end should be inserted into the patient's mouth so that the steam rises to the uvula and over it, until the uvula becomes greatly obscured.
Then repeat this process with those places that have dried up, but be careful not to perform this treatment during the onset of apoplexy, as you would excessively strain the apoplexy, and it is not appropriate for you to do this unless the apoplexy has been thoroughly examined by a cauterizer.
If you do not have this instrument at hand, take a cane and shape one end of it into a hook, so that the mouth of the hernia is covered, as the hook of the cane prevents the vapour from burning the opening.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the removal of thorns and substances adhering to the skin, and other causes.
You may notice substances adhering to the skin or thorns from legs or any other cause.
So then, you should remove what is apparent from these [substances], focusing your sight on it, and using the tongue against the instrument solely to identify what is in the mouth.
And for what is hidden from your sight in the gullet, be sure to make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, for the strong cause attached to the gullet will be forgotten through vomiting; or let them swallow a piece of napkin or chopped lettuce or a crust of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge and tie it tightly with thread, and then make the patient swallow that, for when it reaches the place where there are thorns and it is extracted, then it will be forgotten. And you can take a snake and tie it with vinegar, then place it on the table and extract it carefully; or take a worm and carefully remove its entrails and extract it.
If the causes we have mentioned are not forgotten, then use an instrument of lead in this way:
And it should be sharp and thin, with a slightly concave end that you insert into the patient's mouth easily.
And he raises his head high and be careful of the touch of his throat bone, so that he understands the cause and treats it with the thing that pushes the bone or the spine, or what that doctor places his hand on.
However, if that disease infiltrates more deeply, it is better, with its knowledge of the location of the cause and its push downward, pulling his hand towards him with the instrument according to the amount prepared for him, until it is forgotten.
Chapter XXXIX.
On the extraction of blood from the throat.
When treating pharyngitis as described above with medications and not with cold applications, consider the patient's throat under the sun, since you have extracted his tongue with the instrument that I have recommended.
Therefore, if you examine the blood, extract that small or subtly moving clot appropriately.
If it is not possible to extract the clot, then take a concave needle and insert it into the wound of the patient, and then place on the concavity of the needle a hot iron, and do this several times (as long as the blood stops flowing and retreats from the wound) and keep the patient submerged in water for the entire day.
Then take a vessel filled with water, apply its mouth to the wound, and wash the wound with it; do not spill any of that water and draw the patient's attention away from it for a while, as the blood will quickly absorb the water.
But if what we have recommended is forgotten, then fumigate the patient with thyme or asafoetida using the instruments we have described for the suffocation of the uvula.
Do this, so it falls down.
And another method of operation through suffocation is that you take a wave in which there are ignited coals and the wave is covered with a cloth in the middle of which there is an opening, and on this opening is placed the tip of the instrument; then apply it from above the suffocation. The patient should open his mouth at the end of the tube and close his mouth so that the suffocation does not escape until you know that the suffocation has reached the blood flow, because the blood flow will fall down shortly.
And if he does not eat, you repeat the suffocation with motes again, prevent the patient from drinking, consume salty and dry food, and do not drink water, and it is necessary that these precautions be forgotten at this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument used to extract blood from the gullet when seen; it is similar to pincers, but with no curvature: Which is placed on the gullet, and its extremity resembles a cicada's beak, which is smoothened with lime, for this reason, when we encounter any cause, it does not leave.
Chapter XL.
In which is the essence of the discourse regarding the understanding and division of their [scars or marks] symptoms.
The scars or marks are special spots, of various shapes and sizes, according to the recollection of their origin, each one described in this book.
And they vary in their perforation and division in two ways: one is for the specific type of scars themselves, and another regarding the humidity.
And the second method refers to the locations where bodily accidents occur, as the scar from an accident on the head differs from that of the buttocks, and the scar from a fleshy part differs from that at a joint; each one has its specific surgical treatment.
And some abscesses are such that they cover those that should not be pierced, but rather the maturation of the health in those or the completion of their course.
Other abscesses that cover being pierced when they are crossed and not mature according to their course, also have abscesses that are close to joints, where an abscess appears near a joint, the state of it is prolonged until you find something in the circuit of it, and strongly corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay piercing it while it matures, it will affect the principal member; or it is near the buttocks, so pierce one that has not matured, not a raw one, otherwise you may be unable to extract its pus and it will become a fistula, or something done at the end of its course that is not healed. You should know the time for piercing the abscess, and that is when it has matured.
And you will know that it is cured when the pain ceases and fever subsides, and there is a decrease in rigidity and pulse, and the acuteness of the sore's head, and other signs.
And also know how to recognize the drainage location beneath the sore, and the coming of pus from the healing of the lump.
The drainage should always be through the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the thighs or feet, and in places of the joints, of the nerves, of the arteries; and, finally, in all other places equally, where there is no reflection; for in those that reflect, use perforation according to the affected member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, then it is better to wait and observe the progress of the disease according to what has been said; for if you perforate it before its completion, it prolongs the body's illness and increases the soreness and thickness of its edges and depth.
Make some incisions in certain places through the thickness of the flesh or body part as required, or according to what the affected member needs.
And be aware that you should make small incisions, and in large abscesses, a larger incision and wide sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And other types of abscesses in which it is necessary that the cavity be hollowed out and opened, when this is done as if bread were being made, so with those that occur in cases of gangrene and buboes.
And as for those who are incised in a single section with three angles; and of those where it is incised like the shape of a myrtle leaf, so with the abscesses of the ankles.
And as for those with round and lunar incisions administered, resembling those mentioned above.
Make a cut for those who have no such problem with surface-level apothems, ensure you make a shallow incision or one that is only slightly deep.
And if the apothema (swelling) is large and has already collected a lot of pus, do not make a deep incision at once; instead, remove some of the pus, then on the next day re-incise slightly and extract more pus, gradually increasing the size of the incision as needed.
Especially if the patient is severely weak, a pregnant woman, a small child, or an elderly person, as the animal spirit (vital force) moves quickly to escape the pus, they may die from the illness, and you must perform the operation.
Be very careful with this chapter and ensure that you clean your incisions thoroughly when performing operations on these apothemas (swellings). Consider whether the swelling is minor or a deep section, and administer appropriate treatments; if the swelling is large and the incision gaps are wide, then apply pressure to each wound until they heal together.
And if a portion of the skin or tissue is detached from the leg or has become concave in the curvature, then you should cover it with thin cloth made from linen, just as when you bandage cuts or razors, keep it moist; and tighten it after three days, and then treat and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
If bleeding occurs during your operation, you should administer clean water and vinegar mixed together, and apply a cloth of linen over the area where the blood is flowing, and keep pressure on it until the bleeding subsides.
If the bleeding persists, you should administer specific treatments and remedies as recommended in various parts of this book and at different divisions.
If it is during winter and the affected area contains many nerves, you should immerse the location in a mixture of hot water and oil, and apply that to the areas.
And if it is summer and the spots are fleshy, then you should apply powdered ointments mixed with water and oil or wine and oil, and all of this should be rubbed until the third day, as we have said, and you must loosen the crust and cleanse it and administer whatever is suitable for its cure until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but more according to the method of distinction that I have already said about each abscess in terms of how its cure should be addressed in particular chapters.
Chapter .xl. (Forty-first chapter)
On the section of abscesses that occur on the head.
On the head, there are small abscesses, which are of various types with shells that are made of layers; and each type has its own distinctive name.
And from them come droplets, and those are the ones that contain a moisture similar to lime. And those are the ones that contain moisture similar to sweat, and they resemble it; and those are the ones that are rocky, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, as the extraction of those does not cause any adverse reaction.
And the operation in the section of those is that you expect those to be in the shape of an instrument called entromes, as you know it contains.
If what contains is moisture, then you divide that as if it were a section according to its length by cutting along this surface.
And it begins at the section of the B line within the G line. Thus, when moisture is eliminated, you scrape that part where the moisture was present, and do not overlook any cause for its return, as troops seen returning might indicate some cause.
Then immerse the affected area in a mixture of Egyptian fire (a traditional medicinal remedy), or water and salt, if no such mixture is available; fill it with that and leave it for another day, as it corrodes all that it comes into contact with on that skin.
Then repeat the application of Egyptian fire (the medicinal remedy) to that area according to need, as long as you are confident that there is no other cause for that skin condition; heal the wound with fire until it is cured.
And if there is an abscess with thick nodes, then you should incise it according to this form: I have a section that is cut in the form of a cross, and it gets incised between two folds of the section and removed from all sides, and use your virtue to extract the tunic that contains it.
If your heart rebels against what I have first told you, do as I have said.
And similarly, perform the incision in the abscess of the section and treatment as I have told you; the incision over the abscess that is already softened is lighter because it has less pain and less moisture.
And sometimes there are certain abscesses of these that are in the head on some men for whom there is no moisture; which causes because you have incised an abscess on the head of an old woman and left the abscess thus with a hard, sour, white stone that could not be extracted, and if anyone were to strike it, they would be infected.
In other cases of accidents on the head, except for this one, which is not covered in this chapter, including the warts that appear on children's heads and require shaving the edges of the hair, the treatment for all of these should be a superficial section.
And stop the perforation of those in the lower part of their condition, so that the disease is removed from the deeper parts to the shallower ones.
Then apply the appropriate treatment for what is suitable to that of healing.
Chapter .xlii.
On the section of scrofula that occurs in the collarbone.
Various occasions have these warts appearing in the collarbone, armpits, and angles; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And thus it happens in the colon, and these are conditions that arise between them, and all scrofula from those is derived from its own tunic, and likewise with the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have previously discussed.
And the types of these scrofulas are nodules, some being stone-like, others containing humidity, and some are malignant which do not obey treatment.
Therefore, in that case where you find good disposition for the touch, of which the color is proper to the color of the abscess, and it is swollen throughout, not attached to the colon's nerves, veins, or arterioles, and not porous, you should incise it along the dry surface of the abscess from the inside to the outside of the body, removing it entirely from the affected area, as we have discussed regarding the abscesses of the head, and take care to extract it little by little using a knife or scissors if necessary.
And it is more careful that the vein or nerve is not incised.
And if the blade is not sharp enough, and your hand does not fit well with the incision, or it disturbs the illness, and you make an unnecessary incision into a vein or nerve, then you will be left with a wound filled with vitriol or other powders that stop the flow of pus, and open up the infection, leaving that area where the acute of the abscess rests and the swelling of the infection is reduced and begins to rot. When the pus is drained.
Therefore, return to your operation until it is completed.
And then examine the small scrofulas as indicated, to see if there is any cause from the others, and make incisions into those and clean them.
And if it is at the root of a large scrofula vein, you must be careful not to incise that scrofula from its root. You must first remove that thick, twisted thread and carefully pull it out so that it does not cause further harm.
Then fill the wound with fresh, young flesh that you have already purified with Egyptian ointment and tend to it.
And if you completely incise the scrofula, be careful to close both sides of the wound so that any excess pus does not leak out.
If you find that there is excessive discharge due to the size of the scrofula, be sure to incise the root of it, drain it, and then apply a suture and the appropriate treatment as mentioned.
And those of the scrofula that contain humidity, make a perforation at this place where you see the site of the maturation of it, and stop the perforation of what is the base of pus in the body, as we have said.
And then administer the perforation, find such things and resemble them, so that it corrodes what is broken down by corruption. And then when you see the wound already healed, you apply cure to what has been found of generative flesh within so that it is healed.
Chapter .xliii. (This appears to be a heading or title, indicating the start of a new section within the medical treatise.)
On the section of the pilot (or membrane) of the abscess, caused by an accidental ulceration within the gullet.
The ancients described this operation on the epiglottis, and we have not seen anyone in our land who has performed such a thing.
And this is the inscription from the speech of those people.
Men should be aware, as the extraction of the epiglottis must be handled carefully, for if not done properly, all the veins and major structures related to the condition are located here.
In those who have apostemes (inflamed tonsils or glands) in the mouth or throat, if the condition is not in the tongue, it is important to avoid the operation of epiglottis extraction to prevent the loss which is caused by perforation.
Therefore, when we intend to do this, cut the epiglottis with three circles around the epiglottis, or four with a small section at the distance between two circles for quantity, making the cut in the cartilage, not in the tissue, and this location is suitable for cutting because it is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels are open.
And if the doctor is cautious, you must ensure that he extends the cord of the larynx to its full extent, and then cut the cord until it reaches the channel, but avoid the vessels of blood if you know any particular cause.
And then, he should insert the knife according to our recommendation; it signifies regarding the section of the channel for the flux that is situated in this thing that is related to its rupture and by the removal of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, when the time is passed in which incision is feared, add two layers of the cord from the wound, and with that single one, it becomes the cartilage.
And then, administer medicines that promote the healing of the flesh until it is healed.
And Albucasis says that the essence of all that we have discussed is to observe that some of these ulcers have already filled the wound of the patient, and the disease has spread throughout the body, and the breath of the patient has been cut off in that place due to lack of breathing, and some are about to incise the epiglotis so that the patient may breathe over the wound and be saved from death.
And for this, he will keep the wound open until the evil of the disease is consumed; and the evil of it lasts for three days; and therefore, you shall command the treatment of the wound in such a way, and cure it until it is healed.
And what I have seen for myself is that a servant cut open a wound with a knife and incised it deep into the chest, and I was called to cure him, and I noticed the breathing of the dying person, and I uncovered the plague, and I found the pus that had come from the wound.
Therefore, you must confess that you have neither incised a vein nor guided the flow of blood, and the air from the wound is pure, then treat it within the fire of healing.
And do not be hasty in treating the servant unless it is necessary in your voice, and after some days return to the improvement of their dispositions.
And now I say that in the removal of the appendix, there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
Of the removal of the abscess that occurs outside the skull, which is called a brain hernia.
This abscess, called brain hernia, is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it occurs more frequently in women.
And it is divided into two manners, either natural or accidental.
And in the natural, it is not possible to cure.
And the accidental is divided into two manners: one is similar to gouty nodules, and the other manner is akin to apoplexy caused by the displacement of an artery, which is frightening. And one should not make a presumption about it with a sword unless it is asked for. And you should examine the patient and investigate whether it resembles gouty nodules, and if it is not attached to any veins, then you cut it out like a node, and extract that which causes the pain from within the flesh and bursa; otherwise, thoroughly inspect their entire body, and appropriately tend to the area in need of cure until it is healed.
Chapter .xlv.
On the section of nodal spices.
These nodes have various spices, and I have already described all the species of their division.
And it is important that I explain the difference between a node and an exit, with due consideration.
Therefore, I say that an exit is characterized by heat, fever, and intense pain, until the ebullition of excess subsides; it is complete putrefaction that stops the fever, pain, and heat.
A node, on the other hand, does not exhibit heat, fever, or pain, and it is characterized by that cunning lion which lies in wait for its prey.
And according to the color of the body, its beginning is like a cease and it is made thus with void, either greater or lesser, and they are according to two species, either they are fat and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I have said in division.
So, when you come to the treatment of a node, you must expel that and inquire into the beginning of the stimulus which is called an "intromis", according as its form comes in the chapter which is appropriate to this.
And this is the manner of inquiry for abscesses and all nodes; you take this stimulus and insert it in the place which is most humid that you find in the abscess, and you will turn your fingers around it little by little until you know that this stimulus has penetrated the wall.
And then you close your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and you extract the stimulus and consider what has remained in the track of it.
And if the current humidity is forgotten, of any color it may be, then you insert it into the superficial section as I have said in the other posts.
And if there is no humidity from the intrusion, then you know it is fat.
And dry it over the section having the form of a cross according to this form: Thus taught, lift it up and stretch it out, remove the intestines from all parts easily, and inspect the skin or sac if possible over that, and extract the organ from the knot.
If it is broken during the operation, it may not be possible to extract that organ, and you should turn your attention elsewhere, and extract it from the body in such a way as not to break any part of it.
If from whatever cause, slight or excessive, the hernia returns, it should be treated according to custom.
And if you find that a part of the hernia is exposed, complete the repair with sharp, corrosive powders and tighten the wound, and place a hot compress over the affected area, and treat the other injuries according to their respective cures until they are healed.
And if it is not too large, you will cut both lips of the hernia and treat it with something that adheres.
If a venous pulse is present against it, or not, you will cut and apply a hot compress to the place of the seizure, using vitriol, and leave it tight for two days or three until the pain subsides and the swelling of the sanc; then return to incise what is broken off from the hernia.
Chapter .xlvi.
On the forms of instruments necessary for incision and piercing.
Of these are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three kinds, of which one is largest, and another is middle-sized, and another is smallest.
The form of the large instrument is this:
The form of the smallest instrument is this:
They are made of iron, aluminum, and with precise movements, in order to properly position the instrument at the desired spots.
And these are the ways of experienced ones, they are called alchemists, and one of them is called berid.
And it concerns three spices: one is great, another is medium, and the third is slight.
The form of the experienced one, great:
The form of the experienced medium one, shape of it:
The form of the experienced slight one, shape of it:
So therefore for those apertures, excitations, fistulas and buboes, so that between them are bones and other causes.
And thus are made round, thick, leathery ones, also with great needles sewn to them, of iron or of gold or of silver, and the best are when they are made of citrus wood.
And the experiences of black plums are made, which remember that through these openings in the hollows of which reflections are, those reflections will be reflected to their lightness on those reflections.
And they are of three kinds, some being long, others medium, and others short, according to the extent of the fistula and the tightness of it.
Shape of the experienced great plum:
Shape of the experienced medium plum:
Shape of the experienced small plum:
The shapes of the plums are of various spices, some being simple curves, and they are of three kinds: large, few, and medium.
And of their bodies' humors, there are three types.
And of these, there are two types of curves, which are of three species.
And they have three types of curves, which are of three species.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Shape of a slight curve, shape of it:
A large half-moon has two curves. A half-moon of medium size has two curves. A small half-moon has two curves.
A large half-moon has three curves.
A medium-sized half-moon has three curves.
And these are the forms of the scalpels that are sharpened and cut through nodules and abscesses, and they are of three kinds, namely, large, medium, and small.
Large scalpel form:
Medium scalpel form:
Small scalpel form:
The ends of these have sharp blades, and the other ends are not sharp, but designed to make a clean cut during the removal of nodules without damaging veins or nerves; and for these reasons, the patient experiences less pain and greater calmness due to the adjustments required during the excorciation of the abscess.
And these are the forms of knives, which are also of three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you can see.
They are made of leather and look like the skin of a rabbit, on which alcohol is also applied.
And at the end of this side, there is a pointed instrument hidden and in that course it goes inside and outside according to your will, as desired.
The forms of instruments, which are hidden between these times during the piercing of the apertures and do not affect the patients, are of three kinds: great, milder, and minimal. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of vents through which the flow of blood is stopped, and there are three kinds; great, medium, and small; their forms:
They are made of citric metal, round or of some length, and they are thin.
And these species of vents must be great, medium, and small, so that by opening them, the flow of blood is stopped quickly when necessary, and they are used as a first aid measure when other remedies are not at hand.
I do not recommend using these to stop blood in all parts of the body, but only in fleshy places, just as with the varices of the legs and thighs, and the varices of the arms, and of the breasts and abdomen, and of the groins, similar to their fleshy counterparts.
And sometimes, these small instruments are made in the shape of surgical blades; by which the blood is stopped when performed through phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
And some times are made round according to this form:
Chapter XLVII.
On the care of the mammary glands of men which are assembled from women.
Some times the mammary glands of certain men become inflamed due to the effect of sleeping in an awkward position, and they become inflamed, and because the mammary glands are assembled from the women's breasts, they protrude outward, becoming distant.
And for those who desire this, be aware that you must incise those parts in the lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G, and then excise the entire grossness, and fill the wound with incarnate medicine, and close the two lips of the wound with stitching, and cure it until it is healed.
If a mammary gland retracts to the sides and is softened by its magnitude as it should be in women, then it should be cut into two halves, each with an incision resembling a crescent moon, of which each one contains the other until the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this shape of the line B and G. And then extract the cord between the two lips of the ulcer, stop the discharge, and administer what we have said about sutures and powders, what is necessary for healing until it is cured.
And if you do not perform the incision of what needs to be incised due to the patient's restlessness and the flow of pus, then you must fill the ulcer with a corrosive ointment and leave it until it corrodes what is broken off from the crust, and then care for it until it is cured.
Chapter .xlviii.
About the piercing of abscesses that come from the inflammation.
These abscesses that come from the inflammation are symptoms of scrofula, hard growths that contain a pus-like substance.
And regarding those that contain humidity, they must be incised at the lunar section as per this figure: from the line marked G to the line marked B. And once all the contents of the abscess are evacuated, you should close it with a strip of cloth and check for any signs of recurrence the following day.
And keep the bandage clean and change it regularly until the wound is healed.
If the abscess is of the nodal type or from scrofula, then you should incise it as we have described for scrofula above.
If the plague spreads so as to cause gangrene, then apply cauterization to it as we have previously mentioned.
**Capitol .xlix.** (Capital X, Forty-ninth Chapter)
On the section of apoplexy that occurs through archery or vein.
When an arrow pierces through and the string is tightened over that part, then inflammation and apoplexy occur, and the signs by which it is known that inflammation and apoplexy are caused by an artery or vein: for when apoplexy is due to an arrow, a long quantity of blood is accumulated in the preon (abdominal cavity) of the body; and when you press on the apoplexy, you feel a noise coming from it.
And that which is due to a vein returns abruptly to the appearance of the body.
And the section of this apoplexy is wrong, especially in those that leave open the armpits, and in the angles, and in the collarbone, and in many parts of the body; and it is very great, so be careful that its cure does not escape, and that which is in the extremities, or at the head, must be avoided.
Place a cloth soaked in hot water over the affected area to reduce inflammation from the painful arches; then cut the long cloth into two sections; and with one section, make incisions and release the pressure from the arch, and with the other, remove the bandages that cover it, until it is completely exposed.
Then take the needle and make it penetrate between the two layers, and tighten the arch with a double thread at two points, which causes the patient to pull out both arches located in the temples.
Then apply the pressure to the area between the two ligaments using a spatula until the swelling subsides completely, and dissolve the abscess.
Then administer treatment to the area where pus has formed until the ligaments fall off, and use a suitable poultice to care for it until it heals.
If the abscess is caused by a cut vein, you must hold your hand over it as close as possible to the abscess, and then insert the needle into the area where you have placed your hand, and make it penetrate; then wrap the thread around it in a double knot until you extract the other side from the opposite direction, and tie the abscess with the thread according to what I have told you regarding the grapevine ligament on both sides of the thread.
If you fear that the thread may break, insert the needle again at the same point of the incision, and tighten your threads in four places.
Next, dry the wound in the middle part of it; when the swelling has subsided, then make an incision to remove the excess skin, and leave what is attached to it.
And then place the poultice you have soaked in wine and oil over it, and administer the treatment that is needed until it heals.
To complete the treatment of the wound, which occurs due to the compression of nerves.
Thus, when a hernia occurs in the rear or vein, and it appears to be similar to a hernia occurring in the nerves due to their compression or excessive strain, or for similar reasons.
And it is applied to the areas of the assistants or the legs, or in any place where the joints are painful.
It is a severe apoplexy, resembling the color of another body, and it occurs in their most vital parts; when it is tightened by violent force, the patient feels a stupor-like suffering from the illness.
It is not an apoplexy of the extremities but affects the whole body; it does not go to any particular part in front or behind.
Therefore, regarding those who have it in their joints, one should not assume it is due to a bone fracture, as they will experience severe contraction.
One should apply a hot compress to anyone who has it on the head or forehead. If it is a minor abscess, then cut it open with scissors and remove that part by its roots.
And if it is large, then hang it with a hook and cut it out, and close it up; and dress the wound with a suture, and take care of it until it heals.
Chapter.
On the section of the abscess that occurs from the chest down to the abdomen.
Even some people observe swollen glands in the bellies of those individuals and in other parts of their bodies, which are called funguals because they resemble mushrooms; the roots of these are subtle, while the heads of them are large. And the edges of these are convoluted, and it is from these that a great discharge (or abscess) results.
And you have already seen one, and within their belly were two parts that served as functions similar to each other, and there was no difference between those white, small ones.
And the lips of those [parts] were reversed and split open, and moisture flowed from them constantly.
Therefore, you should cut these off and tighten the bandage on the foot, one at 18 inches (quays xviii unc) and the other at 6 inches (quays vi unc).
And the procedure for their incision is that you must consider if the patient's malady is humid, and the color of the swelling is white, moist, with a subtle texture; then you cut them with a broad knife, and apply cautery to them over a flame, as you have seen, in order to expel the effusion of blood; and if it seems that the blood flows, cauterize that part.
And if the patient is afraid and trembling, be careful not to make an incision with a sharp steel; then take fresh plaster made, strengthen that bandage, in the manner we have said, and leave it for two days.
And then adjust the tightness of the lead string; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the large lead after it has been cut and fallen by itself through its work.
If the part is of thick consistency, there is no cause for fear or trembling in making an incision into it, especially in that which is in the belly.
It is possible that you make an incision into the mass, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then take care that it is healed, as the disease is cured.
And be careful not to presume to incise that which is of a dark color, with little sensation, and moves regularly, for that is absolutely cancerous.
And now let us return to the recollection of the cure.
Chapter .lii.
On the cure of hernia (or "eminence" of the navel).
The hernia or protrusion of the navel is caused by various factors: either through gaps in the abdominal wall above the stomach, and from these openings emanate the intestines or hernias as appropriate in other ruptures; or due to a vein or artery constricting (sanct) as described previously; or because of excess gas trapped within.
If it is indeed due to a gap in the abdominal wall and the protruding hernia, then the color of the hernia will resemble that of the body; it is very painful, and appears in various positions. And if it is for the evacuation of the intestine, note the position of that part which we have described above, with greater diversity, and when you press on that mass, it is concealed, then return; it is very stiff in its place, and it requires much effort to insert water and vigorous work.
If it is due to moisture, then it is a tumor and not concealed when you press with your hand, nor is it compressed or cut.
And if it is due to infection, then these signs appear as a black-deforming abscess.
If it is not due to flesh, then it is a severe, thick, and hard abscess, and it varies in size according to the quantity.
If it is due to wind, then the touch of it is like a lion.
And the operation on it is that you consider when the prominence of the navel is due to a hernia, or a vein, or from gas; then know that you should abstain from treating it, for there is fear and dread as it is taught in the chapter where I spoke about hernias by arteria and vena.
If the prominence of the navel is due to an intestine or hernia, then know that you should order the patient to take a deep breath and be stretched out; then make several attempts around the entire navel, and command him to lie on his back between your hands over his loins, and encircle the area with a strong thread or a soft one in a proper manner. Then extend the extent of the hernia upwards towards its origin using a large hook; and tighten the thread or soft material around the circumference of the navel in a suitable manner.
Then cut the hernia away from its attachment and insert your finger into that opening to explore the intestine; if you have secured or observed it by means of the ligament, then carefully pull it out and push the intestine back inside the abdomen.
And if you have found the thread, then take some oil; and cut away its excess.
If it is contrary to your skill or vein, then circumambulate that place, and return to your operation; take two needles and insert them into the two strong threads and, in the manner of a cross, pierce through the circuit you have made around the abscess; then tighten the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, leave the needles and allow the place to heal until the flesh is extended and falls off by itself; or cut away that part when it has softened and separated, and then treat it with something that will cleanse the wounds until it heals.
And if the protrusion of the navel is only flesh or due to moisture, then cover that place as we have said and remove the sanch or moisture which you find there, and then treat it with something that covers and strengthens the area.
Chapter .liii.
On the treatment of cracks.
We have discussed, in the previous section, the types of cracks and the methods by which they are treated using medicine, and how cure with metal is avoided so as not to ulcerate; we also spoke about the causes of cracks and precautions for their treatment.
The ancients also said that, in some cases, cracks can be in places where it is possible to eradicate them completely, as with the crack that occurs in the breasts or in the groin and similar areas of the body; especially when it has just begun and is small.
However, if it is very old and deep, it may not be possible to cure it on its own, as I have neither seen nor heard of any success in that regard.
And the operation on it is as we have said, you must proceed and remove the illness and purge of black choler some times, and then clean that, if a manifest relief is found.
And then prepare the patient for the preparation in which the operation will take place, and ensure that all incisions made are properly sealed; and carefully examine from every side with a good look to ensure that no cause for complication from the roots of the illness remains. Then do not let the blood flow, and do not abruptly remove it, press the places, and cleanse the abundant blood with your hand or an instrument that you have at your disposal from among the instruments.
If it causes you difficulty to make an incision of a large vein or artery, cauterize it until the flow of blood is stopped, and then take care of it with the other remedies as long as it remains healthy.
Chapter .liv.
On the cure of hydrops.
We have already discussed, in the previous section, the types of hydrops from water and the signs of each type, regarding their treatment with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only the species of altitis alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympanitres or the species of hydrops, for that is mortal.
And when you have already medicated this species of hydrops tympanitre with medicines and do not agree with your treatment, consider this, for if the disease has already weakened the patient or it is another malady, other than that specific hydrops, such as in those parts of the body or abdominal conditions similar to these, then be careful not to treat them with iron, for there is fear regarding that.
If you observe the patient's excessive growth and it is not another malady but hydropic only, without inflammation or aging, then the manner of operating on it is that you lift the malady between your hands, apply your hand to press the abdomen, expel the water from its origin beyond the pubic area, and take a sharp spatula as follows:
it should be of two sharp parts long, with a sharp extremity as well as the spatula; however, make it not too short, so that during operation with this one does not enter the abdomen, and you hold it.
And consider if the generation of hydropics is from the bowels, then you must, through section, move away from the navel by a distance of three fingers on either side, to the right of it over the pubic area.
If the generation of hydropics is due to illness of the bowel, then your section should be left of the navel by three fingers.
And if the formation of it is due to inflammation, then your section should be on the affected joint.
And be sure that your section is on the side where the malady wishes to go, so as not to spread superfluity to that painful place.
Then thoroughly perforate the entire channel with the instrument, and insert your hand into that section, raising it between the canal and the effect, and extract it; and if it is the size of a fingernail or similar.
Then perforate the hernia until the space is reached that you want to reach, and it is in the place of water. And extract that, and insert an instrument whose shape is as follows: It resembles a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or iron or bronze, and in its initial part there is a small hole, and on its sides are three openings: two from one side and one from the other; its end is cut out according to the shape of a pen, thus:
And at the end of the tube there is an armilla, for when the instrument reaches the water, it immediately sucks up the water through the instrument, thus evacuating a significant quantity in a short time; if you evacuate more water than can be contained in one hour, then the patient's life will be endangered by the resolution of their animal spirit or he may suffer an immediate stroke that brings death.
One should evacuate according to the capacity of the tube and according to one's understanding of the patient's condition, considering the virtue of the pulse and the quality of the humors.
And after removing the instrument, retain the water that is retained due to the pressure of the tube that blocks the opening through which it was inserted; I recommend that you perforate it according to that manner.
And repeat the procedure with the instrument on another day if the illness tolerates it, extract a small quantity of water and do this for several days in fear, beware of making an error so as not to remove too much water.
If you fear the illness and read of a great quantity of water, then treat it as burial in sand, dip it in bathwater, and leave it in the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medicines until it is healed.
And apply cautery to the stomach, and with the blade and fire, extract the water as I have recounted above.
Chapter LV.
On the treatment of children whose genitals are not naturally open for urination.
Some times, a child is born from its mother's belly with the head of its mixture (amniotic sac) not pierced (or it is too tight or in the wrong position).
Therefore, it is necessary to pierce (the amniotic sac) as soon as the child is born with a gentle and subtle movement in this manner:
And then, with a gentle movement, insert a thin lead clamp and tie it off; do this for three days or seven.
And as for urination, let them pass urine gently and slowly; then return (the child) to their position.
And if you do not secure the lead clamp, it is possible that the urine which flows over the area will not be contained by this closure.
If that of which the pain is sharp should be treated with a lead clavicle, as we have said, for too many days until it is amplified.
For those in whom the pain is not in its proper place, it should be treated thus, which is the cause of those who are born with a hernia and cannot urinate during micturition, until the hernia is raised with the hand above the parts; and this is not due to generation, so that the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a motile disease.
And the manner of the operation is that the hernia be turned over on its back, and then extend the head of the hernia with your left hand by vigorous traction, and cut the head of the hernia from the place of the perineum with a scalpel, as if it were an incision with a pen, or whatever tool you prefer, so that the middle part of the hernia appears similar to the head of the hernia and the hernia falls into its proper place.
And be careful in your procedure to remove the flow of blood, for complications may arise from it; stop the bleeding where it cuts off the blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LVI.
Of the albaster (or white stone) that occurs in the prepuce at the head of the penis due to corrosion and blackness and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Complications may arise from this albaster on the penis, causing swelling and prominence of the flesh.
And some are malignant (malignant) and others are not (benign).
Benign (non-malignant), take care to suspend it gently and remove that one completely; then place your hand over the affected area with a poultice of Egyptian ointment; and after that, treat it with refined ointment until it is healed.
And if the blister is malignant and turns black, you should cover it with cautery near its incision and cut it out.
If the blister is on the prepuce of an uncircumcised penis, and one side of the blister is inside the prepuce while the other side is outside, you should treat the blister inside first before treating the external area; for when you cure the external part, there is no guarantee that it will not reoccur.
And also, there are instances in the genitals and prepuce that turn black and inflamed; therefore, you should remove everything that has already turned dark or is about to corrupt or is corrupted; then apply a line of medicine onto it made from wheat bran mixed with crushed chickpeas and lentils.
And treat the other wound with the same care until it is healed.
If there is an excessive flow of blood, then administer cautery monthly according to this form:
This cautery is useful for two purposes, either to stop the flow of blood or to treat a wound when it is corrupt.
If the head of the foreskin is completely corroded and destroyed, then insert a lead tube into the inside of the foreskin so that the infection urinates through it.
In the adherence of the foreskin to its head (and this adherence only occurs in those where the foreskin is attached, and circumcision is not required); when adhesion occurs due to an infection or abscess, then use a blunt spatula to carefully loosen the ligament and completely free the head of the foreskin.
And if it is difficult to separate them delicately, then use a spatula to carefully remove the foreskin from the head, and this is because when the foreskin is thin, its delicate nature makes it easily torn.
And then carefully separate the prepuce from the head of the penis with a delicate knife, as it has already been rinsed in water to prevent adhesion again.
And then treat it with a styptic to ensure that it is consolidated.
Chapter VII.
On the purification of newborns and the treatment of issues that arise during circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution for all ailments, but when it is performed as part of our own actions and our own will, and when it is done at an early age, it is necessary that we approach this better operation with greater care to ensure the well-being of the child.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not perform circumcision in any of their free lands, as they were not commanded by their laws, and only because we have acquired through experimentation that this practice causes great pain, which is why I have allowed the majority of artisans and barbers to use circumcision and purification with new tools and knives; they use glue for bandaging and finger nails for incision.
And having tried all these methods and not finding improvement with knives, ointments, or threads, since the nail of the foreskin has two layers, and the inner layer sticks out, it is forced to another incision and sure pain. And the circumcision that is performed by cauterization, which is digital, and is used by barbers, is not safe for the incision of the end of the male member, as it is tight within the wound.
In the operation with the nail, since it is tight, it will damage the knife and corrupt your operation. And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and in many cases, it does not require circumcision, and I have seen that myself.
Regarding the preparation that is made with scissors and linen tied with thread, I have discovered through experience its goodness, because the scissors are of a proportional incision, so that the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below; and therefore when you press your hand, the two sharp edges meet in one time; and it makes compression of the linen in the form containing the knot of the whip from every side, at which no error is found.
And the first manner of the operation is that you keep the child mostly still if it is one of those who understands a little, do not make any other move but to tie the linen around its whip, and let that enter into the other on the following day.
And then do everything possible to make that person happy in every way that receives their understanding. And then make sure that person is well prepared and not afraid; hide the scissors in your hand or place the foot so that the child does not see those or any other tools.
And then insert your hand into the patient's anus and blow into the rectum, pull it until the tip of the instrument reaches the base of the anus, and clean that which has been added to it due to impurities.
The shape of the instruments for cleansing, this is the form:
The extremities should not be of equal length; some should be longer and others shorter, so that the bone of the toe is not left out, and both have the same length as two handgrips.
But the mistake in purification is that they strongly flee from the intrinsic code, or part of it, which must be incised.
Therefore, I command you to extend the one from your hand to your finger in front of the placement of the place and inscribe it according to this equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, extract it with your thumb and inscribe that one.
If three days have passed and it is seen that the swelling left by the aposteme is decreased, then leave it until the aposteme heals cautiously, extract it easily, and inscribe it according to what you are prepared.
And observe the head of the hernia, as it will not come out here.
And therefore treat that which the plague has solidified with the powders we have discussed in the treatise on powders.
And if it is cut from the cord on measure and follows the folds of its origin, it will not notice it.
And apply treatment to that which we have said should be healed.
Chapter LVIII.
On the treatment of urine retention in the bladder.
Urine retention in the bladder is caused by swelling due to stone or sand, or obstruction or inflammation, and resembles those we have discussed regarding treatment in the chapter.
And if it is not resolved as we have said, then you should address the cause of the illness directly. You do this by using a syringe, which has this form: made of silver and very thin, with a needle of fine hair-like texture, similar to a palm and a half, and a thin cane at its head.
And the method of urination is such that you take the folded urethra and tie it at the end of a string or cotton for good drainage; then insert the ends of the urethra into the meatus, and cut with scissors if any excess cause from the string is present, but more carefully insert it into the catheter. Then quickly open the meatus with the forceps and soak it in honey and alum.
And make an incision on the patient's side, open the vesica and clean it with oils mixed with olive oil and water.
Then insert the forceps with ease until it reaches the root of the stone; then fold the stone towards the opening of the urethra; and pull the forceps from that side; and pull the forceps until it reaches the vesica, and cent the patient's pain to be caused by the stone, and do not use this method in any other way than the one mentioned, where the meat is found to be twisted.
And then gradually extend the umbilical cord, little by little, as the urine dries out the cord.
Then extract that one for the cure of urine, using a catheter, do not cease to do this and use a catheter until the bladder is evacuated and the patient's discomfort relieved.
Capital .lix. (This appears to be an abbreviation or a section header, so without additional context, I cannot provide a direct translation.)
Regarding the quality of bladder clistering with stone and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
When there is an occurrence of bladder ulceration or abscess, or a buildup of pus in that area, and you wish to drain water and medications from it, then use an instrument known as a clampcedra (a type of clister), and this is how it is used:
but if its opening at the end is closed, it remains blocked. And there are three parts to this process: two from one side, thus as often.
In the beginning, there is a congestion, which is what is inflamed, and according to the quantity that oppresses it, it adds to it; provided that when some cause throws off humidity from it, it is thrown out, and when it is expelled, water is thrown into it, and when it is long-lasting, it becomes like a clog in which naphtha is caught in sea battles.
Therefore, if you want to prevent humidity in the bladder, insert the end of the clog into the humidity and throw it against the parts above, because the humidity is thrown into the cavity of the clog.
And then insert the end of the clog into the wound as we have recommended in the surgery; and push the humidity against what you are pushing, because that humidity goes to the bladder soon enough, and the evil centers around it.
The shape of the delicate crystal through which the bladder is crystalized, and this is its form:
Whether it is made of silver or lead, which looks like a small feather, and leaves a trail of glue behind.
Then take the bladder of motion, and place it in the humidity that you want to crystalize in the bladder, and then tightly tie it between two strong ligatures with double thread, and heat that humidity over the fire.
And then insert the tip of the crystalizer into the urine.
Then place your hand over the bladder with the humidity, gently stretching it until the patient feels that the humidity has fully entered the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder at hand, take a piece of cloth and make a circle from it; then perforate that circle in its entirety; next, insert a strong thread through those holes, twisting them as tightly as possible; and add water to the circle, as if you were adding heat, since you focus on what you want to extract of humidity, odor, and water.
And then you attach that to the instrument and make it in the same way as you have made the bladder, and express with your hand within so that the humidity goes to the bladder.
**Capitol LXX (Lxx)**
**On the Extraction of Stone**
We have already discussed the classification of kidney stones and their treatment with medicines, as well as the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each type.
And we have discussed the stone that requires surgical intervention by hand, and sectioning.
And the stone formed in the bladder specifically is the one that remains in the bladder.
And they tell you of that most manifest exposition and concise summary.
Therefore, it says that the disease born in the bladder mostly affects children; and among its signs is that the urine expelled from the bladder resembles water in its fineness, appearing sandy; and the illness irritates its verge, causing frequent pain, and it often becomes inflamed; and this is how they get sores on their buttocks because of these.
And the healing of children from that condition is easier for those who have reached 13 years old; and it is difficult to cure in the elderly. In the young, it is more common due to what exists between those.
And of him whose stone is larger and healing is more difficult; and if it is small, it is the opposite of that one.
Therefore, to achieve the cure for this condition, it is necessary at the beginning to cleanse the malady with chrism that extracts all the opening in their bowels; for that opening sometimes blocks the flow of urine after its inspection.
Then, while holding the hernia in their hands and positioning it correctly, they should twist and massage it so that the urine descends to the opening of the bladder or sometimes it may pop out of place.
Then use the appropriate forceps between their legs, and let the other assistants hold the patient's legs, so that the bladder is completely released and inclines towards the parts below.
Then, after removing it all, inspect the entire area.
Therefore, if you feel the urine in the space, then cut it open with a scalpel as soon as possible.
And if the pain does not subside from any treatment, you should apply oil to the specific indicated area of your left hand, if the illness is in a child or its small part in a young person, and insert that into their anus. And once the stone is extracted, ensure it does not remain in any part of the body. And gradually convert that incision into the neck of the bladder.
Then press on that area with your hand, specifically indicated, and expel it outside after removing the stone from its place.
And order the assistant to press the bladder with their hand; and command another assistant to extend their legs with their right hand above, and with their left hand, pull the skin away from the area where the incision is made.
And then insert a spatula incidentally into this, which is the form of it: It then divides into what is between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle place, starting on the side of the left thigh; and the section should be over that bone and it is said to be in the buttock, and a transverse cut is made so that the outer cut is wide and inner narrow according to the quantity that can be extracted from the stone possible, not major, because strongly it comprehends the saying that what is in the buttock the stone should be divided, and this is forgotten its disability.
And know that there is some stone with angles and edges, so the extraction of it is made difficult because of this.
And from that substance is like a grain, round, and it is made of the lighter extraction.
Therefore, if it is one that has angles and edges, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it cannot be opened in this manner, cover your hands over it or tighten them around it appropriately, the end of which should be like a lime that you tighten onto the stone, without slipping from it; or insert from beside it a delicate instrument with a curved end.
If you cannot do that, then amplify the opening a little, and if you see any pus, cut and tighten it with hot iron.
But if the stone is larger than one, at the beginning, push your hand into the opening of the bladder and cut it; then push a little water in; and it should come out as two stones.
And if the stone is very large, then ignorance is that you cut it with a great section, which causes two problems for the patient: either it stops (the flow of urine) or it promotes the discharge of continuous urine, because the location is not completely solidified.
May you administer an expulsion of it from within while it is still inside, or use a lever at the fracture of it to extract that in pieces.
Therefore, once you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it tightly. And place over that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and water, to ensure the heat slowly escapes.
Then re-position the patient on their back, and do not disturb the dressing for three days.
And when the dressing is loose, wash the area with water and oil, and then apply a paste of honey and alum until it heals.
If, in the case of an abscess, cauterization and drainage are performed, and it resembles as if the urine is frozen in the bladder, and due to this the flow of urine is blocked (and this is known as the expulsion of urine with a delay), then insert a tube into the abscess and drain that pus, for if it causes corrosion and putrefaction in the bladder.
Then wash the abscess with wine, water, and salt, and against all kinds of things that are beneficial for its healing until it is completely cured.
And during all the stages of healing, make sure that both parts are joined and adjust the medicines that are applied over the area.
And if the stone is small and located in the middle of the urinary tract, and its passage through urine is blocked, treat it with what I have recommended beforehand to prevent dissection, for many attempts through this treatment can lead to dissection; and after probing and dreading, this is what you should do:
of a triangular extremity, sharp, stuck in wood.
Then take a thread, tie it to the stone, leaving it near the bladder so that it does not return to the kidney.
Then insert the iron into the stone, piercing it easily until the perforator reaches that stone. And turn the perforator with your hand on that stone, slowly, and pierce the opening until you make it from one side to the other; for soon the urine will be drained.
Then place your hand over what is broken off from the stone that projects outside of the bladder, for it is torn and drained by the urine, and the patient is healed.
If this treatment is not suitable for your condition for some reason that precludes it, then attach one bandage to the foot and another above the foot. Then apply pressure to the foot at that point between two joints. And then extract it. Then loosen the ligament and clean the infected ulcer that is formed in the wound.
And it is not necessary to leave a bandage on the foot, except to prevent it from returning to the hernia, and the other bandage above it, for when the bandage is loosened, the bulge returns to its place and the pain reappears.
And this is necessary when you attach the bandage above, that you raise the bulge towards its upper parts, or it returns to its proper place, and the pain appears again, as we have said.
Chapter .lxi.
The extraction of stones from the kidneys of women.
Stones in women's kidneys are seldom generated.
If one sees a stone in any of those (organs), the cure is then difficult, and it is forbidden by many methods.
One of their (organs) is that women who are strong endure less pain.
And the second is that one does not find a woman more wise than to discover if she should go to a doctor when she is sick, or whether it is from women who have husbands.
The third is that one does not find women more skilled in this art, especially in surgery.
And the fourth is that the location of the incision on the leg in women is distant from the location of the wound, so it requires a deep incision, and there is fear in that.
If it is necessary to do so, you should seek a female midwife well-versed in this, and her assistance is not easily found.
If you are devoid of that expertise, seek out a midwife skilled and subtle, or present a well-esteemed female matron in the matter of women's health, or a woman who has mastered this art through experience.
So, present this woman, and command her to do everything you instruct, from inquiring about the wound to its beginning; this is because she must observe if the woman is a virgin, then know that she should insert her finger into the woman's anus and feel for the wound.
Therefore, if you find it, cut it off and leave its tongue, then command him to incise upon it.
If it is not possible, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's urethra and feel over the testicles, for she places her left hand on the bladder and extracts urine with due care.
Therefore, if you find it, slowly remove that which is obstructing the opening of the bladder towards the external parts, at the same time using your strength until it passes through the gap in the thigh.
Then make an incision over that position of the bladder, at the opening of the thigh, and place the foot on that part to prevent it from moving, and do not allow the finger to be cut off by the urethra.
And the cut should be shallow at first; then insert the blade into that cut and, if the pain is felt, adjust the cut according to the quantity by which you know the pain will be relieved from that.
And you should know that the parts of the kidney are numerous: some are small and sharp, others are large and harsh, and some are elongated and round, and they have spikes.
Therefore, you should know the number of parts (of the kidney) in order to understand what you mean when you speak about them.
And if you wish to stop the flow of blood, apply vinegar mixed with salt to the area and leave it for an hour until the blood clot is formed, then return to your operation until the kidney stone is expelled.
And prepare for yourself the instruments that are mentioned in the extraction of kidney stones in men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
And if you wish to stop bleeding and know that the expulsion of blood is from a cut, then place powder on the wound, gently apply those medicinal powders and stricture descent, and do not repeat it; remove the stone and do not extract it, for strong will the illness die. And then treat the wound.
So when the intensity of the blood loss diminishes, the wound may heal, then you return to your operation until the stone is removed.
Chapter LXII.
On the section about hernia treatment.
A hernia inguinal is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white skin, which leaves the opening of the generative veins containing the blood, and it is called the inguinal cavity.
And in some cases, it is within the own panniculus that nature prepares for the departure of a humors, as long as it is one humor or another; and it is the end of the generation between the white bone which we have mentioned, and it is not this but hard.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which happens to the muscles, so that this matter is discharged into them, and sometimes it happens due to a blow struck on the muscles.
And this humors has no distinct color, for the color of them may be declining to citron or sanguine, or red, or black putrid, or white watery, and it is this one that is most dangerous.
And the signs by which one knows this addition of water are as follows: for if it is in the white bone that we have mentioned, then the swelling becomes round, declining a little towards length, with the appearance of a humor, since the humors are present from every part.
And if the humidity is in his own pannicle, then the abscess becomes round and from it man thinks it is another humor.
And if the humidity is between the toes of the feet and the white skin, then there arises a feeling of itching.
And to determine the color of the humidity, you should observe the color of the humidity in the abscess as it comes out, and according to what is observed in the traces left by it, judge what is within it.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of it with iron, you should know that you command the patient to be fleebotomized if it is within your power, and empty the contents of it.
Then place yourself supine on your back for some time, and lay a moist cloth over it.
And then place yourself on the patient's left side and instruct the assistant to follow his right side, who will extend their leg from one to two feet at the knee joint and at the meeting point of the genitals and the lower abdomen.
Then take a long knife and cut the knee joint of the genitals from its middle position close to the penis.
And make the cut according to the specified measurement from the line you've marked on the skin of the genitals, reaching the white bone in the middle.
And then extract it, observe, and watch carefully so as not to pierce; your extraction should be thorough yet gentle, and examine the wound according to the amount you can manage.
Then punch the white bone with a wide puncture, and extract all the water.
And then carefully separate the two lips of the incision with scissors, extend the cutting edge to the edges; do not touch the wound with your fingers, and cut the scissor in that way that is within your ability. Cut this either in its entirety or in parts, and most importantly along its thin edges, for if you do not carefully examine the incision of it, there is a risk that the water will return.
But if you remove the wound from its original location during your operation, then once you have completed the incision of the scissor, return it to its place, and carefully adjust the two lips of the wound of the genitals with sutures, and then treat it in the same way as the others, as long as it heals.
And if you find that it is corrupted by another illness, then you should tie the vessels that are above the suspensory, remove the worm, and then treat it in the same way as we have said.
If water is added in two parts equally, then know that both are hernias; therefore, incise the part as you did with the other contrarywise; and if it appears to be an operation to you, then do it.
Then you shall cleanse the wound, and enter into the sections of the wet lanolin submerged in oil or olive oil; place another strip of lanolin that you have submerged in wine and oil outside, and stretch that over both genitals and the wonder of the belly; then place it on folded drapes and poultices, and wrap those with a linen according to this form:
Then take two sheets and fold them with wool threads in this manner; press the extremities where they are joined or with moist wool, add them to the structure in the crotch of the pants, one extremity from the anus enters between the two, and the second extremity touches the opening of the leg, and all the tightness is adjusted in the crotch of the pants.
And in some cases, this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of cutting with a knife; so you take a delicate cut-wound cautery and make an incision at the roots of the veins, and ignite it according to what we have recommended, so that the white skin containing the water be exposed, and then you take the cautery in this manner: and it is similar to Greek script.
And then perforate that skin, and ignite it until all the moisture is drained out.
And then extend the skin with incisions, and scrape it with a fine cautery ignited; cut it according to your ability until everything is removed; and be careful that the fire does not touch you.
And you know that this operation is much safer and farther from any infection, and better than an operation with a knife.
If it causes you difficulty to make an incision or apply cautery, or if there is bleeding, then you must cure the difficulty that affects you through this treatment, a remedy that suits it as said.
If the patient is in great pain and there is no hope for a second operation due to its horror, then perforation should be administered as we have recommended; and it is at this point, as we have said regarding the meanings, that you must determine if that hernia is aqueous.
Now you must know how to stop the patient's pain on some elevated area, then perforate the aperture in the lower part of the abscess with a wide spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
And the aperture should be wide enough to let all the water out.
And then place your hand over the area to seal it, pressing it tightly so that the water does not return. And then attend to that internal part until the plague is healed.
If there is any contraindication to draining the water at that time when you puncture it: this should not be done unless the white pannus in the orifice of the plague causes obstruction and prevents the discharge of water, then you must use a drain or instrument with which the water is extracted from the pus; its shape should precede; or apply a small amount to the plague's surface.
And you should know that the water returns and remains for about five or seven months; and when it is added, it should be punctured in the same way, so that the plague will also pass its days.
Chapter LXIII. (No translation is provided as the text seems to be a heading or a book title, not part of a medical treatise.)
On Hernia (Fleshy Hernia) and Its Treatment.
You should know that in the section about this hernia, one risks losing important dispositions; for it is my opinion that its dismissal and salvation lie in that remedy.
And you should remember the operation on that one and the use of poultices for the abscesses.
Therefore, it is said that abscesses appear in parts of the body where the veins are composed and are formed due to several causes: either by a sudden, intense inflammation that pours into the veins, or by injury.
And the appearance of the abscess varies according to the color of the affected area, and it does not cause pain in itself, but is a severe abscess.
And very rarely is the abscess hardened, of which the color is dark, and it does not cause any sensation.
And in some cases, it is caused by the movement of the joints, or by the inflammation of those parts which have already been perceived as painful, or by the inflammation of veins.
It is known that when it is caused by the inflammation of joints, it is recognized by the spreading of the abscess when you press those parts; and it does not matter if that touches you.
That which is caused by the inflammation of veins does not disperse from it for any reason; you must apply compression to those parts.
And it is also possible that on this species, a section is made and on the other meats; and you inscribe the signature of the genius, then stretch them from their parts, extract the white chyle, dissolve the suspensory of the vessels, tie them, and inscribe the suspensory, as you dissolve that of all parts of the testis.
Therefore, if the bone has already been consolidated in that flesh, then you must extract the bone and cut into it.
And if there is adhesion for any reason in the joint, or between what is between the sockets, then you must dissolve all that adhesion and cut into it with a round incision.
If there is a natural growth of flesh in the location of the adhesion behind, then you must cut into all that belongs to it, and extract the bone as we have said.
Therefore, after your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool saturated in rose oil and wine; and then take care of it with other remedies until it heals.
Chapter .LXIV. (If the text is organized into chapters, this would refer to Chapter 46.)
On the treatment of hernias that are of the viscera.
It is an apostema (hernia) enveloped by some kind of thickening similar to a bud or the softening of the testicles, making it difficult for the patient to move and walk due to the pain.
And in the treatment of this malady, it is important to address what preceded it, as memory plays a role in its cure.
However, it is important to note that they mention an operation according to which I have done the first ones.
And they say that you should cease the malady on a raised cushion; then, dislodge the suspensory of the testicles from its place; next, take hold of the scrotum with both hands, extending them to their full extent with vehemence.
And then cut with a sharp knife, along a longitudinal section, through the vessel until they are all exposed.
And then excise from every part as we have said in the extraction of arcane, which are in the temples.
And then take a needle with a double thread, and pass it through the first part where the wound occurs, and pass the other thread through the last part of them. And then cut them in the middle part with a right section according to the length of the body, and extract what is added from the putrid and corrupt humors.
And then treat the wound with a cure for other wounds in which you wish to prevent generation, so that vessels which do not yield from either of two origins, do not become malignant.
If a vein bursts at all the openings, then you must know if the testicles are extracted or if they are squeezed by the veins, so that they are deprived of all nutrition due to the incision of the veins, and that they become stagnant, or if they cease to function properly with respect to those.
It appears that you have provided only the capital letter "LXV" without any context or additional text. To assist you effectively, I need more information about what "LXV" refers to, whether it's part of a code, an abbreviation, or a specific text from a book. Could you please provide more details?
# On the Care of Intestinal Hernia
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a tear in the wall of the abdomen, extending from the angles of the navel, allowing the intestines to protrude through it.
And this rupture can be either of the abdomen or of an excrescence, and occurs due to various motive causes: a blow, sudden movement, shouting, lifting some heavy object, or similar factors.
The sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the abdomen, is that it occurs gradually over a long period, and not suddenly, and it is accompanied by swelling, so that the abdomen compresses the intestines.
And the sign of it is when it is due to a tear in the abdomen, as at the beginning, it causes sudden, intense pain; and there appears a different swelling below the affected area, which results from the protrusion of intestines, and this is due to the expansion of the bowels.
And in some cases, the intestine's sac is forgotten, and this is called intestinal hernia.
And in some cases, it is caused by air, and in other cases, it runs along the hernia gap, becoming trapped here, which greatly impairs the patient's condition, and sometimes it causes severe and intense pain, especially when pressed.
In the treatment of this illness with iron, great caution is required so as to avoid injury during the procedure.
The technique for operating on this condition is to force the hernia back into its cavity using your hand inside the patient's body, then turn it over and raise their legs.
Then close the incision around the testicles by stitching the edges, passing the thread through the entire length of the scrotum; and secure it in two layers from the cut section as needed to open the incision.
And if the incision is made according to the amount that it is possible for you to remove from that part, without leaving a scar.
And then cut away those bodies which are left at the base of the testicles, taking care to expose the white, hard mass of each part.
Then insert your finger into the space between the testicle, where the white mass is, at the base of the testis, and between the second mass, and free that adhesion which is behind the testis.
And then with your hand, take hold of the testicles at the orifice of their cavity, and extending the white mass with your left hand, raise the testis to the incision site; and command the assistant to stretch out the testis while you dissolve the adhesion behind it with a complete solution.
And seek the threads that hold the intestine wrapped in the hard white ciphell. If you find no cause for the intestine's condition, then turn your attention to the abdomen below.
Then, cut into the opening left by the cord of the testicles, sectioning it from which flows blood and health as we have recommended in what we have said.
Then apply the wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; use the poultice as recommended (and sometimes, the white ciphas are cauterized, as we said, to prevent bleeding during incisions, since this has been seen to cause these problems) and leave the poultice until it falls off by itself.
If the case is prolonged, then water with vinegar should be used and applied to it until it falls off as we have said.
And then apply the cure for the plague with other remedies for internal ailments until it is healed.
**Chapter LXVI**
**On Ventous Hernia**
In this hernia, nothing has been observed that indicates a successful cure for it by force.
And the first approach is to do as we have recommended for hernias that are alive; which is to open the sac close to the affected area with a cut; and then dry the middle part around the aperture with something that promotes healing, until the bags fall.
And treat the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXXVII.
On the dislocation suffered in the angles (or joints).
Sometimes, as we have said, dislocations occur in the angles, and they protrude from their position.
And do not question the natural cause of hernias to the natural creator; and if you do, it is rare, and it returns on its own in all hours.
If the condition persists, a fracture may occur in the bone within, before the hernia descends into the bone; and this happens due to the extension of the angle (or joint), which causes the bone to stretch, become weakened, and protrude.
And the treatment for it involves cauterization, as is preceded by the narration of the condition.
And sometimes the condition is cured by cutting according to this manner: the disease remains on both sides between the thighs, and then the site of the rupture of the prominent aponeuroses is cut in a specific location according to the amount of three parts.
And then tighten the white string that is beneath the bone until it is completely exposed.
And then take the reed and place it over the prominent location of the string, and press it against the abdomen's point.
And then identify the two prominent points on the end of the string's reed, and adjust one of these to the suture with the other.
And then carefully extract the end of the bowel, do not pierce its entire thickness, nor extend the wound, or any other cause, so you know in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
And then carefully tend to the treatment of ulcers, and when you incise the fistulas, cleanse them, and restore the ulcer until it is consolidated; for the tissue is contracted and the protrusion of rupture is not yet adjusted.
And cauterization is better at this site, for it is closer to health.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the cord of the testicles.
In some men, the cord of the testicles is softened due to the softening of the tissues between them, and thus it is important to pay attention to its care.
Then it becomes necessary for the one who is asked to treat the patient that he lay the malady according to its nature, and expose all the stitches that are softened over the natural wound; and then fit two lips to the suture.
And if desired, at the beginning, the superfluity of the softened stitch can be removed with three or four stitches and a firm suture.
Then insert the instrument between the stitches; and then take care for the healing of the other plagues within that it be sane and the filth fall.
Chapter LXIX
On castration.
You know that castration is condemned in our law, but there are two reasons why I will remind you of it in this book; the one is so that the physician may understand it when asked about its treatment, since he knows the cure for such cases; and the other reason is that we sometimes need to castrate other animals for our young ones, as with horses, dogs, pigs, and similar animals.
And therefore it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by constriction or by incision and section.
In the case of castration by constriction, the surgical procedure involves cutting off the testicles while they are still soft and tender so that they can be suspended. And then take those with your hand, resolving them so that they do not show the mark of the touch.
For castration by incision and section, first ensure you have the animal and with your left hand, press the cord of its testicles.
Then attach the ligatures, and cut across each one with a section, ensuring two threads pass through.
And then cut away that pus which you have lanced. And do not leave any causes untreated from the chest, but rather the subtle chest condition that is over the vessels.
And in this manner of castration, the one that is done by tying, it is better because it leaves no cause for the testicles, so the beast does not desire to copulate.
And then tend to the plague until it is healed.
Chapter LXX (70)
On the cure for hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one where there is an abnormality in the space within the scrotum where the testicles are located, resembling both male and female characteristics, including hair.
And in some cases, this flow of urine is seen from the base of the testes.
In females, there is a difference: the female organ over the penis has two parts resembling the testes of males, slightly smaller at the external opening, also with the perineum and two ovaries.
And the treatment is of three kinds: two for males and one for females. It is necessary to insert those tight cloths within the opening so as to stop the flow of that emission, and then treat those with the cure for other ailments.
In the second type of males, where urine is discharged from the base of the testes, there is neither cure nor operation for them.
Chapter .xxi.
Of springtime and flesh swelling due to causes related to women.
The swelling of the lymph glands is most appropriately addressed according to natural causes; however, it is sometimes enlarged in some women to such a degree that it spreads as in men and even pervades during coitus.
So then, if you have an excess of lymph fluid in your hand or fingers, insert a needle and draw it out.
And finally, do not pierce through the flesh's surface, particularly at the point of the rash, to avoid drawing out pus.
Then apply care as part of the cure for plagues until they are healed.
The flesh that is born is flesh that lacks in the horror of death until it fills itself, and it quickly becomes apparent to those who inspect it (and for this reason some initially called it "tail-born disease"); therefore we must incise it as we incision the limb, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXII.
**On the Cure for Hoarseness.**
Hoarseness is when the woman's vocal cords are not pierced or a small wound is present. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to disease that has preceded it, and it is caused by flesh that is improperly adjusted or by subtle and thick phlegm.
And it is made either in the region of the mother, or in the ribs, or in the upper part of the body, or in its lower parts, and it prevents from coughing and sneezing and childbearing, and strongly prevents menstruation.
And the recognition of that is made by observing the uterus, if the pregnancy is visible, then it is advised; but if it is not visible, you should seek that among your fingers or by touch.
If the pregnancy is subtle and it is felt in both lips, then you should cut and dislodge it.
And it should be placed over both soft lips, and then your fingers indicate the depth of both at the same time.
And the woman should be on her back, her limbs extended, and then force open both lips so that the subtle sign of pregnancy is broken and the pregnancy is revealed.
And then take wool and wrap it in oil and place it over the area, and apply heat to the site daily so that the incision does not heal.
If the tumor is large and thick, then you should incise it with a broad knife or a blade made of myrtle.
If the operation is for the flesh, then suspend it with hooks and cut it.
And these are the medicines that stop the flow of blood from wounds, as well as pain and dragon's blood, and roots, adjusted to an ointment of oil.
And then administer a wide metal needle to prevent the wound from closing too quickly.
And hold it for several days, administering a dry compress.
And then it is treated as another cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes it happens in the natural birth of others meats, and then you must incise according to this manner. May be so for gangrene, for the gangrene which is in the extremities should not be opposed with force in any way.
Chapter .LXXIII.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids, and of the tail and red botch that happens in the hindquarter of women.
Hemorrhoids appear from the openings of small veins, rather than from those of larger ones; and when they are old and hard, they become painful.
And now that we have discussed the parts and signs of these ailments, let me also say which ones receive treatment and which do not.
Therefore, it says that hemorrhoids and ulcers are when they are in the lower part of the body and do not affect sensation, but in those cases, treatment with iron is not effective.
Those that are in the upper part of the body, on which sensation can be felt, are those that are curable.
And be careful not to place the woman in a position where she is exposed, extend her legs apart with forks or rough cloth, and cut those with sharp blades.
And then sprinkle over those parts the flux of holy water from one of the sacred powders, as with cassia and similar ones.
And then gently stretch their feet for an hour, and place them in hot water.
If the flow of pus persists, then make a drain in decoction with added extracts from nettles and other similar herbs.
Then take flour of wheat and mix it with honey and wine, make a paste from this and apply it to the back of the patient.
If the abscess bursts, it is good; otherwise, adhere to the two vents and make incisions at the nipples.
Then take wool and soak it in the juice of colander or the juice of arugula or the juice of yarrow mixed with wine, make it adhere to the area, and treat the place with a poultice until it heals.
And take care of that which must be healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
On the perforation of an accidental wound in the head.
You encounter special kinds of accidents in the head, such as cracks and open sores, ulcers, swelling, eruptions, fistulas with bleeding, abscesses, and other wounds. And you have already described these ailments and their kinds, the signs of each, and their divisions, as well as their treatments.
And be aware that I shall describe in this treatise of gangrene the kind you see in the majority of cases, and if you wish to know how the operation is performed on it with a knife.
So, then consider that in the beginning of gangrene pain is sharp, with percussion and fever, and sometimes there is swelling, and if you do not remove it by perforation, treat it with what helps the maturation until the sharpness of the accidents ceases.
And then you must tie the patient down to a bed with two ropes; lay them on their back and align their feet at the lowest part of the abdomen, expanding their thighs, supporting their arms below their elbows, and attaching some to the bed with appropriate bands.
Then the midwife should stand at the right and administer the instrument that opens the orifice of the wound, the shape of which will be appropriate for those causes that require it.
And when you wish to use this instrument, ensure that you hold the handle of the main part of the device, and whatever part of the instrument enters into the patient should not be larger than the handle of the main part and it should ease the pain. If the instrument is larger than the handle of the mother, then it is necessary to place poultices over the texture of the handle of the mother so that no part of the instrument can enter into the handle of the mother.
And ensure that you place the weight of the instrument from above and have the assistant hold the instrument, then slowly turn the weight until the opening of the mother is completely open.
And when the excitation occurs and it is painful and hot to the touch, then ensure that you quickly clean that part with a hot sponge.
And when the sanie (vomits) is evacuated, you must place a cloth soaked in warm or cold oil on the pain, and press the compress on the section below the navel towards the spine.
And then pull the cloth out from under the navel and place it on the penis, a clean cloth soaked in water with mulle (mallow) roots.
Then the treatment is considered complete after two days, applying what is suitable for it until it heals.
In some cases, the navel and the affected area are washed with a mixture of water and honey, and then immersed in water containing extracts of lilies or long-stemmed aromatic plants, and finally, the application is renewed.
If the pain is deep inside the navel, you must avoid treating it with fire, but rather focus on the treatments we have discussed in the previous sections.
Chapter .lxxv.
To teach midwives in what manner the living embryos should be treated when they are in a non-natural state.
A necessary cause is that the midwife should know the beginning of the natural childbirth by its signs, and this is when you see the woman straining at the contractions and desires to breathe the air; she is distanced from what is upon her during childbirth, and the expulsion of the embryo is hastened. At this point, you must understand that this delivery is according to a natural figure, and the descent of the embryo is over her head or suspended or hanging from the navel.
Therefore, when you observe these signs, you will know that her belly is contracting so that the embryo descends slightly when it is over her head; then she experiences the second stage, and it is cleaned of those superfluities with good cleansing.
He who is affected in this manner in a part other than usual is not natural or commendable, for when the disorder has seized his feet and his body is positioned with his head below his feet and his hands on his ankles or at his foot, or his head and hands are above his feet, or his belly is turned towards his back, he seems unworthy of consideration.
For all these reasons, it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in dealing with all such cases, and should avoid errors and disappointments.
And showing all the signs of those, and what understanding is in those so that it can be made clear about this and stood upon.
When the disease appears on his head due to natural weakness, and it is vehement against women and becomes a difficult task for them, sometimes their virtue is already depleted, then they should use, what women have, a poultice of fennel seed and humid oils.
And then insert the meter between their open spaces, gently inserting the second one, or rather, that with its finger, until it reaches what is within of humidity. And press the woman's belly as the child is being delivered.
If it does not come down, then cover the woman with a poultice of goosefeathers and fenugreek, bound together.
Then command the patient, change the poultice, and do what causes them to sneeze in this condition; also close their mouth and nose for an hour, so that the effect is forgotten soonest.
And if both of the effects are forgotten at the beginning, then cover them with ease, gradually reducing them. If you do not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a mat and lift her feet up, and then position the mat on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the impact.
And if the pain persists and the child dies, then incise those areas and extract the rupture from the fetus or tie the body to the mother's breast and extract that part equally, for it will be forgotten.
When the fetus weighs down on its feet, you must push those towards you, and gradually turn the small body, and take one of its feet and stretch out those little ones.
If it is situated within the spaces, then command the patient to exhale and cause that condition to pass, for if God wills, it will be forgotten.
And if it is not forgotten what we have recommended, then you return the small wound little by little until it heals according to its natural shape, for that will be forgotten concerning the lighter aspect.
And if it is prohibited to do what we have recommended, then take a mixture of althae and dissolved gum, and pound it all in a mortar with good percussion, and return the congealed mass of the woman's abdomen, along with the pus, into the wound. Then apply that cesarean section in sterilized water, as long as the hypocondria (a term referring to a region of the body associated with disease or pain) are achieved.
And when the parts that have been separated from him are no longer inflamed, then apply the fumigation of mint and gently place it on him. And after the fumigation for an hour, then you make a cesarean section over it, and make him sneeze and pull his mouth away, and press the lower part of his abdomen gently with lighter compression, for the wound will soon be forgotten.
The condition of the patient lies lateral during treatment on one of their sides. Use ingenuity in reducing the swelling of the hand; if you cannot reduce it, raise the limb and do that instead.
If raising the limb is not possible, then have the patient lie down and gently beat the affected area with a mallet, then apply moist compresses and poultices as recommended by experienced healers.
If the condition relates to childbirth, then apply pressure over the cesarean section, study the reduction of the hand, and gently manipulate the fetus back into its natural position; have the woman sneeze and command her to compress herself until the pain subsides.
The condition involves the fetus with its arms expanded, stretching the skin and fascia of the mother's abdominal wall to twice its normal size. Nurse should have her hand on the child and slowly turn him this way and that, so as to make it easier.
And as it is and how much it has swelled, then place over the top of it what we have recommended of oil and bandages.
Then you should command the patient to move their legs little by little, and when you have done this, make them lie down on one side and command them to bend over; then command them to be turned over and lie on their back; and do as the condition requires. Prepare the exit of the fetus on the side.
When you observe the signs of labor from the mother according to this manner, consider and then insert the second instrument into your hand as if it were a sponge within what needs to be emptied of humidity.
And if the hernia is suspended over the face and neck, you will incise it with an instrument, so that it is not retained and dies.
Then, gradually, you push the hernia inside until it stops in the place where it covers, and order the woman to buy some light weights, so that, by God's will, they can be removed when needed.
Double birth or multiple pregnancy. You know that twins are born, and sometimes even three or four, which is strange and difficult; however, these may be due to natural causes, not living.
And regarding these cases, whether they are multiples, a second one, and they are separated by counting, distinguish those who enter the ligament in each other's navel; some births are lost this way, as if it were a natural light weight, and some births remain alive despite not being able to be saved.
And if certain aspects of their condition prove difficult to treat and you reach the point we mentioned regarding unnatural forms, then tend to them as we have described.
And if the midwife is skilled and accomplishes this with ease and subtlety, without delay, and uses ingenuity according to every form as she prepares the body for the necessary aid leading to health.
Reminder that it forms in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Sometimes they form in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more, and it is necessary to have already verified that a woman who has aborted cannot become pregnant again, or else all of them cause great damage due to the measurement of the wise sages.
And all of this should be in the knowledge of midwives so that they understand well what is happening to those young women, and thus pay close attention to it because it is very important.
Chapter .lxxvi.
On the removal of the dead fetus.
When you treat the dead fetus using the methods we have discussed in the section on treatment and it does not leave the mother's body, and you are compelled to use manual means, then consider whether the woman is of sound constitution and not susceptible to any of the conditions that could lead to her loss.
Now, you should position the woman so that she lies on her side with her head inclined forward and her legs elevated.
The midwife should support both of the woman's sides or be placed under her in the lying position to prevent her body from moving during the extraction of the fetus.
And then moisten the mouth of the patient with oils, and with a paste of aloe and fenugreek and fennel seeds.
Then the midwife uses her hand with these oils and pastes, she introduces her hand into the mother with ease, and searches for the place where the cuts are made in the fetus.
And the appropriate place is found: then consider whether the fetus is ready to be delivered head first, and make incisions in its heels, or neck, or mouth, or palate, or leave the beard, or in the fork of the spine, or in the places near the ribs, or leave the hypochondria.
If the delivery is to be over the feet of the patient, then in the pubis or in the middle of the ribs.
And take care that he holds the ungument with his right hand, and places the curve of it at that spot which is between the fingers of his left hand, and inserts his finger with ease and keeps the ungument in one of those positions we mentioned, aiming to reach the underlying cause.
Then place and hold another finger in the correct position, or the third if necessary, so that it attracts equally, and does not extend beyond its natural range.
And consider the whole process, so that the removal of it is facilitated as much as possible, just as is done in any other case for the eradication of a tumor.
And pay attention to what is between them, so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it remains stuck, then the midwife should apply some of her chosen oils to these spots and insert her fingers skillfully and turn those parts that are stuck.
Therefore, if the fetus' position is overlooked, the incisions will be changed to another place where pus is present; and do so until all the fetus is removed.
If the hand is twisted and cannot be reduced due to its state, then a bandage should be wrapped around it; and extract it until all is removed, cutting it either at the joint of the hand or in the armpit.
And similarly, do the same for the other hand and both feet.
If the head of the fetus is large, or there is constriction during delivery, or it is in a position where water cannot flow out, then you must insert between the edges of the spine and split the head, or use an instrument called an "alundat," which resembles other instruments described in the chapters that follow.
And it seems that this work is of great importance by nature: and now you will see that we insert this balm or take that medicine as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
If the head is set and compressed, then its fork should be split to allow the moisture in the foot to drain.
If it is not complicated and does not contradict any rules, then you should insert the head as soon as possible according to your ability.
And if the abdomen pain is from an apoplexy or is water-related, then you must perforate that part to drain the moisture within it.
If the operation is on their feet, then the attraction of it should be light and the direction to the mother's opening should also be light.
If the belly and foot are squeezed, then you must extract that cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and cut the stomach and foot until what is inside comes out.
If other members are held still and the head is turned, then insert your left hand; if the mother's womb is open, then enter your hand through the opening of the vulva, seek for the head, and pull it towards you, and afterwards insert one, or two fingers, and push it inside her.
And if the mother's womb is constricted due to an abscess that occurs in her, then be careful not to agitate it; instead, you must first provide enemas of greasy, humid substances. And apply poultices, and keep the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the issue is on their side, try to use a knife: and administer what we have said about the living body.
And if that is not possible, then incise into the bones, and extract them.
And ensure that you do not leave any cause within the second incision.
And when you have completed all your operations, administer what we have said about the cure for these wounds that occur from the major incident.
And if there is bleeding from the wound, stop it with strict water and administer the other cure.
And you have already seen a woman whose belly was containing a dead child, and another time over that fire she became pregnant, and another time the outcome was a dead fetus. It happened that after a long time an abscess formed in his leg; it swelled up like fire, and he began to shiver with fever.
And you have been called to treat them, and medicated for a long time, but the illness is not cured.
Then you should focus on them from some causes of strong attraction, and extract one bone from them, and after a few days, another; and you will be too amazed when there is no bone in the belly.
And then you will realize that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Thus, you will pursue the illness, extract many bones from them, in the woman's best dispositions, and already have experienced such manner for a long time, correcting it with a small amount of medicine.
And do not be strange that it should be thus, for in this there is knowledge and aid to the doctor's art in administering treatment with his hands.
On the forms of instruments necessary to extract the hernia.
Form of the instrument used to open the hernia:
This is the form of a strapper in which the limbs are secured, with two points of attachment on each end of the feet. However, this strap should be made to be neither too tight nor too loose, and it can be made of either silk or leather.
And the width of each leather should be such that two fingers can fit between them, and the margin on either side of each finger should be one palm length; in the middle part of both leathers, there should be two fastenings already secured, whose length is a little less than a palm, and the width of each should be about two fingers, or slightly less.
And these two additions are inserted into the mother's opening so that they can be opened when you turn to those prescribed virtues.
Another form similar to that subtle and lighter pus:
It should be made of birch wood or bone, according to the appearance of forceps. However, on the extremity of it, there should be two additional parts as well, and the length of these additions is about a palm, and their width is approximately two fingers.
And when you want to open the mother, you should lay the woman on her side with her legs apart, opening what is between her thighs. Then open your hand over the instrument using the clamping forceps, according to the amount you want from the mother's opening, until the meter indicates what you desire.
The form of dizziness that the ancients spoke of:
The mechanism that causes the movement, which drives the process:
The way of understanding, which contains the great secret:
And it is constructed like tongs with teeth at the end, thus when it grasps, and sometimes it is made long according to this form, also with teeth like a reaping tooth that cuts and contains. The way of understanding in brief:
The form of the instrument lacking a spine:
The form of the instrument lacking two spines:
A form of spatula with two ends, one of which cuts off the head.
A form of two spatulas wide.
All those instruments are practiced, and when more varieties of them are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, they are then easier to use in their operations and more beneficial for people due to their quantity.
And do not neglect those instruments that are already prepared, for the need for those is not excusable.
From the extraction of the second (part/item).
When the second stage of labor is reached, you must command the patient to hold their breath, then make them sneeze in a certain way, and place your hand over their mouth and nose, and if they breathe outside, it is good.
And if that happens, then take a blade and make a hole in the cover, opening the mouth of the mother with herbs such as warm and harsh ginger, chamomile, and licorice root, as well as cinnamon and cassia wood. All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the vessel, and then placed over fire.
And then place a canvas tube in the mother's mouth, keeping it so that the steam goes into the concave part of the mother.
And do as we have said, making them sneeze, and the second stage will pass quickly.
If one approaches this cure with caution and not haste, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in warm sesame or mullein oil, and then insert that same hand into the patient's anus and gently search around until she feels the second one, and once found, slowly extract it little by little according to the prescribed method so that the mother does not feel any violent attraction. As soon as you notice that the pain is changing from the right to the left side, facilitate movement.
And if the mother's passage is blocked, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and medication made from various herbs.
If all the causes we have mentioned are not forgotten, be careful not to do anything in the course of abstraction, but understand that what comes from him to the mouth of the mother lies in the matter of the female, and then anoint it with a discovery and a tetracyclic; for it will rot away in a few days and will be dissolved and forgotten.
If you notice a high fever in the head and stomach, it causes the disease; then understand that vapors and appropriate remedies should be administered to it.
Some of the ancients already used vapor from burning fennel and dried figs.
The form of the instrument used to fumigate a woman for the retention of menses and afterchildbed:
It is necessary to make a cut or an incision.
And the fine end of the instrument should be in the cavity and the broader end over the fire, and the smoke should be directed away from the arms of the fire.
And hold that until the smoke is consumed, then repeat another time.
On the treatment of the unpierced navel of an infant.
Many infants have navels that are not pierced, which naturally become slightly inflamed and swollen. Then teach the midwife to pierce it as she has said, and if not, pierce it with a sharp instrument, taking care not to touch the scar.
And then apply pressure over that cloth soaked in wine and oil; and tend to that sore with a clean ointment until it heals.
If there is a risk of oppression, apply pressure on the wound through a tube for several days, and stop it when the child wants to eat.
And it also happens that oppression occurs in the rectum for the consolidation of a wound or abscess; then ensure that that consolidation is incised, and apply treatment with the water and lead we have mentioned regarding healing.
On the healing of fistulas that have formed.
Fistulas that form in the perineum contain a low and thick pus, which often protrude from near the anus or in the space of one opening.
And it is a fistula or a wound.
And when that movement is old and due to the flow of moist, white pus or subtle corruption, sometimes these fistulas penetrate.
And those that penetrate are known for what is issued from them through the exit and by inflammation; and sometimes the patient uses a tool for egress, and very strong is what issues from those worms.
And regarding those fistulas, some are found in the space they penetrate within the bladder, and within the flesh of the penis; and some penetrate within the joint of the thigh and within the nut (testicle) of the scrotum.
And regarding the case where a known fistula penetrates but does not exit, you should insert the thin tip of the catheters into the anus, and attempt to gently erode or cut into the fistula when there is no turbulence.
If there is stiffness in that place, then insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the tension or hair in the correct position.
And if you do not feel anything at all or there is no cause for the pain, as we have said, you will know that it is non-penetrating and then you must proceed to treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the meaning of it is the emission of urine from that place and its prohibition until the affected area is healed by medicine.
If it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then its sign is that tension prevails here if there is no stiffness within the bone, and pain in the surrounding region; and it brings pus constantly; and it does not respond to any treatment, nor is it healed with ointment.
And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the healing of those requires work and patience from skilled physicians upon whom their safety depends.
But for those that are not penetrating or recent, healing with herbs is hoped for as you have been advised and what you have already proven.
And indeed, the disease moves between the patient's thighs over their sides and raises their legs within them, the parts are inclined towards the patient's belly, and then insert a plug of lead, or iron if it is in a narrow fistula, knowing the place where you insert the plug.
And if that feels like the disease is around the heart, then you must insert the knife directly into the chest.
And if you feel the knife already has made an opening and is penetrating on its own, or you feel something between the knife and that part, then you will surely know that it is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that, because there is no healing in that, as we have said.
Some people nonetheless say that it heals certain men's joints.
And for the treatment by which one hopes to heal them quickly, make subtle cauterizations according to the extent of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and insert that heated instrument into the fistula until it reaches around the core; then repeat this process two or three times until you know that all the flesh surrounding the fistula, which is similar to a quill of plume, has healed.
And then dress those wounds wrapped in bandages until all the surrounding flesh is healed, and treat those wounds with medications that promote healing and consolidation of the flesh; if it heals well, it is; otherwise, it will not be cured by any other treatment within a certain time frame.
If the attempt to insert it does not succeed into the depth mentioned, and between that and the attempt that is slightly of flesh or bone, and the fistula is extended to where the surface of the wound is exposed, then dry the wound from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see the attempt drying as well; once the drying reaches the point at which the tip of the attempt penetrates, the attempt is freed and removed.
And then clean those infected flesh which resemble a tube of pain from an external source and have not been torn for any reason.
If a flow of pus appears between you and your operation when examining those flesh, then the best course is to use an instrument that leaches out the pus, either by cauterizing with fire or with sharp medicine, for cauterization with fire promotes good healing: it adjusts those inflamed flesh and removes the pus through exsecation of moisture.
And then tend to those wrapped in bandages or pressed between parts of the body, and attend to the pain from hard flesh grown over and hardened by infection.
And such medicines should include stoppage and excision; when the pain is alleviated, it is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
If the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and is extended from the surface of the body, then insert a small instrument into the anus and examine it carefully.
And therefore if the growth is tender and between you and it there is clearly a distinction between flesh and bone, and it is prone to penetration, then it is not an operation on it but rather through a path of trust and hope.
The treatment for this condition is administered in three ways: first, by cauterization as mentioned earlier; second, by drying out the growth until you can reach its cavity so that you can insert something and provide the necessary cure; and you should not use excessive cutting or incise to remove the scar tissue containing the pus, lest you cause further damage to the patient's will. And take care of it as we have said, so that it heals quickly. Or, elongate that membrane and drain the pus from inside, just as mentioned earlier, or with a probe or another instrument with a sharp tip, and surgically remove those fistulated meats which are in the incision within the anus; and make every effort to restore the whole wound through surgery, and if the opening of the fistula above does not heal properly, it will reopen due to the patient's condition. And in some cases, the fistula is ended in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, it is at the side of the anus near the surface of the body and on the margin of the anus, take the probe of the pierced end, which is thus prepared with a needle in this form:
and insert yourself into that fold covered with veins or around those; and then insert the probe into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
If it is penetrant near the margin of the anus directly, then extract the vein from that tract thus you have inserted the tip into the anus; extract the end of the vein and adjust both ends, then apply each one, and leave it for a day or two, and when you more deeply insert the vein into the flesh, begin again until those carnes between the two extremities of the vein are incised which fit together.
And then treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
If the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in some way as you are prepared, either by using a probe, for it is not suitable for you to do this so as not to cause damage; and then treat it until it is healed.
The shape of the spindle-spined instrument by which the fistula is incised: its curvature is acute in one part and the other part is not acute, so as not to damage what is not necessary when using it.
On the stitching of hemorrhoids where an infection runs in the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids exist in two ways, for they either appear between the buttocks resembling stones, or those are swollen with searing pain. And they are small and large, and the fever runs from them at that time and is one, and it is hot, and it comes out of its place, and in the extremities of it.
However, those that are exclusively hot and dry according to a few humors, of which citrinus water or a little fever runs continuously, and they are according to the body's color.
And the treatment for that which is inside the chest is to have the patient lie down and squeeze until the fever burns out and the hemorrhages appear to you. Then you take care and suspend them with pins or what you have at hand, and return those parts to their places.
If the pins are not held in place by the humidity of those parts and their softening, then take a rough cloth or a cotton swab or a woolen thread and extract those with your fingers, and then cut them and sprinkle some powders prepared for incision over them, so that they adhere to those parts instead of cautery; or cauterize them as mentioned previously in the chapter on cauterization. And then attend to those and other treatments until they are healed.
If the hernia does not yield to treatment, then sharpen the knife used for incision, wash it in water that is in the wound and which obstructs the escape of the hernia slightly when the hernia is pressed.
But if the hemorrhoids are external, their cause is slight, and it is because you take those with your finger, or those with a horn, and cut them, then attend to them as we have said until they are healed.
And for whoever performs the incision, know how to close it with a suture according to this manner: take a thread wrapped in wool and pass it through the hemorrhoid from above, then pass the needle into the root of the other part below, and wrap the two ends of the thread around the passage and leave them outside the needle; do this laterally and tighten the hemorrhoid with strong tension, then tie the thread and remove the needle.
And do this completely, leaving none of them attached, so that the excess of blood flows from it.
Then place a cloth soaked in warm oil or wax on it and press down, and command the patient to rest. Then remove that from the wound; and when it heals, treat those with ointments or other remedies until they are healed.
And when they have been long-standing and no longer respond to those medications, you must clean them with the points of a spatula or your finger, making sure they remain moist and draining the pus from them, which prevents their hardening; then treat them until they are hardened.
Now hold those with a strong reason, more urgent than the first that enters, and ensure they are carefully cleaned; then take care of those inside so that they heal.
You know that hernia, it is crucial, and not only if they become red according to the color of the body resembling a clavicle head, but they are made everywhere in the body and most notably in the parts where the pain occurs, especially in the feet and sides, and through those pains, you should treat them.
And so you should incise what is in the path of the hernia, and hold it with forceps or a hook, and extract it from its position; then take care of that.
And if you wish, cauterize according to what is mentioned in the preceding chapter.
May a veruca be a small, rough, round ulcer raised on the surface of the body, and is often seen in children.
And the treatment for it is that you extend and incise that, or clean it with a knife or needle within the wound. And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine, as we have said.
May a tick be a small, hardened or fistulated lump on the surface of the body, often moving in the skin, and when it is disturbed, it feels like a mosquito bite around the body.
And the treatment for it is to take a thin needle of goose or deer feather, and make it strong, and place it over the swelling until it contains the circle of the needle; then turn your hand with the needle inside until you pierce what is in the circuit of the swelling, and place it on the muscle of the flesh, and eradicate the swelling from its root.
And if you wish, make this as a needle of iron or bronze in this form:
The extraction from the needle should be delicate, without perforation, wrapped around itself so that when it is removed from the swelling, its appearance is preserved and the revolution of that is complete.
And if you wish to cauterize the swelling, as described above in the chapter on cautery.
In the form of instruments that are administered to give injections.
Sometimes the injection is given with silver or lead or bronze needles, melted and shaped, and sometimes with small or large instruments according to those used in treatment, for that which is administered to the very young children should be small; and of those whose edges are sharp or painful, the injections of these shall be small.
The form of large and few injections:
The tip of the syringe's nozzle, in which the bag is attached, should be wide according to this manner; and it is distinguished at the place where the bag is attached as well.
And the lower end of it, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (not pointed), bent with subtlety; and on one side of its length there are two channels, and on the other side a single channel, and the width of the channel should be according to the thickness of the rays, and for the larger ones a bit smaller.
And let the bag be filled with medicines from the bladder of a beast or sheep's skin, and its size be a palm.
And it should be pierced through many parts like this when it is twisted; and if the space between the parts is as wide as the said thickness.
Then insert into those parts strong sharp stone of fresh stone, or surround them; and adjust the bag to that; and when the bag is stopped in it, make it tight at the top of the channel between two distinct parts at a firm constriction, and then cauterize each part: but the quality of cauterizing those parts is that you fill the bag with medicine, heated according to the amount of patient's tolerance, and be careful not to make it too long or too tight.
Then place the patient on their back, and raise their legs on pillows or a lance, and apply the end of the cautery with oil or egg albumen or mucilage of fenugreek or similar; and insert it into the anus with ease, and let the practitioner take the bag and squeeze it twice more strongly until everything in the channel is evacuated into the intestine; then remove the cautery and let the patient lower their legs.
And if the medicine forces him to vomit, take as much as you can; and if he sleeps with that all night, it is more beneficial for healing.
If you believe that applying heat to the pains of intestinal solutions and vomiting releases them, then you apply cautery until it is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or fistulas in the anus causing pain, then apply gentle heat and the kind of cautery that children use to cut them.
**Curation of Plagues**
You have already spoken about the division of the cure for plagues according to each case, and you have given as much information as possible about their treatment with herbs and medicines according to need.
Therefore, it says that plagues are diversified according to where they are made by the plague and according to the place where the plague strikes.
And the causes for which plagues spread include the heat of fire, incision of space or skin, impact with a lance, or with a stick, or with an arrow, or similar to those causes that bring on wounds.
Plagues that are in places on the body can be similarly to a plague that strikes the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the belly, or the back, and similar to those of the members.
And it is very necessary to recommend treatment for some plagues, in order to stop that reasoning and regulate concerning other plagues.
And one should begin with simple plagues of the head, since the remembrance of the compounded ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, it says that when a simple plague occurs on the head and is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to the impact of stone or something similar, and the patient has already bitten the tongue deeply and it is a severe plague causing concern about the progression of apostema, then you should immediately perform a cerebral fleubotomy and extract the clot from the sinus according to the amount of virtue (blood) in it, unless any other cause prohibits fleubotomy, especially if the sinus that forms from the plague is small.
And the fleubotomy should be performed contrary to the previous plague; and attention must be given to preventing the patient from reclining, sitting up, or consuming large amounts of food and drink.
If, however, any cause prohibits the minimum (fleubotomy), then reduce the intake of food and do not approach meat or wine.
And with regard to the plague, if it develops into cautious apostema, apply a small amount of hot oil or wine in which a reed has been soaked.
If you are certain of the apothema (infection), then place your hand on the sore, if it is fresh and the air has not changed the powder which I have just mentioned, then gently press.
And if the air has already changed that, then place some ointment on it until it is healed.
But if the sore is large or due to a rupture of space and appearance, and the edges of it are not suitable for stitching by themselves, then adjust them with stitches according to the suture method I have mentioned for their healing.
If the sore has already exposed the bone and penis, and it is not swollen but a small suspended one, then cut it open and treat the sore with medicines and restore the flesh appropriately in the place of the wound, and order the patient to abstain from food that is rough: seeds and hard forms like theirs, until it heals.
And if you find putrefaction in the wound that does not adhere to the bone, you cut off all the rotten parts and remove them, and then care for it.
If these plagues involve an artery or vein from which pus flows and it is not severed by medicines, then you should inquire about the artery, and if you find one that is not incised, you cut it with a knife or tie it; and if cauterization is required to prevent the pus from draining after it has been removed, do so.
And if these plagues are simple and small, their cause is considered minor; so you sprinkle over them this powder, as it hardens before the air changes those.
The method of the powder is this: take equal parts of olive oil from broken olives, dragon's blood twice as much, and three times as much mastic gum; mix all together finely and fill the plague with it, then apply firm pressure to ensure it sticks, and coagulate the pus.
And then tighten it from above with poultices and leave it, do not touch it while it is in that state so that the medicine does not leave until it is healed.
And at other times, it requires only cautery, when there is no acute pain or inflammation.
And this surgical procedure is performed on large hernias when it is appropriate to pause them and tighten them, and they are recent hernias with fresh inflammation, where the air has not been altered.
And if the air has been altered, especially in summer, then one cannot understand the position of this powder, but instead, cure them as we have said, by pausing over these alcus (possibly abscesses) with hot ointments or by pausing over the swelling parts of the body with water and honey until they are cured; and then apply other treatments to those until they are healed.
If a fracture occurs in a bone and it is small, then you extract it with your hands.
And tell the treatment for fractures of the head which is dangerous.
Of the ailments of the neck.
If the ailment occurs in the neck, it does not differ much in treatment from an illness of the neck, and between the head's ailment when it is simple.
If the nerves or arteries of the neck are cut, then if it is a nerve, there is not much to do except avoid any treatment that causes strong spasms, thus using poultices and bandages as if they were vinegar and similar substances to soothe them and relax the tension on the nerves. And do not apply any treatment to the pain without understanding its cause, for the substance of the nerves is affected and their continuity is connected to the brain, which is the source of all members' functions.
If it is to be cured by lighter medicines, then it is washed with water twice, sometimes soaked in rosewater or not, and rubbed when washed with water, and the other remedies are applied afterward following this method, and moisture is added.
However, if the pain is severe, then stitches are administered, or the opening of it is narrowed, and afterwards, treatment with poultices is done until it is healed.
However, if the pain is deep or an abscess forms in it at a low place due to a break, then it is pierced at the most sensitive location.
If an artery is already incised in the plague and blood flow results, separate or dry it, or tie it, or cauterize it if that is what causes the need for it.
If the spinal bones of the neck or all are already incised and the veins in the neck are preserved, adjust the edges of the wound with sutures over the bone of the neck and do not touch that; then equalize that and return it to its natural shape, and tighten that with proper tension, and leave it for some days; and then care for that with ointments in which there is stiffness and excitement until it is healed.
If the plague has already taken hold in the bones, then probe it and if there are any fragments within, extract as many of them as you can; leave what is not suitable for you, until the plague is dried up, separated, and removed from it.
And if the affliction is recent, sprinkle on that powder which has been recommended to you. If the affliction involves an open wound, treat it with that which will help remember its cure in its chapter.
If it is a lance or edge percussion and it strikes the depth of the body, then consider more carefully if the affliction has any air bubbles when the patient cries out; you should know that the affliction may be fatal.
And if it is not a deep wound and the affliction is recent according to its mark, then you should place on it from the first hour the recommended powder, and do not press upon it so that the mark does not remain in the depth of the body and returns to the heart, causing harm to the patient; instead, place on it an attractive ointment, and wipe it twice a day.
And if the ointment is not at hand, then you apply a cold compress to the wound's surface until it absorbs the moisture; and make the patient lie upon the sore so that what is within flows out properly.
If after three days the wound is passing well and no spasms, tremors of the heart, or tightness of the chest occur to the patient, and other good dispositions are observed, then you know that the wound is saved; and thereafter treat it with cool compresses and other remedies until it is healed.
If the healing of the wound is prolonged, and it remains open for a long time, then you know that a fistula has formed; so treat it according to its nature.
And if the wound is due to a sword or axe cut, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with the method mentioned above for binding, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
If a valuable skill has already been gained in working with bones, and you have already made incisions and removed the affected parts, then twist the pain and cut to extract those parts if they are separated. If the parts are not separated, leave them inside so that the pain subsides, as extraction from them is alleviated.
And for other accidents in other parts, the treatment from the beginning is what we have said.
Of abdominal pains.
The discomfort that occurs in the stomach is great or slight or middling.
And when a small disruption is caused, it is difficult to be rectified in another manner, and I know that the reduction of them is all the more difficult if you do not take care of their reinsertion into their place immediately, for they open up and thicken, making it difficult to insert anything.
Therefore, the best disruption is to move it slightly, for in that case, the reduction of the hernia is not difficult, as it is in the two aforementioned species.
And you know that the suturing of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two types of sutures are commonly used for the suturing of other bodily wounds.
And the other two types of sutures also communicate with other wounds, but they are more appropriate for the suturing of the abdomen.
And I recommend that each of you make an exposition and declaration.
Therefore, it is said that when the hernia is small and there is no cause from within the abdomen for it, and it becomes difficult to reduce, then it is in one of two ways: either due to the narrowing of the rupture as we have said, or when the hernia has come about through inflammation in the abdomen caused by cold air.
And so when it is thus, then you should know that you must apply a compress to it in such a way that you submerge a moist sponge or cloth in warm water, or take water with squid, cypress, and spice, and wrap it around the hernia until the inflammation is resolved.
And in some cases, they use a mixture that has been strained, and it is better than just water for resolving the inflammation.
And so when you have seen that the inflammation has been resolved, then you should moisten the hernia with water in which high and malt are mixed, for by this the inner parts of it are relieved from a little cause.
If it is excusable to insert something near this treatment, then you should cut the disruption with a small, sharp instrument that incises hemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is better when it is appropriate not to cut, and there is no need to dry or deprive of nutrition.
Of the instrument, consider its form:
One part of the sharp knife, and another part not so acute, and the tip should be slightly blunt, not too delicate; it should be obtuse rather than pointed.
And so when the plague is exacerbated and the intestine protrudes, it should be returned to its natural position in its proper place, if possible; this is better.
If the rupture is extensive, and it occurs in the lower part of the abdomen, you must have the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; but if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, you should elevate the patient's head and feet above the rupture.
And if the rupture appears in either of the two parts of the abdomen, you must always pause and direct your attention to it, so that the gap where the pain is located is higher than the other.
And also, you must administer this to both major and minor ailments.
For minor ailments, apply what you have prepared, and ensure the medicine is between your fingers, which hold the rupture entirely in their grasp and adjust the lips of the wound, and then gradually uncover from one part to another, searching for any cause that might disrupt the suture.
And this is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or count one needle according to the quantity of the width of the wound; then lay it near the end of the tear in the annular finger, and tighten the needle, so that you do not pierce both ends of the cord, but rather the two ends of the phalange that remains within the wound, until you make the thread penetrate through that gap; and you have already added the two ends of the cord and the two ends of the phalange, thus making four orders.
Then tighten the thread double in the loop of the needle, and in some cases, join two parts together, and add both lips and the wound through proper addition; then lay down the thickness of the finger and fix another needle to it, and attach that as if it were the first needle; and do not stop doing this with the needles until you have completely filled the contraction of the wound.
And the needles should be of varying thicknesses, between coarse and fine, because the finer needles slice through the flesh slightly; while the thicker ones are difficult to insert into the wound, hence it is necessary that they be both finer and coarser in thickness.
And ensure that the needle is inserted into both ends of the affected limb gently, so as not to deeply wound the flesh and disrupt the healing process before consolidation.
And avoid prolonged stitching so that the wound is not hindered from healing.
Then carefully cut the ends of the needles so they do not hurt the patient during their sleep; place your hand over the stitches, applying gentle pressure from all sides, with the needle tips; and leave them there until you know that the wound is fully healed.
These types of stitches with needles are most suitable for small wounds, where one or two needles or even more can be used in the stitch.
However, the second stitch is different: you must administer a stitch through all four ends, from the thigh and two ends of the leg, at once, using a needle with thread meticulously and carefully wrapped around it in terms of both fineness and thickness.
And then, when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, withdraw the needle from that middle split part from which it began, so that the thread retracts the pus-filled opening split to the wound, so that the suture is as secure as a cloth suture by which the cloths are tightened.
And between each suture, hold the amount of thickness of the largest needle.
And this suture heals men.
And with this suture, I have closed the wound that had occurred to a man in his belly, which was afflicted by a knife, and it was a rupture of the wound that was greater than a palm, and there was a gap around two palms from the opening of the intestine at the middle part of the body; and then I reduced that part that the intestine had been ruptured for twenty-four hours.
And the plague, once established in the space of 15 days or so, is cured and considered healed; and it may recur for many years, and be managed according to its disposition.
And other physicians had judged that it was not curable; and by a miracle of fire, for the pain did not subside when treated with ointments or any medicine, but only after applying heat to the plague for a short period twice a day and frequent ablutions with honey water until it healed.
But I will tell of two kinds of sewing according to the narrative of the Word.
And it is that you begin the sewing of the wound, and insert the needle from outside to inside.
And thus, as the needle penetrates the wound and at the junction where it enters, according to rectitude and length throughout the body, leaving the tip of the thread in which you have inserted the needle; and you make the other end of the thread penetrate from inside to outside through the other end of the wound.
And when you have managed to insert it, you will insert it again on the other side at the same extreme of the wound from outside towards inside; and leave the edge of the skin that is on this side, and insert the needle into the other extreme of the wound from inside towards outside.
And insert again with the same penetration that you use to insert into the skin at the extreme of the wound which is inside, so that all of it penetrates.
Then begin at this side of the wound, and with the same extreme that is on the other side of the skin, extract the needle from the thread by which it penetrates, and return it to that thread, and place the extreme of the skin that is on the other side against this edge of the wound; and extract from the thread that is part of him.
And do this over and over again, and do it one more time properly until you have closed everything that is outside according to this example.
And the essence of this method of sewing is that you sew with a needle through the skin, stitching the flesh, so that you sew the seam once from the end of the toe, and then again when you have completed it.
The second type of suture, which is peculiarly Italian, and this one is spoken of and used by physicians, is that you sew the second layer with a needle, adding each part to its natural counterpart; then you apply one end of the thread to one extreme of the wound and the other end to the opposite extreme, and it is done according to your skill.
You should keep the needle at the end of the wound towards your own hand, and make it penetrate into the flesh from inside out, passing through both ends of the wound; then turn the needle around and make it penetrate again from outside in, through both ends of the wound.
And then carefully reverse those folds, and cause some of the contents from within to penetrate between the two extremities of the mirror, except for the contrary side.
And this method of suture is better than the common lightweight suture, and it is a suture of which we have previously spoken.
This is the speech of Gaul.
And they might say, the suture of the belly is corrected with two needles; so you insert a thread into some of these, and begin the introduction of this needle, and make it penetrate between the other side according to the suture of those which join the flesh firmly.
And you know that when there is disruption in the middle part of the belly, the suture there is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
The treatment of this illness should be judged according to other illnesses.
Which causes, when you recognize the recent illness due to its pain in front of the hernia that the air alters it, and return the intestine to its place and sew it up and prepare it properly, then place your hand over that flesh-colored powder.
And if the air has already altered the illness, then place your hand over that acid which is within your presence so that it causes hard pain and breaks the tissues, and they become consolidated quickly and miraculously; and similarly treat that illness as with other illnesses until it heals.
If you do not have any medicines at hand, then focus on these remedies, for when it begins to feel better, removing the cause and repeating this twice a day is enough, as you have been taught, until it heals, since you should not need other types of medication due to simple illnesses.
If you fear that the contagion may spread to the vital parts of the body, then cover the wound with a lion's wool soaked in oil of high quality or olive oil and place it in the places where the angles are, and leave the covers.
And if pain or putrefaction is felt in their intestines, which signs you have noticed, then immerse that part in a black, astringent vinegar, especially if the inflammation has been caused by an object protruding into the cavity of the hernia.
And know that the one from the thick hernia has a slower healing than the one in the thin hernias.
And its healing is difficult because the hernia called "gugnu" does not receive healing from any plague that occurs in it; and this is due to the great number of veins present there, and to the magnitude of it, and to the subtlety of that part of the body, and to its proximity to nerve nature.
If what you process from the disease is the fabric, and you achieve that recently, reduce it according to your prescription, which reduces hernias in general.
If it has been some time and the affected area has turned white or black, then tighten the bandage over the spot that is discolored from it, so that pus flows, for in the fabric there are veins and arteries.
And then you cut what is another part of the bandage, and place two ends of the bandage on either side of the affected area, so that by moving it away from you, the attraction of it should be relieved, and the emission of the plague's breath stopped.
Reminder of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
When there is a disruption in the intestine and it is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people, so that you may see those who were once plagued in their stomachs by the impact of lances, and they had an ancient plague with fistulas, and from its management and ventilation.
Then pursue the cure of the patient, even if it was not confirmed in their healing, but continue to apply heat to that part which is healed and the location is consolidated.
And having observed the location now consolidated, pay attention to the illness that engenders in them an accident of evil in their belly; do not force anything for this ill-accident and broken in their delicate dispositions eating and drinking, and then bathe frequently and exercise as it is said.
And certain experienced ones say that when you must treat an intestinal plague, small or large, it is necessary to tie it according to this manner: take sharp forks from large heads; then adjust the two lips of the plague and place a fork from those which open the mouth over both lips of the plague; therefore, when you grasp those and tighten your mouth, cut off the head of it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
Then place another fork near the first, and do not cease doing this until you have tied several forks according to the quantity of all the plague.
And then return that part with the pain and bring it to health; and remove those attached parts within the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
And it is possible that the intestine may be seen as a thin thread taken from the intestine of an animal, finer than a hair; and so you take the end of these intestinal threads, quite bare, and approach the end of it to the thread, wrap it, and then insert that thread into the needle and sew up the rupture.
And this method of stitching with threads is nothing but a second way of trust and hope.
If the pain is great and wide, especially if it is in one of the delicate intestines, then it is not only a question of extraction, but also of healing it completely.
On the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
You know that every ulcer and fistula that forms as one ages and becomes old, if it is not healed and solidified, persists for a long time and does not heal, then in any part of the body, it is generally called a fistula and we refer to it as an ulcer.
And fistulas, in truth, are narrow, hard, white spaces that are not painful and have a hollowed-out appearance just like the one caused by external injury; therefore, they are called alcus (ulcer) because of their pain.
In ulcers, moisture forms which can cause pain; and in some hours, the humidity is absorbed. And sometimes this humidity is evident, and sometimes it is scarce, and hard, and thin.
You have already shown all those causes and the signs of them, and in the division, the remedies for their cure.
And so it is also necessary for you to know the cure for a fistula that is caused through surgical means by hand.
And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for those are fistulas that reach great veins and arteries, or to nerves, or to the skull, or to the abdominal cavity, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to any of the spinal joints composed as the hand and foot; and these cause proximity to the principal member and similar symptoms.
And therefore, of these fistulas, those following this manner are from diseases of difficult healing, and do not receive treatment, and occupation with them is work and ignorance.
If it is one of these fistulas that is so deep as not to reach the places mentioned above, and you hope and trust in its healing, and wish to come to knowledge of it, then take the attempt with a knife or scalpel, and if the fistula is as it should be, and after questioning it, you find it useful.
If the fistula is twisted, examine it carefully with a thin blade, for the weight of its body being lifted and curved away from the twist must be corrected.
And if the fistula has an extremely painful condition, it is not within your power to attempt to treat it.
Then cleanse the orifices with extreme care, for the moisture by which you clean them must also affect the other orifices and their flow.
And you must inquire very carefully, according to the manner in which it is possible for you to know if here there are bones or nerves, and whether the depression of the fistula is distant or close, or whether it is a fistula with only extremely painful orifices, over which all your strength, all your questioning, all your probing into the patient's suffering, and all your discovery of the pain through your compression with your hand on the area, as well as any similarities in accidents to the abscess, depend.
And when you have carefully considered all those causes, you will proceed to treatment with confidence; for you consider whether it is an apparent fistula close to or distant from a joint, or of a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or one of the places that you know and deem suitable.
Now you inspect the fistula according to what has been said in the description of it, remove whatever is in that flow and corrupt flesh, and whatever has formed in the orifice of the flesh, or from tissue and similar things, and treat that until it is healed.
If the fistula is of great depth and according to rectitude, you must incise it in the place where it enters as deeply as you can reach, and then clean it thoroughly of all corrupt flesh; and then apply some wrapped bandages with sharp medicaments, and insert them into the hollow of the fistula that you have understood with your hand.
And for this purpose, some use certain sights within which acute medicine corrodes everything that is broken in the cavity of the fistula of corruption.
Then, once the wound is healed, clean those that have generated healthy flesh until it is completely cured.
If it is not healed by this, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain of this, then examine it and dry it as we have recommended; however, do not neglect any cause from veins or nerves or major limbs as we have said.
If the bone is exposed and there is no corruption or discoloration, then you should clean it until the corruption is completely gone; and then care for that area as it heals.
And if the disease does not respond to treatment in this way as it should, then you will know that you have not achieved the complete eradication of corruption; and then you examine it again precisely to discover the cause of it and its purification with the last strengthening force, and then restore it accordingly.
And so if it is cured, then it is good; but if not, you will know that this corruption is in the deep and remote parts of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore your remedy for it is to cleanse that alone.
And if the corrupted bone is small and within your reach, then you can remove it with delicate forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
And if there are many bones, then carefully extract all of them, and do not leave any cause for concern in your strength.
If any cause of discomfort arises from humidity, and in their incision there is no fear or error, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and dislocate the bones.
If you are not prepared to extract the bones from your patient, then place your hand over the wound where the pain is most intense, and leave it there until the pain subsides, ensuring that the wound is between the bones, muscles, and ligaments, and watch for any signs of infection in the wound that you have incised during surgery.
Previously, if you fear, place a hand on the part immersed in hot oil, or immersed in Egyptian alum, or any of the verdant alkalis, for when these ligaments and bones are separated by their action, and that attraction is removed.
If it is a large bone such as the tibia or thighbone or similar, and what is corrupted from it is only the surface of the wound, then quickly remove that affected part as soon as possible before the blackness and corruption spreads, and then restore the wound.
If the part that is corrupted is large, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it becomes necessary to close and completely incise within the area where the corruption has taken place, and then treat it once it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you that you enter into the patient's thigh to stop it at its simplest and assist in your operation.
A young man around XXX years old experiences pain in his thigh, and the pain arises from within due to an abscess inside the body until it reaches the thigh, and it is an abscess or a great abscess without any external cause.
And thus, over time, the condition worsens due to the mistakes of the doctors as the abscess becomes enlarged, and it attracts moving parts, and its treatment is delayed until the leg becomes fistulated, causing horrific sores that lead to decay and bodily humidity.
And then a multitude of doctors around two years later, not focusing on the wisdom of those times but on the arts, as you have been called to do so.
And I saw the patient's legs and the substances that were flowing from them through these terrible wounds; and already the condition of that man was entirely stable, and the colour of him was citron-like.
And then you insert the probe into one of these wounds and succeed in reaching the bone with the probe.
Then you carefully examine all the wounds and discover those that have reached their limits from every part of the leg.
And then I carefully cut and incise over one of those wounds until I discovered a fracture of the bone, and found it corrupted, wretched, and decomposed; and already a part of the leg was rotten and putrefied, and had been penetrated right to the marrow.
And then I will secure what I have discovered and prepared from the exposed bone.
And I considered that it was not in the bone itself but that corruption which I had removed and secured, and I had already drained it.
Then I will cease the restoration of the illness with medicinal consolidators for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
Then I will examine and uncover the bone again according to the initial discovery, and look for continued corruption within the bone.
And I secured what appeared to me as that corruption, and then I had a hole made for the cure of it and restoration, but it is not restored.
And so I uncovered it again and did not cease to carefully cut the bone in small pieces and make an incision for its restoration, but it was not restored until I removed a portion around a palm of it, extracted what was within its marrow, and then restored it with medicine; it became slightly strengthened and healed.
And further operation of it and cutting of it is not necessary except for the arrangement of the hernia's edges and due to the patient's weak endurance and fear of death, as it becomes unconscious at all times due to excessive evacuation, a bad sign.
And thus health is achieved through complete healing, and nothing is in place of the hard bone; its arrangement within the body is good, and its virtue returns; it is guided by its dispositions, and no harm comes to it during movement or any cause.
If a bone protrudes from the body, you should act as follows: take a strong ligament and tighten it around the end of the protruding bone, asking someone to stretch it; then attach a thicker ligament over the first one. Then place this ligament on the flesh left by the bone, extending its end so that you can pull the flesh away from the parts below, thus uncovering the flesh where you want to make an incision, so as not to damage the flesh with the saw.
And place a cushion or table beneath the bone, for when you do this, the saw is not hindered from cutting through the corrupt flesh.
And take care that the sawing over the corrupt place is done little by little, because if it is in the concave part of the corrupted bone and does not appear in its sensation, then force the saw another time.
If the bone is corrupted and not prominent, then it is a continuous fracture from one side to another, and the corruption is in the middle or at a part of it, you must uncover the flesh from all parts; and then place a cushion beneath, and saw the first fracture where the corruption entered until the other fracture is completed.
And the sawing should be done according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in a joint, cut that corrupt joint, and bind the bone where it continues to the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in their ratio but requires skill.
And if the corruption is in the chest of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you must inquire into how the corruption appears to you, and open it up, and remove it according to some disposition possible to you, and by skilled reasoning rectify it so that no veins or nerves are harmed.
And you should know which saws and chisels to use when cutting these bones, as they depend very much on the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their thickness or thinness, and their size or smallness, and their hardness or rarity; so you must prepare suitable tools for any type of operation.
And you will know that this operation signifies to you regarding the kind of instrument of which you have need; since you possess great learning and long experience of the manners of this art, and are witness to the ways of many illnesses, for now you will employ to it what is suitable for it among instruments for every illness.
And thus, at the end of this chapter, you will learn the number of instruments which you will use with examples of those which you will employ in accordance with your prohibition, which you will experience upon others. Form of saw:
Form of another saw:
Form of another large saw:
Form of treatment: The head of this treatment should be in the shape of a starred key, and its points are in the shape of surgical needles.
And it is not appropriate to apply them unless the heads of the joints are compressed when they are corrupted, or the mouth is widely opened.
Shape of the smaller rasor:
Shape of the broad rasor:
Shape of another saw appropriately made: it should be curved from the middle and have a sharp edge, and the boy's limb is cut down with a descending knife. Form of it:
The shape of the razor with its concave form:
The shape of another razor, more subtle:
The shape of another razor with an extremely curved extremity:
The shape of a small razor resembling a tent:
The shape of another smaller saw:
The shape of another type of saw; this one resembling a ray, with its tip like a serrated edge, often used in various places for cutting bones.
The form of the ray that is appropriate for reason of one who is pierced by bones:
And the end of it is triangular and of acute point.
And it is made of Indian steel, and in a way that covers all the causes we have mentioned of razors, knives, and saws.
Of the incision of the extremity and the locking of the bones.
The extremities may be affected either by an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, and if the treatment you apply to that corruption does not bring relief, or the corruption worsens and affects a member that is not initially involved, then you must incise that member within the area where the corruption has spread, so that the malady is removed and the member saved from death or further harm.
And the sign of that which happens is that the member becomes black as long as it is enclosed by a wound that fire has burned, or if you see the darkness extending to another part of the body where it was previously not present and affects the whole body; and so cut with an incision from that place.
And it seems to be caused by the corruption and impact of certain poisonous sources, such as from a sea scorpion or a viper or a leech and similar things.
And if the corruption or impact is on the tip of the finger, you cut off the finger and do not give space to the corruption for it to spread into the hand.
And if it seems to affect the hand, you cut off that of the affected finger, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes over the whole arm.
And if instead, you cut through that, incise the arm within the elbow at the joint.
And if another corruption passes and the elbow is affected again, then it is the end of the patient's suffering; and to treat any other cause due to this in healing requires a great deal of virtue.
And similarly, if there is corruption in the foot, cut through it within one of the joints.
And if you take hold of the foot's edge, cut through the entire foot. If it is possible to enter within the toe, then cut through the leg within the joint of the toe.
And if the corruption has already spread to the toe, then it is not worth attempting to cure it, and let the patient face death.
And the method of incising or cutting off a member is that you tighten the ligament at the point where you want to make the incision, and tighten another ligament over the place; and the instrument extends a ligament between the parts left behind, and the minister expands another ligament on top of them; and then separate the flesh which is between two ligaments without any space in between so that all the flesh is exposed; and then it is cut or sliced.
And cover it with clean cloth from all sides to prevent any contact with the wound, and ensure the patient's injury is aligned and cauterized safely.
If bleeding occurs during the procedure, you should cauterize the wound carefully or apply some powders to constrict the blood flow; and then return to your treatment until it is complete.
And then attach the affected member to the appropriate ligament, and treat it until it is healed.
And I tell you that you must remove a black, painful lump from a man's foot, this accident which I and you have recommended, which is caused by the inflammation of heat in their foot similar to the burning of fire.
And that corruption, caused primarily in their foot's inner part, tends to spread throughout the entire foot.
And then that man prepares himself with the same tool he used to see the cure go to the member with the violence of its pain and heat of the inflammation, and he cuts into the foot at the joint, and fire heals.
For a long time, that tool caused corruption in the inner part of the hand indicated.
And then it struck me, and I felt compelled to reflect on that superfluity with the water that had been placed over my hand as a cure, returning the body's purification to him; and the superfluity is not purged, and it begins in another inner part that it started from my hand.
And the doctor, with a pointed instrument, cuts open the patient's hand, and does not wish to do so hoping for the resolution of that excess, but rather you must adhere to the incision of the dead hand, because the virtue of the disease was on the brink of collapse.
And as he (the patient) has departed from me, he has returned to his land and overcome me with the fact that that man had prepared and cut open his hand completely, and he has been healed.
And I have not related this story merely to provide aid regarding this illness, but also to explain its meaning and according to which it is understood.
On the cure of wounds and the quality of enema therapy with medicines.
When a gangrenous ulcer occurs in some fleshy member and the space of the ulcer is prolonged as far as it collects pus, and then it breaks open and perforates, and the pus oozes out from it, and the place remains void as if it were a vessel, and the skin that covers it becomes thin, and does not reach a state of complete corruption, and does not affect the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and is not named a fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged such that the corruption entirely envelops a member, it is then called a fistula and does not heal.
And the treatment for it is that you cut through that entire cord as it is twisted, especially when it has become subtle and is made with thread, and ensure that it does not stick to the area due to its corruption.
If you hope that the cord adheres and that that corruption does not succeed due to its last effects, and the cord has passed through from front, then treat it with a cleanser.
And it is that you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that it affects has a foul odor, then cleanse it with an Egyptian medicine made of oil, wine, and honey, received in equal parts, mixed in a vessel, and heated over the fire until the medicine becomes hot and effective.
And then take from him what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; wash the affected sinus with it, tighten the orifices of the foot, and leave the medicine on it for a period of two hours.
And then extract that foul substance; do this for as many days until the sinus is purified and the pain is alleviated.
In some cases, enema treatment is given with ash water when this medicine is not available; take the ash of vines, mix it with water, and use that to wash out the affected area until you feel that the sinus has been cleansed.
If the patient is intolerant to Egyptian medicine or ash water, then wash out the affected area with a mixture of honey and water, adding a third part of ginger; also wash it with a mixture of wine and honey, as honey purifies and washes, while wine helps adhere to the sinus, especially when there has been an excess of stiffness and dryness from previous treatments.
And after you have done this several times and feel that the inflammation has subsided, then cleanse that part with water which causes flesh to be born in it.
And indeed, you take a mixture of dyphristic oil and dissolve that oily matter or use a styptic; or you cleanse that part with some medicines and apply others which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the orifices of the sinus are narrow in which the cannula of the cleanser cannot pass, then gradually widen them with a small iron, and place hot compresses wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicum until they are widened.
And if the orifices seem wide, then you sew up their lips and leave only enough space for the cleanser to enter.
And if the orifice of the limb from which the arm flows is elevated above its attachments, dry it in the lowest place on the patient where the arm flows within, for when the arm is restricted in the depth of its sinew, flesh will be generated there.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinew within the vicinity of the bone in the lowest place as you desire, then pierce and prepare the member so that the arm flows from it lightly according to what you have made ready and without any cause for the restriction of the arm.
He who is over the opening of the sinus, which you massage at all times so that it draws out what is pressed in it from the arm. And so that you may know if what flows from the arm is much or little, or digested or undigested.
And so consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain in it or not, and if it is infected.
And when your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter discharged from the sinus opening has adhered, or formed a strong adhesion, then on certain days (the third day, for example), you loosen the adhesion, and when you remove the plague, change the bandage and renew the ointment.
If from the sinus a fine, virulent matter is discharged, then do not be alarmed by the adhesion of it; for healing of it belongs to itself, for some people have late generation of flesh in their wounds, and others suffer the contrary of that.
And if a bruised or swollen arm is caused by indigestion, then you know that the vein does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the vein is prolonged, adjust in the drying of medications, for if the medications are humid in their substance and virtue, they become dry just as with an ointment that dries up when applied.
And the last remedy, which is to be used for healing, is to take a drying ointment and dissolve it in warm oil, and apply it over the affected area, just as if you were using any other remedy, and do so with care.
And it seems to work in the same way when there is no swelling, using a drying ointment, taking honey that is thick, and applying it; or taking myrrh and aloe, chopping them up and pulverizing them over the fire, and then laying this on cloth and pressing it onto the affected area; and you should apply the honey that you have noticed has thickened, and sprinkle it over cloth and press it.
And some times they administer to him long slices of celestial lilies (and these are celestial lilies) and chickpea flour and centaury, and use these simples either alone or mixed, grind them and sift the powder over honey which has been collected; and apply it.
And if the pain persists and this treatment does not heal it, then you know that the corruption is in the innards of the patient, and already inquiry has been made into the bones or other hard members or the ligaments; then you treat it with a fistular remedy, as it is said above.
On the treatment of calluses, corns, and hardened skin on the feet, adding cuts to the finger and its sectioning.
Calluses are a condition where the skin of the toe becomes thick and hard, often due to pressure or friction, and they can affect either the hand or foot. When this condition persists and its treatment is delayed, it can lead to an abscess (a localized collection of pus) in the toe, or it may become infected, causing severe pain. The infection can spread internally, corrupting the bones and causing a foul odor. The end of the affected digit may turn black, and the color of the skin becomes dark.
And therefore when you have done as we have said in the division and do not confirm your treatment, be aware that you must cut out with a knife all the excess fluid that is forming in the joint and then cauterize the wound nearby, for cautery promotes healing in it.
But if the bone is sound and the joint swollen, and the additional fluid in the joint has already penetrated the tissues, and it begins to ache and pain, then be aware that you must make a slight cut at the angle of the aching joint, and push it open, and cut the flesh easily, and apply over it the appropriate medicine with cauterizing, until all the flesh is removed; and take care to treat it with poultices until it is healed.
However, if the corruption has already penetrated the bone, then you must cut into the bone and extract it, for no time is sufficient for healing if the corrupt bone remains in place.
And if you see corrosion and corruption in the area, you will incise it into one of the joints according to its memory, and then treat it until it is healed.
If you experience severe pain in the joint due to inflammation or injury, at the onset of this malady, you should begin by applying a flebotomist's tool to draw out the harmful material, and then carefully clean the nail with an acute spatula vertically from its base, ensuring that the cut does not penetrate into the surrounding flesh, as this would cause even greater pain and potentially lead to the growth of excess scar tissue in that area; subsequently, treat the affected spot to alleviate the pain.
However, it should be noted that this condition, which is naturally present in the bodies of many people, varies greatly among individuals; for some, it primarily affects the muscles, for others, it is mainly in the bones, or for some, it is notably in the nails.
Some of them originate from the inflammation of the joint, while others are inherent to certain joints in the body. He who is born into this world without knowledge of it will not suffer much, but he who is born with strong joints will be in pain.
And for those who are born carnal, the incision is light, and it is that you insert what must go to its root with a broad spatula.
He who is born with the root of the joint, cure is difficult; so beware of his dislocation.
In he who is born with such knowledge, take care to begin the incision on his flesh in a rounded manner within the bone, and then use a suitable saw to close it, and tend to that place so that it heals.
Consolidation that occurs between the joints due to repeated movements or because of the nature of the man who lacks such knowledge, or as a result of a plague or fire, or similar, therefore take care to remove that consolidation so that the joints return to their natural form.
And then place between their sheets, dipped in warm oil, so that the joints do not become stiff, and separate them with a thin plate of lead until they are consolidated as needed.
And if it appears that consolidation has occurred in certain parts of the hand, then you should dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
From the understanding of defects, there are varicose veins.
Varicose veins are thick, wrapped veins filled with melancholic excess fluid that occur in various parts of the body, most commonly appearing on the legs, particularly those of travelers, workers, and carriers.
So then understand that you should administer purgation to the body from black choler sometimes with strong expulsion, and draw blood from the patient's basil vein.
The treatment for their pain is according to two methods: one is to incise and drain that black blood, and the other method is to raise the vein and extract everything.
The incision is made according to this method: first, the leg is soaked in hot water until the thick blood clot is dissolved, which is foul-smelling from the leg, then firmly grasp the patient's thigh at the superior part of the affected area with one hand above it, and incise the vein at one place, or two, or three wide places, and raise the black blood clot using the other hand from below the leg towards the upper part of the affected area until all the desired quantity is extracted, as much as necessary, and the patient tolerates it.
Then bind it tightly, and order the patient to refrain from hot foods that cause black bile generation.
And repeat the treatment through phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this causes pain to the patient.
The elevation of their legs should be done in this manner: you who support the patient's leg, if it is stiff with pain, then immerse it in water and soak the leg with warm water until it becomes flexible and the veins are relaxed; or if it has been exercised with strong exertion, then bathe it while the member is still warm.
Then, cut the cord at the right of the vein, either in its length or at the very end, or at the lowest part of it, then tie it off.
Then, cut the cord with scissors and extract the vein from all parts until it appears healthy, and you must observe the condition of it, as you would judge that disease which turns to blackness.
And therefore, having evacuated the vein and cut the cord, you will then examine that white which is the vessel.
And then you insert the instrument into the space between that is raised and freed from the cord, and suspend it with a weight of some kind.
Then make another incision approximately three times smaller than the first, and carefully cut the cord away from the vein until it appears.
Then lift that one and make an incision from behind in the second section, then extract that one and lift it until it is passed through the second section, and then extract it from the section above that one.
And do this until you extract the one from the highest or topmost section of all the incisions, ensuring that all are passed through, and then make an incision there.
And if you do not follow the above steps in extracting and lifting, then insert a strong double-threaded needle, tie it off, and extract it, or insert a thread into the space and turn your hand over entirely wherever it is stuck. And be careful not to cut yourself; for if it is broken, it is difficult to raise that part and it will affect the patient through that injury.
And once all that is removed, you will place over the infected area a mixture of wine and rosined oil and unrosined oil, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted without torsion in which it is wrapped around parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then you must make an incision over all the parts of its torsion and at the places where it wraps itself, and then suspend it with stitches until you raise it entirely.
And be careful not to cut the vein and not to injure it, for it will be difficult for you to raise it; and use your prudence in that.
The form of the incident which is dried out:
It is not sharpened like other incisions nor does it have an extremely sharp point so as not to damage the vein; rather, it should be of considerable flexibility, because if it were too thin, it would cut through the vein due to its thinness; we have said this regarding its superfluous thickness.
Of the extraction of the vein of the thigh.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot regions, as well as in hernia cases in Arabic lands and in the hot, dry lands of India with little vegetation and no grass or open spaces.
And very little of it is generated in other parts of the body, other than the legs.
And the generation of the hernia is putrefaction that comes from within the body, snakes and worms and scabs and worms engendered between the hernia and flesh.
And the sign of the impending arrival of the hernia is this: that which happens in the leg, a violent inflammation; then the place becomes swollen; and then the vein begins to emerge from the place of that swelling, which seems torn from the flesh.
And when the hernia appears, you will see that you must wrap over it a piece of lead of which the weight is equal to that of a dragon. Within this dragon, you will notice and release the lead suspended from the leg.
And whenever you see any cause for the hernia to protrude outward, wrap it in lead and note that. And if the movement persists, you insert a knife into it and wrap the ribbon; do not cut the one that penetrates deeply within, for if you do, it contracts and enters the flesh, causing abscesses and pus in the area, and bad ulcers.
Because it is important to treat it gradually and extract it little by little, until it is completely removed from the rear of it, without leaving any cause for its return within the body.
And from this vein, some people have reported its length reaching up to the distance between the hand and the wrist, and I myself have seen it extend to a length of 20 palms.
And if it is cut during the process of treatment, insert the blade into the opening in its flesh and pierce through the thick flesh of the body, removing everything inside, and apply putrefaction to the area for several days using medicines; then take care of it for the healing of abscesses.
And this vein is sometimes seen to have great swellings, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot itself, and it comes with much pain, and it issues from each painful swelling.
And therefore treat that as we have said in the division and refer to what is mentioned above.
Regarding the section on worms generated under the skin, and it is called bovine affliction.
This affliction is called bovine affliction in many lands, as it causes great pain in the body and a small worm that is born between the intestines and flesh, spreads throughout the entire body, and eventually breaks the skin, expelling itself.
And the generation of these worms is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, so that worms and snakes and roundworms and hookworms occur in the belly.
And it is feared by its malice, for when it enters the body and rises to the head, and reaches the joints, it causes a severe pain in them and destroys the joints, and that should be treated immediately.
And therefore, when you want to cure it and extract it, it is not done unless you understand its movement and appearance in the body, and then you must grasp what is above it and what remains below it with strong compression, and then dry it over it and extract that.
And if it is embedded in the flesh and you do not disturb it, then apply a hot cautery with fire over the place where it resides, and the main cause that is feared is its corruption by which it corrupts the place as we have said.
If it affects the head near the joints, then tighten over the brow with strong pressure, and dry it over it, and extract that; and know that the patient should use purification of their body with medicines evacuating corrupt bad humors, and beware of foods causing putrefaction.
On the cutting or incision of a malady.
This malady is called nefritis in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some members, and then it changes from one member to another.
And you have already seen that second one that I recommended. You were called to attend a woman in a village, and upon examining her arm, you discovered a small inflammation in the vein at the wrist, which you pricked with a needle, observing that the swelling decreased accordingly, almost as if it were living silver flowing from one place to another.
And then, after removing the pain from that place, you applied pressure to the muscle, and left it for about an hour.
And then correct the other body until you reach the other arm.
And then I realized that I had to turn myself around in every way, as I had seen; and I was too amazed at the exchange of him and the speed with which he moved from one member to another. And I had already seen this in my feet according to that manner, however, I have seen many which astonish me with the pain of being exchanged from one member to another. I have never seen anything like this in the feet of a woman.
And I did not think that this was anything but why the woman was of old age, with dry skin and visible veins, and in this state, the sensation of that exchanged wind appears.
And it is necessary that this retro-cured appearance does not manifest in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with clogged veins.
And if you wish to cure the patient and they feel pain, do not appear as we have said, then tighten over that area and let it rest slightly and dry on that spot until that heat is reduced, and cauterize the place.
If you cannot find the exact spots, then cure it by drawing out the fluid from the body and by expelling that heat, and bind those with foul-smelling pills and pills of serpents and similar things.
Extraction of arrows.
Arrows vary according to species and the parts of the body they hit, for their diversity lies in whether they have sharp or blunt tips, or are concave or sound, solid ones; and some have three points, or tongues, or barbs.
And among the signs of the servant is when an arrow strikes in it, and passes through the bone, and there comes out from the base which is over the brain, because of the violent soda, and scotomia, and vertigo, and pain in the legs, and inflammation and pain in the tongue, and spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of anger, and so strongly is the word cut off, and the voice is destroyed, and there comes out from the place of the disease a white humidity resembling powder, and spots like those of flesh.
And if these signs appear to you, then abstain from treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is protruding.
If the arrow pierces the heart, so that it is near the left mammary, and you feel a hard cause of pain there, and it is not visible; and strongly feels the movement of the arrow similar to the pulse, and the flow of dark plague, and chills in the extremities, and fainting, then know that death is at hand.
And the signs when the arrow has struck the lung, appear as pus of plague, and the vessels near the collarbone are infected, and the patient's condition changes, and great spirits depart, and they require a strong draw of air and frothing.
And if the arrow strikes the membrane in the foot, and the pain is close to the small ribs, it causes great pain suddenly with strong sighs, and all the muscles of the limbs are not at their best.
And if the arrow strikes the stomach, one feels intense pain from the poisoned food, some undigested.
And if the arrow pierces the abdomen and becomes lodged there, it causes a rupture of the plague, or the intestines, or hernia, and there is no hope for the patient's recovery unless the arrow is removed.
And if the arrow strikes the bladder and it leaks urine outside, causing pain due to some internal injury, then know that this is a severe condition, a sign of serious illness.
Similarly, the other parts such as the face, neck, and head, shoulders, elbows, spine, hip, leg, and knee, and similar parts of the limbs can be saved with great care when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a poisoned arrow.
And I will tell you about what I have seen of these arrows, so that you may understand their use in treatment.
The cause of which is that when an arrow enters the tear duct of a man's eye at the root of his nose and is extracted from him in another place, leaving the grays of his eyebrow intact, then he recovers, and there is no damage to his eye.
And another arrow was extracted from a Jew, which had entered into his eye in the grays, leaving the eyelid intact, and the arrow was hidden and could not be removed from there except for a small tip to which it clung, and it was a great arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, capable of penetrating a lion without leaving any trace.
And the Jew is healed, and there was no bad consequence for his eye.
And extract another arrow from a Christian man who had been struck in the gullet, which was an Arabic arrow, and it is that one to which only ears are attached; and then I incised it between two guides, and it was already submerged in the gullet of the patient; and then I carefully removed it, and thus healed the Christian.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been struck in his belly, and I realized that he was dying from it; so, after we had passed thirty days and nothing had changed regarding his condition, I incised the arrow and treated it, and thus he was healed, without any further harm to him.
And I saw a man in whom an arrow had been embedded in his back, and the pain was concentrated on him, and after setting fire to it for some time, I extracted the arrow at the base of the wound.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had been embedded in her belly, and the pain was deeply rooted within, without changing her general condition, and the woman did not suffer any inconvenience in her natural functions.
And he sees another man whose face is covered with arrows, and the wound is deep, so the arrow is removed without much pain, and many similar marks are seen like these.
And the arrow was extracted from the man of the king's princes who had been hit in the middle of the nose and had already inclined to the right side a little, and the entire arrow was hidden.
And you were called for the treatment of him, so that within three days the arrow's wound would heal.
Then he examined the wound of the arrow very closely; then he inquired about that attempt subtly, and did not feel it; but he felt a sharp pain behind the right ear, and then he hoped that that pain was due to the end of the arrow.
Then he applied a plaster to the place with an astringent and digestive effect, trusting that by doing so, the location of the arrow would become apparent to him, so that it would dry up on its own.
And do not remove the plaster from the wound for several days; and in the meantime, consolidate the disease, breaking the malformation of the hernia through intervals of several days until on one day you feel the arrow inside its sheath and thus successfully treat it.
Then apply acute, corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it opens, and try to ease the pain; carefully remove the tip of the arrow, which sticks to the wood.
And then you should adjust the opening of the wound with that acute medicine until the tip of the arrow becomes visible to me; I devoted four months to this.
Then, as the wound became enlarged, I attempted to insert forceps and hold it, without causing further harm, until I found a way using clever means, as will be described in detail at the end of this chapter, to extract it with forceps; and thus, I healed that wound.
And some physicians judged that the nasal cartilage was not restored, and they restored it, so the affliction is solidified and the disease is healed entirely, with no further damage to it for any reason.
And I advise you to consider the quality of extraction of certain arrows so that it provides order and meaning to what I have not mentioned, for the divisions of this art and the definitions of those parts are not understood from the narration, nor do those comprehend the book.
And the wise artisan speaks little about what is present and even less about what is absent; he seeks new operations and novel instruments to understand the descent of foreign causes into the art when accidents occur.
And therefore I say that arrows are not discharged from the members in which they are embedded, but according to two manners: either by attraction towards the place where they enter, or by the opposite of the other force.
And that which is discharged from the place where it enters, or is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy part, and is thrown out and discharged.
And if you do not adhere to the timing of when to eat, then know that you must leave it for some days until the flesh around it heals and the attraction of it and its discharge are alleviated.
And similarly, if it is stuck in the bone and you do not adhere to your diet, leave it for some days until the attraction and movement of it cease on certain days, and it is discharged.
And if you do not adhere to your diet for some days, then know that you must puncture the path of the arrow in that bone at a subtle depth where the location is enlarged by the arrow, and extract it.
If the arrow is already lodged in the body and affects a particular sense, then probe that area, and if you feel any resistance, use some suitable tools to attract and draw out the arrow.
And if you cannot get to it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, here there are neither nerves nor veins, then make an incision into the wound until it is enlarged and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
And if there are auricles attached that must be removed, carefully cut the flesh in which they are embedded from all sides with every tool you can use; and devise a plan, if you cannot remove the flesh from around the auricles when they are broken or twisted, until they heal completely.
And when you perform the extraction of the arrow at any location, use a forceps with your hand twisted at all times to make it firm; and employ every subtlety possible so that the arrow is not broken and can be easily extracted along with the tissue.
And if you cannot access that part during your shift, leave it for a few days until the swelling in the tissue has subsided, and then repeat the procedure when it is relieved. If blood flow is stopped, do what we have said about treatment in its chapter.
And take care to make an incision with precision, whether of a vein, nerve, or string, and use all your ability to facilitate the escape of the arrow; do this with ease, tranquility, delay, and firmness as much as you can for yourself and as advised.
And therefore, make the arrow contract in such a way that the damage corresponds to the shape according to which you need to aim the tip of the arrow, for it is more beneficial. If this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the shapes.
Consider arrows that are shot in the opposite direction of another party, or those that have already proceeded to the outer parties from within, or make the tip of the arrow limp by feeling the movement beyond the proposed depth and twist it; then focus on that; and cut it according to the quantity in which the forceps grasp it; and shoot it, for it is made light in flight.
If it is retained in the bone, cut your blade according to the angle that the arrow has entered the bone, amplify the cut, and then extract it.
And if that does not work, leave it for a few days, then repeat the procedure as often as necessary.
And if the point of the arrow is embedded in it, then push it towards the body.
If the point has fallen and you want to give impulsion, then insert your finger and, if it is smooth, hit it gently into the concave part of the bone at the base of the arrow and push it towards the body.
If the arrowhead is concave, then push it strongly towards the bone, as the arrowhead will be pushed away by the bone.
And if the arrow is embedded, you must press all your concave flesh in the place where it truly is, if it is within your power, and treat that part as seems best.
And if the arrow strikes the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close enough that you can touch where it enters, and it is within your power to do so, then press on that point, and be careful not to cut any veins or nerves, extract the arrow, and apply a poultice if needed, and treat the wound until it heals.
A device for extracting arrows:
Their ends should be shaped like a bird's beak, made with a serrated edge that grips the arrow so it does not slip.
And these are made in various sizes, large and small, according to the amount of arrow and its hardness, the width of the wound, and the tightness of the swelling.
in such a way with pressure so that the intrusion of it into the concave arrow is dislodged and the swelling is forced away.
On phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins for phlebotomy, of which there are several, are as follows: there are two pulsating veins close to the ears, called the temporal arteries; two veins visible on each temple; and two veins in the lacrimal bones of both eyes, known as the aspient veins. There is a vein located in the middle part of the forehead and another in the tip of the nose; there are also two veins at the nape of the neck and two veins on the lower lip. These are called the algelic veins, and lastly, there are two veins on the tongue. But the veins that are flebotomized in the arms, there is one cephalica, and it requires wild latz; and the people call it "the vein of the head," and it is deaf, and it is the middle vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalica; and they call that one the people "the vein of all the body," and the basilica is the vein that is paused in the domestic latz, and it is called "citillar," and they call those common veins "the stomach vein"; and the funis of the arm, it is paused on the fossa, and it is the one where flebotomy is performed, and it is the one that appears on the ear through manifest appearance; and salvatella, it is the vein that is between the said auricular and the smaller said pus, and only in it are two ramps.
And on the foot and leg there are three veins; one of them is left in the curvature of the end of the wild latz; and the second is superficial, and its location is left by the domestic latz bandage; and the sciatic vein, its place is left by the wild latz bandage; and on the bandage are other veins similar to those.
The treatment of veins that are close to the ears is an ancient cure for migraines, emigrations, and ulcers on the head, old maladies.
And the method of bleeding them is as follows: it should be done at the top of the patient's head, and the head of the patient should be rubbed on both sides in the area where the veins are located, close to the ears, in a manner that causes good friction; then tighten the bandage around the head, binding the two areas where the ears are located, which are depressions in the head; and if you wish to do it as they say, and if you feel the pulse of those veins as they say, here is how to try.
Now take the surgical knife, one that is sharp, and insert it into the vein in the wrist until the incision reaches the bone. Then raise your hand over the vein and bone, and cut the vein with a sharp incision. And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, or as needed, and make the cut as deep as desired.
Then, apply strong compresses and leave it until it is healed.
And it has already been mentioned at the beginning of this treatise the incision of these and their cauterization.
However, of the two veins and arteries that are located near the temples, the jugular vein is an ancient and severe evil, causing frequent headaches and acute overflows in the legs.
And the quality of performing a flebotomy on these is as follows: confine the patient's limb until two veins appear under sensation, after which you should carefully probe and determine the pulse below; and then you will know that it is successful.
And then, you lift the cord above the vein at its insertion as indicated, and insert the sharp phlebotomy instrument, raising the vein; and cut likewise in the other two veins; and allow the blood to flow according to the amount of your need.
Then, you should be close to the patient's hernia, placing the indicated pressure on the vein for an hour, and then pressing over that area and applying poultices and strengthening it with firm compression, leaving it until it is healed.
And previously, the recollection of them has been made, and then the incision, and the attraction at the beginning of the release.
And thus, the application of phlebotomy to the vein of the forehead is appropriate phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for old facial diseases, migraines, and painful, foul ulcers.
And the quality of the flebotomy depends on what you have learned; it is that the illness tightens its collar with a bandage so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument called a phleatome, which has this form.
Stop the puncture at the prominent point of the phleatome on that vein and strike it with a lean or other tool in the proper manner, and let the blood flow according to the amount you wish; then remove the perforation from the patient's illness and tighten it until it is healed.
And sometimes the vein is opened with a lateral phlebotomy, but it is not appropriate that a phlebotomy be of acute extremity as well as other phlebotomies, but rather from a distant extremity, and phlebtomize that according to the transverse, because the bone is very close and strong, it would break in the phlebotomy if it were too delicate.
Avoid the jugular veins that are the tears of two wheels due to itching and scurvy in the wheels, and to the illnesses of the face.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that the disease tightens the vein in a certain place, and then you make a phlebotomy cut there, while standing over the patient's head.
And phlebotomy should be performed according to the transverse direction along a slightly thin phlebotomy cut, as in the place there is no flesh; and if the phlebotomy is fine, then only the tip of it is broken.
Then drain the blood as much as necessary, and apply pressure on that side, tighten it for a night, and then release it.
Phlebotomy of the nasal vein is effective for high fever and intense sweating, and for facial diseases and migraines and redness that occurs on the face, especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that the disease tightens its grip, and then you take hold of the patient's nose with your left hand, take a fine long cut and place it in the middle part of the nose according to straightness, because the vein does not feel here, and because blood begins to flow shortly.
Ensure you complete the procedure with your hand on the flebotomy, slowly letting the blood flow according to need; then close it up after a night, as it is restored more easily.
However, the young of the flebotomy from both sides should be guided towards constriction of veins and beginning of healing and moving towards removal of bad humors and acute and corrosive ulcerations as well with potent remedies.
And the quality of the flebotomy on those is that the illness tightens each one in its place with adhesion; and the practitioner is over the top of the illness, and the patient lies on their side.
Then, make a flebotomy on the vein in the long with a sufficient and slow flebotomy; and draw out the blood according to season or as much as necessary for this purpose; and do similarly to the other veins.
And then carefully disengage the ligament and tighten both veins with a moderate pressure to prevent further complications, and leave it within the bandage until the pain is healed.
And regarding the healing of phlebotomy of the veins, it deals with small apths and pustules in the mouth and the corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, as well as bad ulcers that are on the nose and around the anus.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is such that it stops the illness in its track, tightens the vein with a bandage, and then turns back the lips of the wound and inspects each of the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and you can tell them apart by their different colors, for around these parts are smaller black veins; and therefore cut each one with a precise incision.
If there is any doubt remaining with you, and you do not know which one it is, then understand the incision of the larger one among them, and see if pus manifests from those wounds.
And make it look like the two veins that are on their lips.
The veins that are located on the tongue's surface, their treatment involves phlebotomy of the cephalic vein, which is usually located in the neck, and other issues in the throat, such as those affecting the uvula and mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomy involves following the disease among your teeth in front of the sun, lifting the tongue, observing beneath it, and looking for veins on one side of the tongue as well as the other; their color will be leaning towards blackness.
And then perform phlebotomy on each one; be careful not to cut off your hand while phlebotomizing them, because those are arteries.
And your veins that are flebotomized in the groin, through which blood usually flows in all men, the flebotomy of them is done according to two ways; either by applying a flebotomy syringe or olive oil with subtlety decreasing; or cutting with a flebotomy knife, and this is called arteriotomy, and this is the form of it.
both the width of it also with times, and it is necessary to open the concave veins full proceeding apparently thick, and to those that contain hard clots.
And this flebotomy is of smaller diameter and has more delicate ends, suitable for flebotomies of fine veins that contain subtle citric blood.
However, the jugular vein flebotomy, one of three veins, is used to extract blood from the sickly conditions that remain after the gullet and collarbone, and also from the chest and abdomen.
And it is necessary for the flebotomist, when performing that flebotomy, to be very careful and cautious, because if he misplaces or adjusts the puncture of the flebotomy, he will cut that artery and cause bleeding, so it is important not to flebotomize that part with a sharp needle, but rather to use a secant.
And if the basil vein does not appear by clear indication, then you must know that you should leave that one and change to another, or look for a branch of it; or perform flebotomy in its end on the arm, because that one is manifest; and use a secant needle as we have said.
If you wish to perform a flebotomy on the patient, then cover in front of the tightness of the arm that you touch the area until you know the location of the pulse, and then press over it tightly; and bring the arm close and dry the vein by making a concave section for flebotomy as we have said; and be careful not to strike the percussion on any space of the area of the artery.
And when you press, with strength the ligament, an inflammation appears in the area that you have pressed tightly, then that inflation is inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid that one.
And if you press and feel the flow of blood in the flebotomy as with an ear of a child, and the pain is subtle, then know that it is from the artery's pain; and then cut and stop the hand over that area for a long time; and soon after, if the pain stops, since the pain has stopped, tighten the arm and leave that.
And watch the patient from the release of their moisture, and be very careful with them, and do not harm them for a few days until they are healed.
If the gangrenous part does not separate, and it is not appropriate to apply any medicine to it, then you cut into the artery if you see it; for the end of the limb is contracted and the gangrenous part separates; or take a piece of lint, and bind that around it, and strengthen the area over the vein with a descent of plaster within another day.
And if the gangrenous part is separated, then it is good; otherwise, treat that with the water mentioned before in the recollection of the location of the severed powder flux of gangrene.
And the removal of gangrene from them is difficult due to the small location of the plague and the possibility of adhesion in the arm.
Regarding the dark vein, flebotomy is beneficial for draining blood from the upper part of the head and leaving it from the rest of the body; for this reason, it is composed of branches of the basilic vein and branches of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
And be wary of the flebotomist if they are overly afraid of flebotomy, because there is a nerve involved; then, upon finding the nerve during the flebotomy puncture, stupor will occur, and healing will be difficult, and it may not heal completely. This nerve causes sensitivity; and if it is hidden in some men and is subtle and not visible, you must pause the flebotomy with which you are cutting, and avoid the nerve with all your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length.
The benefit of flebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it drains blood from the head and provides relief to ailments of the feet.
And in this case, if you want to perform a flebotomy with a olive or myrtle flebotomist, it is the safest of all veins, as it does not leave behind an artery or nerve.
Yet in some cases, the pain is so severe in certain individuals, when not punctured on the first attempt, you should not pay attention to that apothema.
The first sentence translates to: "The first [of these] is what you must know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the preservation of health and in hope of the patient, and it is done by making a cut in one of the veins located in the elbow: cephalic, superficial, and basilic; and phlebotomy should be performed at the beginning of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and in winter, during meals, when signs of repletion appear.
And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or, if sooner, after three hours from sunrise on the first day.
Phlebotomy may be administered at any time of night or day, in every hour and every moment, when it is found convenient and necessary.
And it is important to note that phlebotomy should not be performed on children under twelve years old; pregnant women should not undergo phlebotomy except after the fourth month and before the seventh; and the elderly, those who have already passed sixty years, should not be bled.
And if someone wishes to be freed from any manner of illness, he should cleanse his cavities before a flebotomy with a lion's clister, if there is a significant gap therein, so that the veins do not cast off the excess fluid during the flebotomy of the cavities, which are pure, and do not affect the main members.
And patients should not undergo flebotomy without sacred knowledge and fast, nor should they avoid illness or madness until this is remedied by them, nor should they have hydroptic disease, and it is better to fear colic and vomiting, and pain in the belly, and multiplication of cough and labor and exercise during breakfasts or vigils, and any cause that dissipates strength, either in the body or in animals.
And it is appropriate to consider the subtlety of humors in this regard, if the pain is severe, from food and drink, and from medicines if it is possible for them to help it.
And then immerse in a bath if any cause does not forbid or some exercise is performed so that the swelling is reduced.
And stop the phlebotomy on the patient's leg at around 3 o'clock in the afternoon, as we have said.
And pierce that foot which is under observation on that day from all animal misfortunes, as when there is anger, fear, or any physical accidents, especially when it involves excessive work and pain, and resembles those conditions.
And at his bedside, have the causes be present of which corr (possibly referring to a disease or condition) is most common among men, aromatizing and perfuming them, and applying balms and similar remedies according to the possibilities.
And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is clean or rather, the cushion of the one who was just bled.
And then extract the arm, and with your hand, rub the flebotomator two or three times; and tighten the ligament with a strap and wrap it two times.
And whether the compression is firm, so that the compression is not equal, or the compression is excessive, then prevent the flow of the sanc; or it is for softening, and then prevent the complete closure of the sanc's flow.
And then apply the compression, ensuring that whoever was to be flebotomated rubs their hands together between their fingers until the veins are inflated and visible.
And the flebotomist should apply a small amount of ancient oil to their flebotomy instrument; and they should place their left hand's index finger on the vein, leaving the spot where the flebotomy is to be performed, so that the vein bulges slightly, and the pressure is relieved because when veins are encountered that are tight, one must perform the flebotomy while applying pressure, and if the vein ruptures during the flebotomy, it should be tied off immediately.
And therefore, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be skilled and diligent in all these cases.
And after completing the phlebotomy, if the vein is swollen at once, then it is good; otherwise, you repeat this another time, leaving that place a little or applying pressure with your hand, if the location is not inflamed.
If the location is inflamed or the illness worsens, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not strain the limb, as strong inflammation can cause severe swelling, nor should you immerse it in water.
And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
And if the opening is small and there is a subtle flow of blood, and you fear that you will not get the desired amount, then repeat the phlebotomy on that track according to its rectitude, and adjust the opening slightly, applying pressure with your hand before the location becomes inflamed, because in many cases a slight opening is enough.
Sometimes that already formed ulcer may not heal, do not get discouraged as it does not excuse you from any cause; apply some ointment on any part of the wound, as it soothes the body's suffering. And it is better at this location than other locations, and all oils.
And it seems that the application of oil in all flebotomies, by which veins are opened to prevent body suffering, is a well-founded and wise practice when one of those on that site is stopped, as the pain is alleviated and the inflammation is reduced when it is strong.
And if a large ulcer is formed at the site of flebotomy, as it often happens due to various causes, especially when there is no significant blood loss but rather a slight piercing, or in the perception of a thin vein, then you should compress it and apply a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly warmed, and hold it for an hour, as it dissolves.
And it is necessary that he should do this immediately after the blood from that vein has been collected, or from another vein.
And if after some days there is any discoloration or swelling, do not notice it; and if you wish, apply a mixture of aloe, myrrh, dissolved in a vinegar, or mint juice, or a similar remedy to that place.
And sometimes accidents occur, requiring amputation of the affected limb or surgical incision of the basilic vein.
And therefore place your hand on it, and if you feel any tenderness, you should apply compression to that area; for the swelling is a sign of an evil and bad condition; and so be careful to avoid applying pressure on any of the causes we have mentioned, as strong blood flow comes from the saninary artery.
And apply plaster to the area of tightness, so that the place is healed, and take care of the other treatment until it is cured.
And take care to extract the blood from each person according to the quantity of their virtue and according to the dominant color appearing on the skin.
If the blood is black, leave it to settle until it becomes clear; and if you draw it off when it is thick, leave it to settle until it becomes thin; and if it is raw, then stop its flow until the sharpness of it subsides.
And be mindful of him who is full and strong and requires blood extraction at once; in this case, enlarge the vein cut and make the cuts wider.
And for him who is anxious, do the opposite; and when extracting blood in several stages, make the cuts narrow.
The best way to perform vein phlebotomy is to make a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is free from blood flow and nerve incision, and it is more laudable and safer than phlebotomy according to length and width.
And in cases where syncope occurs after phlebotomy, it is customary to treat that immediately after phlebotomy with a small amount of wine infused with millepedes or simply diluted oxymel; and remove the blood in three or four draws.
And if there is a chill from the extraction, then take something to infuse before phlebotomy with myrrh or honey-based elixir scented with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar ones, or an aromatic and strongly-scented elixir.
And if syncope occurs after phlebotomy and it is caused by a great deal of blood loss, then take something to drink with beef blood and a mildly-scented elixir; and use the aromaticity of fennel seed, and apply a cold compress to your feet at that area.
And use other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter of fainting for evacuation.
And here he will extend his arm and dissolve the abscess a second time, addressing the part from which the phlebotomy is most effective for evacuation, and its virtue is hot, which evacuates the small abscess little by little, according to the amount of virtue in the continuous days.
May he who wishes to extend his arm and discharge his abscess a second time, and his body is strong, do this about seven or eight hours after the first phlebotomy.
He who wishes to discharge the abscess from his body in the opposite direction of the decline to which it inclines, should have it extended on the second or third day.
He should pay particular attention to a body in which there is much pain, heat, and fever, where the abscess should be discharged at once, with a considerable quantity of bloodletting, so that the perception becomes intense before fainting occurs, since you will have preserved all the conditions for phlebotomy; and he who places his hand on the pulse of the body containing the abscess, to prevent death from syncope, is particularly attentive, as he should be when the phlebotomist is inexperienced or negligent.
And be careful when you want to free the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, after the orifice of the vein has already been closed and it becomes difficult to draw out the blood, press down on that part with great force and gently bend it slightly, for this is too harmful.
Next, apply a second technique if the first one is not effective; or use a sharp instrument to open the vein at the site of clotting; or place a hot pad or a cold compress lightly over it until the blood is completely drained.
If the vein is infected, leave it alone until the infection subsides.
If it becomes necessary to evacuate the blood a second time, and there is no other option, draw the blood from that area or from the other arm into another vein.
And the vein called the "funnel of the arm" is phlebotomized in the place of the cubital or basilic vein when they are not found or are occluded, since it is composed of those.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the doctor inserts his hand into the patient's arm until the vein becomes inflamed and appears clearly.
Then apply pressure to that stricture with a gentle hand; and phlebotomize according to the transverse small cut, not longitudinally or transversely.
And it should be an open view, and your phlebotomy should be such that you phlebotomize on the joint of the hand with a small one.
And if the flow of blood is stopped, then insert your hand into the patient's arm and prevent the blood from running in the water until you achieve your need.
If you were in the summer days, then you are excused from the movement of your hand in cold water, and in winter, the body of the wound in cold water is most at rest.
And the incision of this vein is far more safe than all other veins, for it has neither pulsating blood nor nerves.
And the phlebotomy of the vena cava on the right side is indicated for liver afflictions.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that you tighten your hand strongly on it, as you have placed it in cold water, provided the vein is swollen and clearly visible; then make a transverse incision; and if you puncture it from top to bottom, it will not bleed again.
And be careful not to cut off your hand during phlebotomy, for it contains the nerves of the dita exposed by the skin.
And then repeat the hand in the warm water and let the blood flow through that, for if you do not repeat that in the warm water, the blood will clot in the opening of the vein, and it is forbidden to flow.
And once the blood is extracted according to the amount needed, you should apply oil and salt to the vein to prevent it from hardening, and ensure that you do so carefully on every part of the wound.
But the healing of this arteriotomy with the hand from the left side is appropriate for the ailments of the right side as well.
And do the same with this arteriotomy as well, just as you have done with the other.
And the healing of the superficial vein from this arteriotomy is for ailments that are in parts farthest from the body, just as there are ailments of the pelvis, and to retain menstruation, and for ailments of varicose veins and ulcers on thighs and old socks, and similar ones to these ailments.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of him is that the disease pushes its foot into water and makes friction until the veins appear; then it ties over the joint of the foot with a strap; and the place where the vein is visible, the pus appears, and from there it branches out in various parts of the foot.
And therefore, phlebotomy should drain the pus widely and leave the cushion over the vein after the addition of him, as it is better and more salutary.
And if you perform phlebotomy on the foot, be careful of the nerves that are left over in the face of the foot, and place your phlebotomy carefully where you cut through it from the side, just as if you wanted to incise it.
And be swift with your phlebotomy.
You should not forbid the emission of the sanium (a term for blood or pus); then you immerse the foot in water and let the sanium flow out until it is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist misses on the first attempt, then repeat the phlebotomy in another place, since the area is sore; and do not fear any ill effects, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
And it seems to work similarly on the other foot as well.
And for sciatic vein, the area as we have said is below the knee at the attachment of the wild branch.
And the incision of phlebotomy on him is at hip pain when it is done with a sharp cautery.
And the effectiveness of phlebotomy on him is that the patient's illness enters a bath, quickly and thoroughly draining his body from the ankle to the thigh with a long, thin instrument, so as not to leave any traces.
And therefore when it appears, you perform an incision on that part according to each method at your disposal and as is most appropriate; either cutting through incision or severing through sectioning, since the site of it is exposed.
And it is in many people very painful; and if you find it, and it does not appear in the feeling of all, perform an incision on a branch of it, and that is the one that appears at the back of the foot instead of the aforementioned great toe and little finger.
And be mindful of the nerves, and allow blood to flow from the wound as much as you wish.
Then release the tightness and place your hand over the site of the incision as it strengthens the area, for gently it is healed.
Of ventilation and of the qualities of use of those.
The windows are of glass, or iron, or crystal.
Ventilation is performed in two manners: one through lancing and extraction of pus, and the other through ventilation by means of lancing.
This ventilation, which is through lancing, is performed in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
And the ventilations that are administered through lancing and extraction of pus are in twelve places on the body, of which one is where ventilations are paused, and it is the last opening on the head; and two openings from each side of the nape; and ventilations under the jaw, leaving the mandible below the mouth; and ventilations of two blades; and ventilations of two holes, each in two bracelets; and ventilations of two pins; and ventilations of two cushions.
And the extraction of blood should not be done only from small veins scattered in the flesh, and thus not catch the virtue through them, as is the case with phlebotomy; nor should it be covered that bloodletting be done with fire or a burning in any illness caused by accumulation within until the body is entirely evacuated.
If bloodletting is necessary for an illness or a continuous condition, it should be administered at the beginning and end of each month, and in the middle of its course as well, and at any suitable time.
And therefore when, due to any of those conditions, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the night, the doctor orders ventilation to be done rather than waiting two or three hours after midnight.
And the immediate ventilation of the neck consists in applying pressure to the head, causing it to sink into the pillows; this is more effective when it involves the evacuation of all the body's fluids.
And this ventilation is performed at the site of phlebotomy in the head.
And it is not advisable to use that which is of a putrid or catarrhal nature, as it brings great harm to the patient.
And for this reason, one should not use those things on the feet, and especially on the tops of the toes, where there are joints that are prone to pain.
May he who is lying on that which is continuing to press upon him experience relief; and for this reason, you must command the ventilator to place his hand with a slight pressure on the areas where the pressure is greatest, lest there be generation of loss of sensation.
The application of the bellows over the chest is in place of phlebotomy of the deep vein and the basilic: and thus it confers relief from asthma, and from constriction of the air passages, and from the cracking of the lung's air sacs, and from cough, and from congestion.
And it should be noted that the application of the bellows over the chest should not be prolonged, for if it is left in place for too long, it generates weakness in the body and the stomach.
And the application of the bellows over the head confers relief from accidental pains in the head and eye, and migraine, and pressure, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is in place of phlebotomy of the basilic.
And be sure to instruct the ventilator not to press his hand during the incision so as not to pierce the artery and cause bleeding.
The ventilation should be done by applying alcohol to the mouth, and it helps in the healing of gum corrosion, resembling other diseases that occur in the mouth, and is used instead of phlebotomy for drainage from the two lips.
But the ventilation done on both cheeks provides a cure, which is achieved by applying heat.
And the ventilation within the two cavities provides immediate relief from phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilic, femoral, and cefalic, as it draws blood from all those hand-sized veins in the flesh, and the smaller veins that are connected to the larger ones, so as to achieve the attraction to the three veins.
And instruct the bellows-maker not to overdo the scraping, for the place is denuded of flesh, and leaves only nerves and arteries.
And it is a bellows used to blow over the anus and confer relief to hemorrhoids in the buttocks and to pus ulcers left behind.
And you should instruct the bellows-maker to use a strong bellows made of iron, for the place needs a robust section; and it tolerates only strong, sharp blows from the bellows and subtle scraping.
But the bellows from the legs should be reduced in size for precise use, as they draw blood from throughout the body, and relieve old pains of the kidneys and bladder, and menstruation, and open obstructions, and stand in place of two incisions, and of a noose, and two pins.
However, these remedies weaken the whole body and cause fainting in many men.
And from the openings (or 'ventozas') of the abdomen, the healing is proper for the healing of the openings on both legs.
And the quality of the position of the openings is that it stops the opening at the beginning visible and sucks by a temperate suction, and do not prolong the position of the openings, rather leave those lightly, and maintain those tightly, so that the humors come to the place by equal event. And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place already reddened and swollen, and that the pain of the sore appears.
Then cut and repeat the suction little by little, and consider the condition of the body.
For that man who has tender skin on his legs, be sure to make an incision once and not again, so that the place is not ulcerated.
And command the bellows to increase the depth of the incision and then slightly pull, and facilitate the suction with ease.
And if the swelling in the wound is great, then make two incisions, for the first incision opens the way for drainage of the wound and its pus. In the second, apply the scrutiny acquired from the extraction of the large wound.
And if the wound is very foul-smelling, then make a third incision so that you may achieve the last result.
Lastly, when we wish to extract the wound little by little or a small one, it suffices for us to make an incision.
And if we want to extract a hard stone, we make a deep incision; and if we know that the stone is large, then we should make a cut for a broad incision.
And the term "scarificacio" refers solely to the depth of the cut.
And if the stone is very large, hard, dense, and its pores are very tight, then the places for the suckers should be made softer, wider, more open, and smooth; if it's in summer, use oil of aloe or violet, or crushed almond oil, or henna seed oil; and if it's winter, use butter, or lilac oil, or chamomile oil, or st John's wort oil, similar substances.
And if the excess is thick, sticky, then use oil of amber, or balsam oil, or aloe oil, or anise oil, and similar substances.
If the blister poultice is made of thick flesh, it should be prohibited from using oil, and at these places where blisters form on their bodies, the blistering should be washed with warm water or with water mixed with salt, or with dog's urine, or with vinegar, and similar substances.
And for those whose blisters have a lot of moisture, wash them with wine or with water mixed with myrtle and sumac and similar substances.
And for those whose excess fluids are thick, wash their blisters with old wine or with water of sage, which is majorana, or from the distillation of anise, or chamomile, and similar substances.
And it should be noted that blister treatment should be avoided immediately after a bath; it is recommended to administer it just before or after the bath for about an hour or two, and that the blister should be kept elevated while sleeping.
What is it that must be done to regulate the flow of blood after phlebotomy before venesection?
When beginning the treatment: if the phlebotomist or the one who has undergone flebotomy is irritable and has severe pain and inflammation, then you must consider causes of coldness, such as milia (small white lumps), and apply things that have a cooling effect, such as vinegar, aloe, and similar substances.
And limit their diet to things like chicken, lean meats, and foods seasoned with spices.
And for those whose condition is severe, they must take in plenty of warm almond milk, or milk made from hemp seeds, and sumac, and drink things with a mild odor between meals and at night; and it is recommended that they consume little to no wine, avoid foods like chicken, duck, and small game, and limit their intake of pigeons.
And it is important that on days of ventilation and phlebotomy, the beverage be greater than the food.
And it is important to provide a beverage to some people with typhoid fever or other ailments, such as musk, which is cinnamon or alcelita before ventilation or phlebotomy, or afterwards, so that the main members are comforted and the pain is relieved; and they should not take that scald.
But the vents that are a form of sacrifice should be vents that are stopped at the liver, and on the abdomen and podagra, and on the navel, in the places of the joints, and the drainage of the wound, because these members do not suffer sacrifice upon them.
And it is not desired by those who only attract the pain of a member, thus pausing a ventosa on the nipple in the case of flux of blood from the nose; and they use that for the ventosa to dissolve the adhesive viscidity of the member, just as with a pause over the stomach and navel; because it rarifies the member and scalps it and removes pain as it resolves ventosa.
And it is already placed over the hemorrhoids when they occur in their position or lying down, for by virtue of strong attraction, it improves the hemorrhoid and eradicates its location.
And it seems to be placed over the liver and gallbladder, requiring ventilation in those enclosed areas.
And these ventilations are managed with suction, sometimes only, and in some cases, they are administered over fire.
And some times, they are administered full of heated water in the ailments of the gallbladder.
And this is so that the ventilation be filled and great pus be formed, it is only heated water or water in which suitable herbs are steeped.
The form of the poultice applied over fire: the size of the opening should be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the remedy should be the size of a palm; and in the length of it, at the place that is in the middle, the size of a third part, the thickness should be small according to the amount that fits inside it with an needle.
Use ery or citrus, with thick, soft edges, to hold the member in its proper position without causing injury.
And at the middle of it, a transverse strip of ery or iron, where the candle is held over the fire.
And this poultice is much greater in effect than that which we have mentioned before, and its effectiveness is less for some ailments and the condition of him who uses it.
And the strength of the suction cups on children and the weak is different from the suction cups on young people and robust bodies.
And the technique for applying this suction cup over a member is to extend the mechanism over a fire with decent fuel before a small candle of wax, and place it over the middle of the transverse branch in the exact spot of the suction cup, so that the fire is ignited around the periphery, preventing damage to the patient's body.
And once it is applied to the patient's member, as we have mentioned, when using suction cups and not requiring the said technique, and the heat of the fire causes steam to form over that track, the suction cup will soon dissolve.
And adjust the mechanism according to your preference, and repeat if necessary.
It is possible to use a suction cup on pleurisy patients without the presence of transverse branches or tracks, and it should only be filled with water and applied over the member.
And this is the form of it: And this funnel, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a large amount of water.
**Chapter XCVII**
Bloodletting is not administered in all members but only in those where it is impossible to place ventosas (cupping glasses) due to their smallness, such as the tongue and similar parts; or in a member devoid of flesh, such as the nose and its surroundings.
And the quality of using those that you have found bloodletting instruments, which are in the infected waters of putrid wounds.
And it is advisable to lay them (the instruments) in infected water during the day and night until they are familiar, and do not cause any pain in the abdomen of those; and then evacuate the body at the beginning with fleubotomy and cupping glasses; and rub the patient's member until it turns red; and then place them upon it.
And when they are filled and bound.
And if it is possible to drain the area with an incision, it is more beneficial in youth.
Otherwise, wash the area with vinegar and then apply a hot compress; it should be rubbed and pressed.
And if the swelling of the veins is prolonged and it persists, then you should immerse a cloth in cold water and place it over the affected area to stop the bleeding.
And if the swelling is multiplied, then vitriol powder or substances similar to those with constricting properties should be applied to it, as long as the swelling subsides; or certain seeds of peas should be placed over the affected area, and left there until the peas adhere to the location and the swelling dissipates.
And if it is necessary, apply bloodletting, when possible, change those.
And if bloodletting is forbidden, then rub the place with fresh salt or leave a needle in the place until it heals; and once they are healed, then gradually reduce them, as those who feel any pain will soon give up.
And when you want them to fall off, sprinkle some aloes powder, or salt, or ash on them and then it will soon happen.
Thus begins the process of recovery from the third stage: restoration. This chapter is mentioned frequently in the art of medicine; it's about restoration of fractured and dislocated bones.
Oh, child, know that those who boast of this chapter are foolish doctors and common people and those who at any time did not study the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
And for this reason, it is said that this manner of knowledge on earth in our time is private; and you should never forget it for any length of time; and I have not devoted myself to it until now, except through the long study of ancient books and the understanding of those times, from which I extracted science.
And I have dedicated myself to experiments and studies throughout the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter everything that my science contains and on which I have conducted my experiments; so that you will find it concise with regard to the topic of elongation and freed from troublesome occupation; I have abridged it at the end of explanation; and I have demonstrated it through examples at the conclusion of declaration; and I have formed in it various forms of the instruments that are administered at that time, as is done by addition of declaration, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
First principle.
In summary, and as a collection of fractures of the bones, those which must be identified first before we begin to recall the memories of the injured parts and their varieties, each one for itself. So, let us begin with the preamble of this chapter by stating the sums of speech; and the chapters to those whose understanding, at the outset, the artisan is forced and obliged to remain true to these—it is you and those who are eager to know or learn this noble art from you.
And so it is said, when you encounter a fracture or dislocation or twist or misalignment, you must first consider whether to begin with an amputation or removal of that part, or in most cases, if no other cause prohibits, with the use of virtue, or as the situation demands, either by making an incision into the flesh, or through cauterization, or by using a stick (viel) on the decrepit, or at times, due to a violent heat or friction.
And then I am content with my own diet of dried herbs, chicken and crab meat; I forbid fatty meats and overindulging in foods, as well as any food that fills the veins with rust, provided you are careful to avoid gangrene and if not, fear the emission of matter into the member.
And then return the patient to their original condition, from which they usually recover.
And so when the broken bone begins to be healed, you should know that the patient must refrain from foods that are too rich in nutrition with a lot and heavy food, but rather make foods prepared with warmth water, rice, bread, meat, veal, fresh fish, large beans and similar, and this treatment brings about the coagulation of the fracture more gently and better.
And you should know that the bones break when they are in men as well as in the very old, it is not possible for them to continue and be consolidated according to their nature because of the withering of the members of their bodies.
However, nature adjusts and amends regarding a broken bone from any cause similar to gout in which swelling occurs and adheres, strengthening and binding together what is usually separated, until the end of strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning, or any cause that does not prohibit it from its works.
And for this reason, it is necessary to restrict the diet of the patient, foods in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
And you know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the arm; and similarly, all other members are diverse among themselves.
And now, let's proceed with the line-by-line translation:
A great variety of fractures require different treatments. And there are diverse species of bone fractures in their innards; for some are arcuate fractures or what happens in them stars; and sometimes it is a fracture according to the length of the bone: such as stag and shoulder fractures and additional procedures and non-procedures, as is done in pain when preparing to write, and fracture by plague and dislocation in the head, and small fissure fracture.
And every species has its own peculiar or tormentous restoration according to the recollection of its distinct place.
A clear sign of bone fracture. And this is how bone fracture is known: the curvature of it, and that prominence and perception from touch, only when you compress it with your hand.
And therefore when there is no sign of deformity nor does the patient experience great pain upon touching the bone with agitation, then it is not a fracture here.
It is possible that it is a deformity or a small fracture, where you do not know how much pressure to apply with your hand; once identified, place over it the remedies of which you have memory suitable for the moment and location; then, make it very tight by applying subtle compression.
And you know that the location, when it is curved and does not split into two or anything else that does not happen in stages, as the entire part of its comparison is affected, then you must begin from your hour to rectify the curvature once it occurs post-injury with caution.
And if it develops into an acute post-injury infection, then leave it for a few days until the infection subsides; and then use any method of elevation and engineering that you can to help it heal.
And you should know that the restoration and stitching of an intestine is more delicate than the bone in which it has burst.
And then strengthen that second one when the recall of the intestine comes.
If the bone is broken in such a way (as if) it has two injuries, whether in the hand or foot; or if your hand holds a small member; or if there are two sutures or one suture and a hand, then extension of that severed limb is necessary.
And place your position on which to hold the member in accordance with its natural shape, while the separations are extended from the severed limb, then pierce so as to cause those additions to return to their proper places, using whatever means you can in their locations.
And take care that your force does not harm the patient during your operations, nor cause any injury; and pierce according to your ability, applying one bone to another in its best form.
And be sure that at this opportune moment you apply your hand to it, and if you perceive any different cause, correct it and overcome it with the quantity of your virtue.
Avoid excessive extension and compression; indeed, such foolish doctors often cause gangrene by their operations, or they cause contraction in the member as we have seen this happen through the operations of their moted devices.
And the quality of the tightness of the member at rest is what you should consider, because you must know that the members broken are diversified in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
And regarding those that are small like the arm and have a delicate bone structure, when you see that the envelopment should be of very fine cloth.
For those that are thick like the skin or leg, it is necessary that their wrapping be soft and durable, as the binding on each side connects the large member and tightens it from every direction, so nothing interferes with its movement.
And then begin, carefully remove your bandage, place a suitable padding over it, around the site of that fracture with three or four layers according to the member's needs; and tighten your hand slightly on the bandage.
And then carefully withdraw it from the superior part of the fracture site, and tighten gently to ensure you do not force your contraction on the area you have strengthened around the fracture. Then gradually lengthen the wrapping around the fracture site, and gently ease the contraction slowly, until you obtain from the area a considerable space.
Then take another bandage and wrap it around the weakened area over the fracture, and carefully withdraw the bands further from the fracture; and your operation should be on the contraction of the bandage and its softening according to what we have said about the first bandage above.
And then place between the bandages a leather pad or cloth to which the curvature of the fracture is adjusted, if there is curvature in it; otherwise, do not place anything in it for no reason.
And then place your hand over the other side, and cover these gently wrapped folds properly made, if there is no inflammation or abscess in that area, and pause on it where the abscess lies and presses upon the inflammation; leave it for some days, and then tighten the bandages over it.
And the bandages should be of different types of canvas, carefully made; or of wooden splints; or of palm leaves; and their width should be according to this form and figure.
However, ensure that the bandage placed over the fracture is thick and wide at the edges compared to the other bandages; its length should be according to the measurement of the limb in terms of magnitude and smallness; then tighten the bandages on the other side as per your initial tightness; then tie them tightly from above as we have said regarding the tightness, and it must be that your tightness is based on the location of the fracture more, and the tighter it is away from the fracture, the better.
And take care that the threads are stronger in thickness and fineness, and are many; and if the threads are thick, as you have seen in certain operations where the thread of cords from some tissues is tight, it is a great error when the constriction is not uniform.
And indeed, thin threads are not suitable, for you will not be able to achieve the constriction that you want, and you will not realize that there should be less than a finger between one thread and another.
And if the illness is localized in the extremities of the bones, then apply constriction at those sites, placing cushions or something similar between the joints to prevent any injury.
Sometimes fractures are as harmful as an epidemic, causing disruptions in the body and leading to recall according to the second rule of singularity.
And you should know that a completely broken limb is not immediately strapped with splints on the first day; this is because, when a limb is large, it cannot be immobilized by splints until several days later, or perhaps after 3, 7, or 15 days, depending on your experience in preventing gangrene.
And this is the method of splints used by the ancients to restore, which are placed over fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Method of splinting as a quick means of restoring fractures, particularly suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, since it does not allow heat or friction: take flour dust, which is the core of flour that prevents the movement of the millstone against the walls of the mill.
And if that is not possible, then use a thin and delicate piece of wood, and arrange it as needed.
Another method of plastering to restore fractures and dislocations and twists: prepare assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and myrrh, which is extracted from the bark of the tree milgraner, with all kinds of dragon's blood; mirra and aloe also in dragon's blood; alcohol in dragon's blood twenty times; mix all these ingredients well with licorice water or egg albumen if the patient's condition is scarlatinous; then apply this plaster, for it is a good composition and gently restores broken bones, and benefits many people.
Another method of plaster, which gives relief to fractures and twists: prepare migrain and add white alder bark in dragon's blood ten times; myrrh and aloe also in dragon's blood five times; acacia in dragon's blood six times; and bol armenic in dragon's blood twenty times.
All these ingredients are crushed in a mortar to a fine powder and mixed with water or egg albumen and administered accordingly.
A method of plastering joints and bones separately from their locations, causing accidental pain in those and in cracks and fractures: take fine wool and immerse it in a mixture of wine and oil, and place it over the area.
This plaster is not only without restorative power but also serves to prevent abscesses and expel pain effectively.
Another method of plastering that restores blocked bones: take leaves of the fig tree and poppies, both wild; mix them together to make a plaster.
A method of quick plastering applied for the restoration of fractured bones and when you wish to achieve resolution of an abscessed rupture: take roots of alder, chamomile flowers, violet petals, all flour, mix them together; grind them in wine, if the affected member is not scalded.
If it is scalded, then apply that which soothes with cold water moistened with colander or cold water itself.
Another method of applying a poultice for stronger resolution than the first one mentioned: prepare a mixture of althae root and seeds, fennel, melilot, majorana, violet flowers, chamomile, any other herbs; all should be finely chopped and steeped in sage water or lukewarm water or wine, according to the condition of the member and its color.
However, Hippocrates does not state in his work that it is necessary to place a poultice directly on the affected member for its restoration, but rather recommends applying it between thickness and thinness.
A Gaul may also apply poultices to the affected member after restoration, and the causes of its dryness require applying warmth as with myrrh, hops, and similar herbs, just as has been recommended for other conditions.
Method of applying a plaster for injury and pain: take equal parts of honey, moss from trees, human hair or eagle's feathers, and salt, mix them together, strain and make it into a paste.
The amount should be adjusted according to how much the ligament is stretched and, once separated, it is important to consider if there was no pain or discomfort and the bone was not broken, in which case it is not necessary to dislocate it completely. You should not force the dislocation with too much effort. And if a severe pain, pressure or swelling occurs at the site, you should immediately remove the plaster from that area and stop the treatment.
Take a piece of linen and sponge from the sea, soak it in hot water, and apply this to the area until the pressure and pain cease, then let the member rest for an hour. Then place over it a clean cloth soaked in vinegar and oil or rose oil, wrap it up, and leave it for the night, ensuring there is no further infection and the swelling of the member subsides and the pain is alleviated.
And then repeat that narrow restriction and apply a small plaster, not tightening it with your first constraint, but applying subtle remedies to what needs healing.
And if the abscess, swelling, pain, inflammation and all other symptoms have already subsided, and the patient is in need of a plaster and restrictions, then repeat that process as you did at the beginning.
And if no cause occurs in the member from any of those we have mentioned, do not remove the plaster for three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes everything is left for twenty days, as it seems appropriate to you, due to the relaxation of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and if it approaches the coagulation of the flesh over that.
And then adjust the restrictions more than in your initial restriction, and adjust the diet of the patient according to the progression of their recovery.
If you examine the site of the fracture and find it dry and shriveled, then know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching that part; so you should immerse that in hot water each time you treat it; and do this for all three days; ease the tension a little, and by this operation, the nourishment flows to the member, and healing begins slightly.
But what these foolish restorers of a member's fracture do when it is not restored at the beginning, according to how it was covered, and is restored according to its deformity, is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if it were a skilled surgeon here, he would open up old scars in their free spaces and heal them towards this.
And you have not seen any of them do this, so it is much more reasonable that they do not do this.
**Section: On Fractures When They Occur in the Head.**
The fragments of fractures are diverse, and their shapes vary, as the causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a blow that shatters all the bone within the joint, leaving the bone fragmented, as it were in a fist; this type is thus called 'ascial'. Or, a space may cut through some part of the bone, slicing through the flesh and not penetrating to the rear of the bone; this type of fracture is known as 'levatio absoluta'.
And the pain from these two types of fractures can be severe or mild, and they may be caused by compression or tension; their cause is a blow or sudden impact upon a hard surface, and they resemble each other in appearance.
This fracture either penetrates and approaches the pancreas, leaving the bone fragmented; or it occurs on the surface of the bone, and the pain from these two types of fractures can be severe or mild.
And when it is a fracture that is damaged in the bone, at the delicate part of the hair root, and for this reason this specific type of fracture is called capillary.
This is a fracture caused either by an accident or by the impact of a heavy object, which causes some bone layers to separate inside, and it occurs in the concave area as happens with the fractures of the skull when there is a blow to the head and their separation from the internal cavities.
This is most commonly found in the bones of children, such as the skull.
And in all these types of fractures, the bones are separated as if they were stars. And then you come to the recollection of all this in its place.
And I have learned all these types of fractures by observing their symptoms and attempting to discern the damaged and rotten flesh that is upon them.
And the special capillary is known for being discovered over the bone, and it is cleaned, and washed over it, as the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, one must consider from the beginning the accidents of the illness, and if you examine the accidents that signify by their appearance over evil, thus as vomiting of anger, and extension, and loss of understanding, and muteness, and fainting, and acute fever, and bleeding of the eyes and redness of those, and similar to them in the major dispositions, it is a sign that one is not healed.
And if you observe unusual accidents, you hope for health, then you begin the treatment of it.
Which cause is that if the pain has come to you at the beginning as it does and this happens in the winter days, then you must study the bone's outline according to all dispositions on the fourteenth day.
And if it is in the summer days, then you must know that you should examine the bone against the seventh day, because what remains of the bone is corrupted by panniculus, and accidents happen that we have mentioned before.
And if the fracture has already reached the panniculus covering the brain and is in small and torn pieces, then you must know that you should incise the comminuted and torn part as I have mentioned before.
And it is that you remove the patient's thigh pain, and discover the bone according to custom and manner as possible according to the figure of the pain, and let it rest over the patient.
And if you experience a fracture of the bone, pus or abscess cauterize it carefully, rest against it with something that covers, and fill the space with bandages soaked in wine and rubbed oil, and allow the abscess to calm down until the pus has ceased, and be certain of the flow of pus; then begin with the circular incision around the bone and its removal.
This is the second of two surgical methods.
One method is to cut the bone with a sharp incisor in a straight line, and this is its form: And then administer another incisor, slightly wider than the first one; and this is its form:
And then administer the incisor even wider than the second one.
And you will need to use various incisors, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are shorter, the last ones being most sharp and made of iron or steel.
And use their help to facilitate the percussion over the incision so as not to harm the head or wound that.
And if the bone is strong and hard, remember to pierce in the circumference of it before you apply the scalpels, which are called non-penetrating incisions.
And they are not called thus, but rather those that do not extend the term of the bone of the skull to which it is attached, so that at the incision, its extreme or edge is round, or like a small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
It is convenient that you take a great number of these incisions, as each one suits the specific nature of every bone, provided that in all parts of the skull, its edge be sharp, and the amount in length and breadth be according to the quantity of specific nature of this skull.
And this is the method for three types of treatments: When drilling into the channel of a broken bone, place the treatment instrument on the bone and rotate it within until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the treatment instrument to another location, and stop when it has passed through all the layers, taking care to adjust its position according to the thickness of the ray or surrounding area.
And then you cut with scissors what is between any part of the bone, creating a thin opening over it according to levitation, as we have said, in order to remove the bone, or with your hand, or with any other tool that you have prepared for this purpose, using forceps and thin saws.
And be sure to take every precaution so that the scissors do not touch any part of the patient's body.
So, once you have drilled through the bone and it is separated from the surrounding tissue if it continues to attach, you will extract it, taking care to scrape and clean it on the roughness of the bone with a tool similar to scissors, but nonetheless be sure that it is more delicate and finer than the other scissors.
And if you fracture any small bones or joints, take hold of it with ease through what you have at hand for instruments; then apply a poultice to the wound with linseed and ointment as we have said.
And another manner of operation is light, free from pain, which cuts Gaul and praises for great merit; and this is the speech of it: It is necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to uncover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and evident, while you have discovered that part, stop leaving the end of this cutting instrument slow and gentle, of which this is the form.
And the lenticular cut is round and does not cause any harm, while the acute cut is in two parts forward in length, so it should be adjusted to the shape of the face of the instrument cutting acutely into the bone.
Then strike the instrument against a cut made in one part with a small hammer, until you have completely cut through the bone, while it is revolving, and be sure of the safety of the patient from any accident that you fear in any way, and if the medicant14 was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of their illnesses; certainly, he would have been asleep.
When a fracture occurs due to some external cause affecting the panniculus (skin and subcutaneous tissue) in certain bone locations, the doctor will incise it with a curved scalpel at that point, and release the pressure from it easily, as it is released from its discomfort and pain.
If the bone fracture does not penetrate through the panniculus, and what has detached or remained from the bone is the facia (deep tissue), rough and subtle fibers, then you should smooth those roughnesses and eradicate those subtle fibers with fine razors that you have prepared in sufficient quantity to be able to apply them at any point to these pus deposits in a manner suitable for your operation on that fractured bone and its shape.
And you should manage in your reasoning when you begin to cut the bone with these razors, and use them close to the subtle pus, and do not stop doing this continuously until you have administered the divine pus and the subtle pus from all of these.
Place a small capillary and delicate fracture in each of the other breaks, make sure to administer treatment according to what you need for its correction.
And it is because not all who have studied that art are skilled in it. And let us now focus on what we have written regarding great fractures.
And if the pannicul (fatty tissue) is contracted when you remove the bone, make sure to take a cloth from it according to the size of the wound, dip it in warm oil and place it over the wound; then take another cloth, either doubled or tripled, dip it in hot wine and oil, and place that over the first cloth, gently pressing it so as not to harm the patient; and finally, apply a lat (likely a type of poultice) over it, and do not bind it tightly unless the wound is very large.
And let this treatment continue for one or two days until you are certain of the safety of the poultice; then remove it and administer medications that promote dryness, such as lint, flour of herbs, powder of roots and aristology, and similar things.
And you should make this powder from the aforementioned medications, which is sprinkled on the affected area after they have dried; and generally, administer to the patient all medicine of good quality from which he abstains and does not bite.
And be mindful according to your virtue that the plague in your treatment be clean; and let there be no impurity of ointment or other; nor do you add severity to it; for when it is applied to the panicle of the brain, it corrupts and kills it, and brings about a severe malady to the patient.
And it happens in the brain, when it is purified and more so when the treatment of it is delayed, and it becomes black on its surface; and therefore consider whether, in the case of the patient, the accidents we have mentioned occur, knowing that it is detrimental to all skill.
If a blackness does not occur from the medication that is placed on it, but rather from the virtue of that medicine that causes that blackness, then you should take some honey and ground oil in small amounts, and with those linements wrap it over the affected area; and then apply cure with the spices for treatment that are appropriate until it is healed.
It appears that the text you've provided is a part of a medical treatise from the Middle Ages, written in a language akin to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Let's continue with the translation:
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
You know that the nose is not broken in one place but rather in two or sometimes in several instances, where each fracture involves a bone, since there are two bones inside it; the break does not occur directly, but results from laceration, torsion, and inflammation.
If one of the two fractures occurs, then you must insert a small instrument into his nose and use the same to stabilize that fracture from inside; likewise, use another instrument to stabilize it from outside, so that the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this for your convenience; be careful not to cause any additional harm during your treatment of the patient's illness.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and the said part does not allow access to it, then you must equalize the pressure at the edge of the wound where the swelling has occurred.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should do it like this.
And on the first day after the fracture, attempt to restore it if possible; otherwise, apply heat or cold treatment for seven days to the affected area with caution.
Then insert a piece of cloth from silk or linen into the nose's opening, if the fracture is in one part, or use two pieces, if the fracture is in two parts, ensuring they are as wide as needed to fill the nasal cavity completely.
He has also recommended some ancient restorative methods where the pieces should be soaked in a border and changed daily, but not visible to me; eventually, I learned that the piece should be dipped in an egg white mixture with flour powder, and then placed inside until the bone is set and the cartilage hardened.
And in some cases, a foreign body may be lodged in the nose, where it should not be, causing pain from the underlying fracture, and preventing breathing.
And this treatment is not necessarily required; and if you wish, you can do it, and if you prefer, you can use cold applications.
And if another complication occurs after applying the poultice, apply a new one to the nose using wax or a cloth dipped in hot oil or vinegar.
If the poultice does not cause a complication, then cover it with a paste made from sesame flour and powdered cloves mixed with egg white, and place your hand over it, but do not press on the nose.
But if the bones of the nose are broken or shattered, then you must carefully remove them with appropriate instruments; and with the cut, apply a cure to it that is nourishing and consolidating, and use suitable plasters.
And if a plague occurs inside the nose, you must treat it by applying hot compresses and administer silver tubes until it is completely healed.
**Chapter IV**
**On the Restoration of the Mandible When Cracked.**
When the jawbone is broken and the fracture is not a severe one, pay attention to whether the break is only on the outside, and not split into two parts, but curved inward at the site of the fracture. In this case, its healing will be light.
And so, if the fracture is on the right side, you must insert your little finger of the left hand into the patient's mouth to support it; and conversely, if the fracture is on the left mandible, then insert the little finger of your right hand; and gently push with that finger to reduce the fracture inward while supporting the outer part of the bone with your other hand. Do this carefully so as not to cause further damage.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, you must then administer extension to both parts according to their correct alignment so that its position can be established.
If there is a loss of teeth due to disruption, then strengthen those which you hope will heal using gold or silver or silk thread; and place a cerot over the broken mandible, and place a doubled cloth over it, and a large, well-made gauze bandage appropriately tied, or a single piece of guaze the length of the mandible; and then secure it from above according to your ability with the ligature, as long as it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and be quiet, and abstain from eating or drinking anything excessive.
And if you estimate that the shape has already been altered in some way, then on the third day, you will cut and separate it; and correct what has already been altered, and apply a poultice of flour, or albumen, or sesame seed meal, since you will have removed the cerot from it, and place a hot compress over it.
And then, once this annex and the dressing are in place and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it, unless you cause it to dislodge until it heals and strengthens the fracture; for this fracture tends to heal in three weeks.
And if, another time, a severe abscess occurs, then apply what we have said about the treatment of this abscess until it heals, and the abscess will be removed.
And if the fracture is a severe one, then consider whether it is a separation of bone or a dislocation, and you must subtily manipulate those dislocations with what seems appropriate for the removal of those from the instruments.
And if the opening of the fracture is too narrow, then you should amplify it with a flébotomi according to the amount of your need.
And when you have maintained those positions and they no longer cause pain, then with the instruments of the plague if it is wide, apply to it one of the plasters that suits it best until it heals.
It appears that the text you provided is a mix of different medical practices and instructions from a medieval period, written in a language resembling Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The section you shared seems to be about treating a specific condition, possibly related to joint pain or gout, based on humors (body fluids) and using various medical tools like cauterization and plasters.
On the restoration of the fork when it is bitten.
When the muscles tear the fork (or bone) from its attachment in front, the fracture is usually caused in one of three ways.
In each case, the fracture is either completely broken off, separated, or divided into two parts that do not occur simultaneously; it is more difficult to restore it; or it occurs in such a way that there are complications, making restoration difficult.
And for that operation, when the fracture is its most complicated, you should have two assistants; one should hold the broken fork in place, while the other stretches the muscle to release the tension on the broken bone.
Then compress the fracture with the hands until it takes the shape required, not leaving any bulges or hollows.
And if you need more extension, wait until the patient stops struggling, and place a piece of cloth or woolen thread under their pressure point; adjust its length according to your need, extend and raise the fork, and tighten it in your hand as they swallow the pain according to what is necessary.
And if you cannot reach the end of the fork to grasp the parts outside, as it has reached the limit, wait until the patient tilts their head, and place a cushion over their neck, supporting on a larger muscle with a smaller pillow.
And the assistant should press on the muscle around the parts still inside while lifting the fork's end towards the fracture, ensuring it is aligned with the bone in its proper place; then, you correct the fracture and hold it in place until it heals.
If you feel any jagged edges of the fork and they are painful, then cut them away and extract the jagged parts to make it easier.
And if it is retained in the bone, you will make an incision with one of the scalpels that you have prepared for this purpose, having previously placed the fork, the instrument that serves to grasp, aside; and this is the form of the instrument:
It resembles a cup in which this is the concavity; and its size will depend on what you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the depth of it.
Make the length of it according to what is possible for the operation; as it has two ends, one end should be wide and the other narrow.
And if the rupture of the plague that you have made when extracting the bone fragment is wide, and it is safe from infection, then you will adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches.
And if the rupture is minor or you fear a post-operative infection, use clean bandages and poultices according to the amount of the wound's separation.
And if an infection occurs after surgery, apply clean bandages with hot oil and vinegar, and place them over the area.
And as long as the bone does not become completely dislocated; and so that you may see the injury each day, when the ligament softens or you see the star already reduced, then you correct it and tighten the bandage.
Then you should restrain the patient's sleep on their back, and each night place a small cushion under their thigh to elevate it above the level of the heart, so that the support of the thigh is raised from the side, and thus the fracture of the furcula is elevated with regard to the muscle; or the arm of the patient bent at the elbow.
And do not loosen the ligament unless it occurs in the vicinity or abscess within 12 days.
Then renew the bandage if you see that it has become loose for him, adjust the tightness and restore it, and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the furcula is healed and coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the most in 28 days, and in some cases in some men it is done in less than that time.
**Chapter VI**
**On the Restoration of Shoulder Fractures**
The blade of the spatula is broken in the lateral part of it, but it is not completely shattered, only the edges are damaged.
And therefore, when the lateral part is broken—and it is broken in the middle part of it—it is not known only by touch, but according to the figure of the fracture, you must force its preparation and reduce it back to its natural shape in every way with all the skill at your disposal.
And then place a powder made from bone meal and honey on the wound; also use a powdered cloth, duplicated; and place a thin sheet of table over it according to the quantity of the spatula, or a little more.
If the sheet is concave in any part of the spatula, then you should fill that concavity with a stopgap and return the sheet to its proper position.
And then tighten it firmly over the tongue of the hernia, using constriction and the stability of the sheet so that it does not move from its place.
And consider the tension each day; whenever it becomes softened, tighten it again and adjust the sheet if it moves from its place.
And keep the patient still on their side.
And the spatula will be restored in 10 days or 25th (day).
And therefore when this number of days is completed, you will dissolve the tension, and you will know for certain that it is one of the bones from which the hernia originated, without fear or concern about its dissolution.
And if you proceed from the location of the infected bone and place a chain there, then you split it open and hold it, and act as we have said in the fracture of the tailbone of the saddle with cautery if this should happen.
**Chapter VII.**
**On the Restoration of a Broken Foot.**
A broken foot sometimes breaks in the middle part and it takes time to heal; but the ends of the bones may knit together, though they are crushed and splintered.
And one of the accidents when the middle part of the foot is broken is that it inclines to the sides and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, and severe vomiting; and it is manifest within the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient be placed on their back, and a cushion be positioned between their shoulders; then press the muscles, adjust the ribs to the two costates, and perform the operation with subtlety in accordance with every manner possible and appropriate for this, so that the bone structure returns to its original form.
Then apply a plaster and stopgap using a fine sheet of sage or calamine, resembling a drape, and wrap it around the broken bone without causing further harm; gently bend the splint towards the back several times, and tighten it with due care; constantly consider the splint throughout the process, and when it softens, tighten it.
And if it becomes necessary to cause the displacement of the bone due to corrosion, pressure, pain, or abscess in the area, then cut and remove the splint, eliminate the plaster, and correct what has occurred through the means of healing; reduce the plaster as needed; and adjust the stricture until it heals.
Chapter VIII.
On the restoration of broken ribs.
You know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur lightly, but in places where they attach to the spine; and the ends of their joints, from which they depart, do not cause any pain to those parts except through their cartilaginous nature. And the knowledge of him is not concealed from your senses, as you inquire into him with your eyes.
And the restoration is such that it heals the fracture as well as possible, according to its nature, by swallowing it, and then applying a plaster and strengthening the broken bone with a splint, if necessary.
If the fracture of the ribs is moving towards the parts within, it causes severe pain and piercing for the patient, just as piercing occurs to one who has pleured, and because of this, the bone puts pressure on its veil; it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of very bitter mucus; and this is a difficult cure.
And ancient remedies are ingeniously designed for that evil disease.
And of them, it is said: cover that which prevents food from the malady that generates inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the rupture is pushed out.
We should avoid this in order that it does not cause a slight delay in generating a cure, if it happens; and if it already has happened, then help is at hand.
They also said that certain remedies should be applied to relieve the pain and then suck out with strength; it is similar to reasoning, but nevertheless, there is fear that the wind may push away the excess due to weakness.
They also said: cover the place with cloth that has been immersed in hot oil, and place poultices between the ribs until it is filled, making a seal as you wrap it according to its shape; and thus it is cured of malady from food and by pleurisy, both internally and externally.
And if the disease causes severe constriction that cannot be endured, and the bone punctures painfully, fear for the patient; then cut away over the affected area, expose the broken rib, and place your hand above it to preserve the integrity, remembering the procedure, and cut through the bone easily, and extract it.
And if the two lips of the wound are large, they should be sewn together, and then treated with plasters until it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs inside, cut it open and insert dust in olive oil and place it over the area; this will cure the disease within the abscess.
And it is recommended to change the position on which he sleeps until it is healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of the fractured spine of the back and neck.
Sometimes, the bones of the neck can fracture and their attachment (or articular connection) can be affected, resembling the fractured spine (or vertebrae) in the back. And when this happens to anyone and you want to know if they will recover, consider: if their muscles are already softened, stunned, and paralyzed, and they cannot move or strain those parts, and when you press on them with your fingers or a needle, they do not feel pain, then you know that they will not recover, and in such cases, it is fatal.
And if they feel constriction and pain in the joints and punctures, then know that the root of the bone is safe and the disease will heal with treatment.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck resembling this and want to know if it will heal, consider the patient's feet.
When you notice that the pain has already subsided, pay attention to the part affected, and when sitting down, they experience increased mobility and expulsion, but sometimes they rise up on their legs and want to urinate but cannot, then know that it is serious, and thus do not try to treat them.
If no specific cause occurs for those symptoms, the cause is better and more easily resolved.
And the treatment for it is to pierce at the seat of the abscess with a hot cautery or oil-soaked cloth; apply this to the affected area several times a day until the abscess is sedated by the cautery.
And now apply a comfortable and firm bandage, tighten it around the affected area, and instruct the patient to rest and maintain tranquility, avoiding sleep on the painful side until the condition improves.
If a fracture occurs in the tibia or any other bone that has already separated, you must clean it by removing the dead tissue and hold up the bone; then adjust the two edges of the wound, suturing them if necessary; and treat the infected flesh with care until it heals.
If the last part of the bone is broken and it is the end of the limb, you must then insert your left hand's thumb into the gap between the broken bones and try to align them as best as possible using your other hand; then apply a splint and bandage over it, if needed, and tighten it.
And if you feel broken bones within it, then you must bind them and hold them in place, treating the wound with the appropriate care until it heals.
**Chapter X**
On the restoration of the bowel.
The bones of the bowels are often broken, and when they break, the fracture is no more than communication in the extremities of those parts, extending along their length and declining inward; and it causes pain to the patient at the site and a shock to the limb when fractured.
And the restoration is that you place your hand over that area which is above the fracture, as the figure of it.
And if the fracture is at the extremity of it, then you should insert that according to what you have been taught by an equal art, as it is assembled to its natural figure.
If the fracture is in the length or extends inward towards the parts below, then you should make the patient lie on his stomach, so that you can prepare for the restoration of that fracture. And so when you have wrapped it up, place a plaster on top of it, and then place another sheet of wood or canvas over it, tightening with strength, without fear of fracture or removal of the stitch.
And wrap the concave space with something that fills it, as it takes on the shape of the body according to its firmness, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or their side.
If there is a risk of gangrene, you must stop the spread of it and the restoration process until the gangrenous part is sedated, then apply what has been described before; then return to the restoration of it and tighten it well with a bandage.
And if it occurs in the bones or they are broken, then you must treat them.
Chapter XI.
On the restoration of the broken assistant (or possibly, 'adjutori' refers to a specific body part, in which case it could mean 'On the healing of the broken [body part]').
The adjutori is what lies between the thigh and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, its restoration is in one of two ways, one of which is to take a flat piece of wood of moderate thickness according to this form...
And it should be tied at both ends of the ligament, and then suspended from an elevated position.
Then continue the treatment on a side; and, afterward, extend the broken arm over the wood until it reaches the thickest part of the wood at which point its curvature is attached.
And then suspend over that some grave cause, or the minister extend that to the parts left; and approach the physician who binds the fracture with his hands at the same time, until the fracture returns as it should.
Another way is that the patient be turned over on their back and suspend the doctor's hand on the collarbone with ligatures; then command two ministers, one of them to hold what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other to hold the pus below them; and each of them extend themselves to the respective parts.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then tighten your hold on the fracture with ligatures and on that other one with another ligature; and each of the two ministers extends themselves to their respective parts.
And therefore if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then it is necessary that half of the ligature be placed on the tendon and the other part supports the fracture towards the shoulder.
And if it appears that the fracture is close to the joint, then cover that ligament over that place and over that joint.
Apply this with ease and care, and as it is wrapped according to how it should be covered and applied properly, then tighten it if there is no risk of ulceration carefully.
If there is a risk of ulceration, then do not tighten the wrap after the seventh day, and place on it woolen thread soaked in vinegar and olive oil to soothe the inflammation, and then you can tighten it.
And the manner of tightening it is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then wrap new cloth around the plaster; and adjust the arm on that support, and place your hand open on its muscle.
And unfold the cloth and tighten it on the arm support to keep the arm in place without any hindrance to the broken bone's healing, unless there is some reason to prevent it.
And then use stitches.
And it is that you should place this stitch over the fracture, and make it thicker than the other stitches; and between each stitch, leave the distance of the said fragment, and the length of the stitches according to the break, adding three parts from the total measurement.
Then tighten the stitches with the strainer as mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is that your strain over the place of the fracture should be tighter. And the tighter the fracture, the less the strain.
And thus, you should adjust the position of the stitches and the strain as we have said in the time when you restore the member to its proper place, then you are done.
And if you fear gangrene, then relax the tension and remove the stitches within the seventh day as we have said.
And then consider the dressing on all parts for three days to prevent any further damage or inflammation; or restrict food from reaching the affected member due to excessive tension; and thus correct everything as we have said.
If you are certain that no further cause will arise, then do not relax the ligature but leave it for three days or more.
And the patient's rest should be on their back, and their hands over their stomach.
And place a warm, moist poultice full of wool on the broken member, and consider at all times during night or day that the bandage is not loosened or dissolved, or that the dressing becomes softened; thus correct it with your skill.
And hold the patient's food as we have ordered before, so that the food is thin at first and then gradually becomes thicker as it is consumed. And now you will notice that the patient's food becomes thicker.
The custom of the assistant and the leg support is to tighten them for 10 days, and you will notice that they should be relaxed and have baths administered and ointments applied that rectify this condition.
And if the fracture is fresh and inflamed, you should not loosen the bandages or remove the stitches for one to two months.
Chapter .xii.
**Restoration of Arm Fractures**
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the humerus and the radius; of these, one is smaller, known as the little finger bone, and the other is larger and supports the little finger, extending upward.
And if the larger or smaller bowstring is broken, they are usually cut at the same time.
And when the smaller bowstring breaks above, its restoration is easier, and its healing is faster.
And when the bowstring breaks below, the fracture is severe, and its healing is difficult.
And the worst case is when two bones break at the same time.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the smaller bowstring above, it is convenient for the doctor, as its restoration requires only minor extension and can be easily healed.
But if the larger bowstring is what breaks, then it requires more violent extension.
And if the two incisions are together cut, then be sure that you press the most powerful external pressure.
And be sure that you place your hand in such a way as to restore and extend it over a cushion, and the wrist of your hand should be above, rather than below, all other parts, and the acupressure point should be lower than all other points, and the pain should be centered on a well-prepared cushion.
And place a cushion in front of them at the appropriate height or angle, so that the pain does not increase.
Then the minister extends their arm away from their body with their hand or instrument, and another minister extends theirs similarly.
Then the doctor should align the bone within such that it reduces according to the best shape possible.
And if in the treatment of the bone there are obstacles, you must perforate and reduce all the weight to its proper place using your virtue.
And if there appears to be a separate condition that affects the bone and does not respond to your hopes of restoration, then you must end it and preserve that according to the manner we have spoken of above.
If the fracture is due to a wound, and you have already dealt with this particular case, then take care of that.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you must line it with a cloth made of rosy oil and white wax, with greater care between specific and subtle points, and tighten the cloth over that slight opening until the abscess subsides; then remove the cerot and apply a plaster prepared from powdered earth mixed with oil of hou, and place stars; and let the star be the one that is paused over that fracture, both more to the side and stronger.
And you should know that the names of the bones in the arm are seen in the major arrangements, either in a single fracture or in two fractures together.
Then apply your pressure over the site of the fracture with greater and more intense force, and as the tightness around the parts above the fracture or around the lower parts of it increases, release the pressure slightly more gently according to how the patient's pain subsides at the beginning of the chapter.
And the bandages that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough, and the thread by which they are tightened should be of the appropriate thickness between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
And consider the member and its ligaments after some days. And if any cause occurs that requires correction, and as the pain occurs in the member, then cover it with a water-filled poultice until the pressure subsides.
And you should not restrict the member until it rests, then return the tightness appropriately.
And if the tightness has already been softened and the bone has healed and appears like those, then correct everything with your virtue.
And consider whether the nutrition to the member is blocked due to excess tightness, so you must soften it a little and leave it for some days until the nutrition reaches it, then strengthen it appropriately.
If the patient does not have any of the causes we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to loosen it within a few days or around those times.
And hold the patient's hand with the virtue of its agile movement, and make them sleep on their back.
And you know that this fracture is healed in 30 days or 33 days, or often it is healed in 28 days, and all this depends on the arrangement of the complications and the disposition of the virtue.
Chapter XIII
On the Restoration of Fractures of the Hand and Fingers.
You know that the hand and fingers often suffer fractures, and unless they are caused by sudden trauma, they do not heal quickly.
And when a hand experiences fracture or dislocation, you must ensure the patient remains calm and then gently place the hand over the affected area.
And the physician should carefully straighten broken bones and align them so that they are congruent with one another.
And then cover it with a plaster and stoppers, otherwise an infection may occur; and return the bandage from above according to the size of the place, and you have already wrapped that in cloth suitable.
If the fracture is in the deep parts of the hand, and it makes a crackling sound like cloth, and command the patient to tighten that part of their crushed hand; then wrap a long cloth around it tightly.
And the bandage of cloth over which the body is lifted, so that the body is applied to the palm; and tighten it according to what you cover.
If the fracture is in the external parts, then cover it with bandages and another bandage on the part left in the palm, so that the hand is covered and straightened; and then tighten the stricture, thus as the hand is revolved to its natural position between the said ligaments.
If you suffer a fracture in one of the bones of the hand, if it is the little finger, it should be wrapped according to its shape and then tightly secured with the palm; if you wish, you can also place a small right-angled splint to elevate the fracture and prevent further damage.
If the fracture is in one of the other fingers, for example in the middle finger, or in the index, or in the ring, or in the little finger (as mentioned before), it should be wrapped and secured to the corresponding finger; or all fingers can be wrapped together in succession, which is better; or a small splint can be placed over it, as we said regarding the little finger.
And consider, in your restoration, the position of the abscess, carefully and oppositely - according to your judgment - as you treat any cause from those mentioned, as it is described in detail.
Chapter XIV.
On the restoration of the broken bone in the thigh.
The bone in the thigh moves and breaks, extending to the wound according to how it turns into the opening and pus dominates.
And the restoration of it is done thus: the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament left on the fracture, and the patient is positioned on their stomach and face.
Then the minister extends all the ligament to its part according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
If it is desired to straighten the thigh, then the ligament should be pulled towards the knee joint, allowing its extension, and another ligament left on the fracture.
And if it seems that the fracture is complete, then do make the ligament proper to the joint, and extend it to the adjacent parts.
Then the surgeon should equalize the bones with their hands as they return to their natural position, and the bone is joined by a good connection; then it is necessary to cover that with plaster and compression, otherwise the member will become infected. If it happens in the infected member, then leave it for a few days until the infection subsides, and afterwards return to your treatment.
The compression should be done thus: it is necessary to cover the fracture with a hard bandage, and fold it two or three times, removing the excess; then wrap the leg until it reaches the thigh and the root of the limb.
And insert a long strip of cloth between the thigh and leg near the joint, bringing both ends together from either side, then turn over the cloth and thigh so that what is superfluous from the bandage falls away.
Then place your hand on the thigh at the site of that fracture, and place one of those stones over the bone in the leg.
Then fill the void between the thigh and leg with soft drapes to cause the constriction to coagulate.
Then begin to apply strong compression from the middle over the site of the fracture with three or four turns, and as you stretch away from the site of the fracture, your compression should be weaker and lighter and more moist.
Then extend both ends of the strip to either side until it reaches the ankle of the foot, and tighten both ends of the cloth from the other side so that the ligament does not slip from its place.
And then apply the stretch over that area so that it does not cause corruption, pustule, or inflammation similar to these; and if any cause of those arises, then take care to dislodge it, and correct what has happened immediately, as we have said before.
If there is pain in the bone due to pressure, then cover that area as best as you can; otherwise, apply a poultice and treat it, and cure what preceded the recollection until it is healed.
And in some cases, this fracture of the thigh is so strong that it cannot be adjusted with bandages, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
However, in the restoration of it in such a manner, do not cause the patient to limp; and if it is restored on its own, then another method should be applied to the other leg, because it is necessary that the injured leg does not limp.
And you should know that the condition is strong in 40 days or a month or slightly more, and all of this depends on the diversity of the complications and other dispositions.
**Chapter XV**
**On the Restoration of the Broken Rib of the Right Side**
You should know that the fracture of the rib on the right side often ends in prolonged pain, frequently accompanied by inflammation and stiffness.
If it happens that the fracture is not just a crack or break in its parts, but rather a severe fracture, this is a great plague or woe, and everything has been said about its pain.
And its restoration is such that it should be equal to what was broken in its parts, as it is joined and combined according to what is possible through harmony and ease of fabrication.
And then apply a poultice and place it over that round wound, if needed; tighten around it with a strap as appropriate.
And then consider all the dispositions we have recommended for other fractures, thus with great care and in a similar manner to those that resist any occurrence that could hinder their healing.
Chapter XVI.
On the Restoration of the Broken Leg.
You know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is thick and is called the thigh bone; and the other is thin, and is called the fibula.
And it happens in some cases of fracture that occur to the two bones of the arm, and for this reason restoration is made to them equally as with the restoration of the arm altogether, and the operation on one is the same.
If two bones are broken at the same time, the leg is completely shattered.
And if the broken bone is a subtle fracture, the leg is shattered in a different way.
If the broken bone is very thick and deep, you will see a bulge there, and it is one of those causes that are not easily cured.
Then apply extension, compression, and traction to the bones according to the patient's condition.
However, if the leg fracture is open and has not yet been stabilized, extension should be less and more gentle, and it will be helped by your skill.
And in the leg is a cause for operation on the arm, and when you bind the steels and complete all the surgical procedures, you will take wooden splints from which the causes that are left over in single pieces have been removed, and they are made entirely of palm leaves; attach those to the ones that require slight pressure, and be careful not to use your hands, and the length of those should be according to the length of the leg, and from the outside inward to where it is most swollen.
And then wrap each drape around the limb in two folds according to its length, placing one over the joint of the leg from one side and the other from the other side, ensuring they are well inside at the foot's base.
Then secure the two splints at three points on each extremity and in the middle point, so that with this structure the limb is prevented from bending at the joint, and it remains in a stable position.
And now a splint of wood is applied according to the length of the limb, and it is placed over the splints to prevent any further movement.
Especially ensure that this is done in the case of a fracture, and when it is truly necessary.
And then, each day, consider the state of the limb and study it thoroughly, observing any signs of detachment or inflammation or other similar issues; and when any such cause arises, immediately apply treatment to it until it is healed.
Chapter .xvii.
On the fracture of the talus bone and other bones of the foot and toes.
The talus bone does not suffer a fracture entirely; sometimes, it is the bones of the foot that suffer fractures; and the toes rarely experience fractures, but if they do, it is due to a lack of proper disposition.
And if the bones of the foot do fracture and these bones become dislocated among themselves, then the patient should lie on their side with their foot prepared thus as it heals.
Then place one foot on top of what is elevated among these bones, and press those, and squeeze, and interlock them until they return to their proper places.
And then apply a plaster and bandage over it, leaving the foot's belly on a small table with two plates placed beneath.
Then tighten that on the foot at its proper level, since you have wrapped it with cloth and other causes of which you are in need.
And as the condition passes three or four days later, you will loosen the ligament, since you will find the bones entangled, either broken or dislocated, and the operation on them is just as well known.
But if it is that some of them are broken, then restore them, and engage those just as you have learned in the restoration of the said parts of the hand. And then apply this splint according to the length of the finger, and bend it slightly on each side; and place the foot on this table which is now properly positioned, and tighten that at its proper level.
If what is broken from the bones is two or three pieces or more, then place your hand on each side of the quantity wrapped in lion's drapes, tighten the table at the bottom of the foot, and stand on one of the table's heads to make an opening in the foot's belly for good retention.
And it is advisable for you that you do not neglect to consider all the causes mentioned above regarding other fractures from accidents we have discussed; be prepared for any accident concerning this matter.
**Capitol .xviii.** (Capital XVIII) - This likely refers to a chapter or section title, indicating the eighteenth installment of a medical or scientific treatise.
**On Fracture of the Hip Bone, Shin Bone, and Male Genital Bone.** - A brief title suggesting a section discussing fractures in specific bones: the hip bone (femur), shin bone (tibia), and male genital bone (not explicitly specified but likely referring to the penis or scrotum).
When the hip bone is fractured, make a cut in the soft tissue at the site of the fracture, then gently tilt the bone to align it with the other leg slightly, and hold it behind.
And then the midwife fills the cavity with hot compresses, applying them to the affected area as needed; and the woman is made to bend, slowly raising her legs one by one, until all the fluid has drained from the cavity in front of the opening of the wound and the fractured bone heals.
Then place poultices on the patient's back, and when they want to urinate, help them remove the compresses and let them urinate, then replace and return the compresses according to the same method used at the beginning, and return to their original position.
And do this for seven days or around that time, as it is restored.
And if you wish, take a small bladder of a sheep and place a tube of canvas over the wound; then insert the entire bladder into the cavity, and blow air through the tube until the bladder is inflated inside the wound, as the fracture heals.
And then it should be filled with a compress and left for some days, as we have recommended, until it heals.
And when the bone of the thigh of a man or woman is broken, then in the restoration and healing process, we apply what we have recommended for the hip bone.
And what is right should not be overlooked in these close fractures, and there is little risk, especially to those who have some knowledge and understanding of this my book; for that fracture reveals to you in the greatest dispositions for restoration and in the stricture of the bone, and thus understand well.
But in the case of a man's scrotum when it is broken, take a cold compress from above and place it on that; then wrap it with cloth, and have it wrapped, and lay it for three days or so, and it will heal.
Capital .XIX.
On the restoration of broken bones when they are wounded.
It is convenient for him who suffers a fracture due to a wound, especially if the bone is large, such as the hip or leg bone, or similar to those that require flaying and amputation at that time, as the conditions for amputation in your case or by testimony of others have indicated, as we have said above.
And if the wound exudes pus, then you must cover it, retaining the pus within, as you bandage it with clean cloth, if other causes do not require otherwise.
Then, commence the restoration of the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, unless gangrene occurs.
If you experience an apoplexy (stroke) cautiously, then leave its restoration within the ninth day, until the apoplexy has subsided, and do not approach it on the third day or the fourth of every month, for you would cause further harm.
If a bone breaks off prominently at an exposed joint, cover it to reduce the fragment and secure it in place with your hands as easily and briefly as possible.
If the extension is beyond your ability and the condition of the fracture requires a specific tool, then reduce it with your hands using this instrument; an instrument made of metal, with a length of seven or eight digits, and a width proportional to the extent of the injury; and for this reason, it is necessary for the doctor to take from these three or four, according to the amount required for the cure in every type of fracture.
And it should be made in such a way, and with such thin material that it does not easily bend during the operation.
And it should be of sharp extremity where its margin is in their extremities; and it should extend from above with great tension, and from below within the parts.
And this is the form of it:
And it is called "voluntary hernia" in Greek, hence the term "paleta pauca.
To ensure that the sharp extremity of the hernia is elevated above the prominent bone's extremity.
And it draws in one go as the bone returns, and is wrapped with some tension.
And therefore it tries to intertwine the ends of the fracture between them; and if the broken end is thin, and does not grip the instrument for a good grasp, then you must insert the end of that bone within the instrument's reach.
If you cannot return the bone to its original position, cut open that part which we have mentioned to it by means of scissors, or saw off that part in any way possible.
Then, cut off the one that is embedded in the bone with rough edges and small notches.
And when the bone is returned and the malady is reduced, it will cause intense pain, knowing that the bone has not yet returned to its natural place; and then you will have achieved great relief for the patient.
Once your restoration on the bone is complete and you immerse it in a black antiseptic solution, especially during summer, do not cover it with bandages or any other material that could cause putrefaction and corrosion.
And then apply arrows at the appropriate times during the complete restoration of the bone, leaving the wound exposed so that you can cut through it with scissors and use bandages according to the extent of the wound.
And be very careful not to strain the wound towards the fracture, as you have seen foolish doctors do this, leading to the patient's death or severe corruption and putrefaction, which is unhealthy. And if the swelling is light, soft, different from the swelling of other fractures, then...
And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you are concerned about further complications from those previously mentioned, and you feel pain in that area, do not press on it, but rather apply a hard wrap of coarse cloth instead of arrows and tighten it to those parts.
And when the pain has been present for one or two days and a fever is generated in it, then remove the covering you had placed over that affected area, and administer some medicine, such as we usually use to treat pains, thus applying tetracycline and similar substances to it.
It is appropriate for you to clean the wound and examine the plague each day and evening until it is consolidated and healed, ensuring that the member is prepared in such a way that the pus can drain from it easily.
If the plague persists for many days and is not consolidated or drained from the arm, then you should know that these are strategies of the small pox in order to prevent the plague from spreading everywhere it tries. And from those strategies, the ones that are distinct and separable should be removed, while the ones that are not separable and cause the member to become inflamed and painful, you should incise them by making cuts as is possible for you.
And if the wound is infected with pus or gangrene, which are signs of corruption and putrefaction, then you should treat each one of these as you deem appropriate for the cure, which is described in detail in its chapter.
And regarding what I must do and you present your case: when the flesh is torn, it protrudes over the member, resembling the bones of the thigh and its support, and does not show any attraction to movement, nor should you attempt to extract it, as this may cause death; leave it be until it becomes gangrenous, which can take several days or even weeks; and treat the wound if you see it, but leave it alone if not.
**Chapter XX.**
**On the cure for nodules that occur at the site of a fracture.**
Motas visible incidents occur during the healing process of a fracture, especially near joints, and this is due to the shape of the member; thus it severely hinders the member's natural function.
Then consider if the displacement is recent and apply those medicines that have stopped it so far, such as aloes, herbs, and other similar ones; take some or all of these, and place those with a stiptic effect, or albumen from animal blood, or agerum, over the displacement in a poultice, and constrict them around it with good compression.
And observe the tightness; do not remove it for several days; then loosen it and apply another treatment, as long as the displacement persists; or place a sheet of lead over it, since lead has the property of reducing any swelling in the members.
If the displacement has already turned into a stone and the tightness is due to necessity, then cut it off with a sharp instrument, incise the superfluous and protruding part, or remove it with a surgical hook, as long as it remains undischarged; and treat that until it heals.
Chapter .xxi.
On the restoration of fractures, once restored, it is then wrapped in a soft and clean cloth according to its nature.
When a bone fracture is restored, it is then wrapped in a soft and clean cloth, but its use should be for legitimate reasons: one of which is to ensure the solution of the ligament and the proper union without any hindrance; or due to excessive tightness of the ligaments that prevents the flow of nutrition to the affected member; or because of excessive sweating; or because of superfluous movement at an inappropriate time; or because of a constriction of blood in the patient's body, caused by weakness.
The treatment for this involves restricting the patient's food and making their body gentle, so that the blood is not concentrated in it; baths should be administered, and gauze and spices applied.
And then place your hand over the member, so that the grip draws to it much nutritious fluid, or continue washing with lukewarm water until the nutrient flows and returns to its natural form.
Chapter XXII.
On the healing of fractured bones when they are restored incorrectly and the operation of covering them is prohibited.
When it happens to the already restored member, then the healing of it from tortuosity and protrusion on the fractured bone should be done, and this is for the form of the member; however, the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, as long as you receive the permission of one who considers that member newly fractured.
There have indeed been many foolish doctors and healers who have done this on our earth, and this operation is highly disdained, losing much to great fear the sign of which is fatal.
If recent claudication and nodulation are present, then it should be treated with tepid water in which gentile herbs such as althaeas and roots of licorice, and similar ones, have been soaked; and make a moist poultice with it, or use a thick paste of althaea root mixed with wool grease or oil of myrtle, and apply it; or use fresh fat figs pressed into the shape of columbar women, resembling those used in certain medicines known as softening consolidants.
And sometimes it is dissolved with frequent light friction applied to the most moist parts, and the affected member should be moved in every direction at regular intervals.
If the deformity has already progressed and is hard and twisted, becoming a stone, and its removal by surgery is necessary, then it should be treated by draining the pus that has accumulated and dissolving the continuation of the bone; it should be cut with delicate scissors, easing the tension in that joint.
Chapter .xxiii.
On the subject of dislocation.
Dislocation is the dislocation of one of the joints in its place, which prevents movement and distorts the shape of the limb, causing severe pain and injury to the patient.
Therefore, when any dislocation occurs, it should be reduced as soon as possible, and if it is delayed, the joint becomes stiff and its reduction becomes difficult.
And so, if it is not correctly reduced while the joint is stiff, it causes spasms and severe pain.
If this occurs, you must then perform a flabotomy on the patient and place something between the dislocated joint to relieve the strain; then immerse the limb in warm water and oil and reduce it gently.
And every member should be treated with the remedy of which the recollection will come to its place.
And you have already ordered the joints of the dislocation as previously mentioned in the fracture; from the upper part of the body entering into the lower part, it is necessary to pay attention.
Chapter .XXIIII.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the lower jaw.
If both mandibles are dislocated and there is no bleeding, the displacement of both occurs in one of two ways: either they are slightly removed from their places with little movement, or they are completely dislocated and swollen, so that saliva from the wound cannot exit, and he cannot open his mouth nor close it, and his tongue is wrapped around its own shape.
When the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its proper place on its own without any specific cause.
If the dislocation is complete and severe, it is necessary to gently reduce the dislocated part without delay.
And the practitioner should have hold of the patient's head, and the doctor inserts his thumb into the root of the dislocated jaw within the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both thumbs, if the dislocation is on both sides, and all other fingers are outside, which they equal; and commands the patient to stop moving his jaws and release them from any strain; and the doctor equally holds the jaw and gently pushes it back until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially when both jaws are simultaneously dislocated, then apply evaporation with water and oil until a gentle reduction of both is achieved, without delaying the reduction of either one completely, as we have said above.
And so when we return and find them all engulfed, and the opening of the malady is closed and not relieved, then place a cerot on those drape powders, made of wax and oiled, and make it easy with soft bindings.
And the patient should lie on their back with their head between two pillows, so that they do not cough to either the right or left side; and do not force them to eat more than they wish. When the pains are relieved and the jaws unclenched, then they can eat what they desire.
And this should be facilitated, and do not work on the opening of the mouth during eating, drinking, or coughing, as long as the jaw is unclenched and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce two jaws that are dislocated in any moment and not returned to their proper places, then fever and constant vomiting occur, and the patient's belly is greatly strained, and they vomit pure bile.
And when you see this, you will know it is a loss; and many times the man who suffers from this in X days dies.
**Chapter 25**
**On the Reduction of a Dislocated Furcula and Extremity of Muscle.**
The furcula is not dislocated from the latissimus dorsi by its attachment to the leg; however, sometimes it is dislocated at the distal part and this is indicated by sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms. And then tighten the area with your palm using a firm pressure, as it will return.
And then apply pressure to that dressing and compress it firmly.
If the end of the limb that is affected is not displaced but continues to be sore, then it should be reduced and bandaged as we have described and according to your equipment.
And then apply pressure to that dressing, and compress it, and command the patient to remain still and at rest until it is healed.
In this cure, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXIII.
On the reduction of muscle displacement.
You should know that muscle is not dislocated but in three ways, one of which is displaced at the attachment to the bone at the joint.
And the second is that it is displaced at the attachment of the muscle, and this is done carefully; and it is not dislocated at the rear attachments through the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front attachments by the nerves.
And it is most commonly displaced and comes out at the attachment on the inside of the thigh, especially in those places where there is little flesh, it is slightly displaced; but more frequently in those where there is much flesh, it comes out with difficulty.
And many people suffer from accidents due to a blow or fall, and the muscle of the affected part is torn from its attachment, it becomes swollen, and it is treated in this way that it has already been dislocated.
Then understand that your breath enters here while you are pressed upon by it, and then you will proceed with the treatment of it.
And it is known that dislocation occurs when the tendon slips from its place; so you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, as you find diversity among them; and you find in the head of the muscle a concavity and leave the tendon slipped after touching the head of the muscle thus as if by a wound, and the patient cannot return his hand to its normal position nor move it without pain.
If it is dislocated in the foot or ankle and you find clear signs of impact, and it is not hidden.
And from this dislocation, light reduction is done when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the patient's hand to its place; then he places his fingers under the tendon, and lifts the joint with strength to its position, and the minister raises the patient's hand and extends it; and then he lets go so that it returns lightly.
It is not possible to provide a line-by-line translation without the full context and proper understanding of the specific dialect used in the text. However, based on the given excerpt, here is a best-guessed translation:
And then position the patient so that they are lying on their back, and place them with their testicles hanging down, waiting for them to be lubricated between relaxation and contraction; then the doctor places his foot over the expectant area, raises the head of the muscle towards the vertical, pulls the hand of the patient away from the parts below, and another assistant holds the patient's testicles so that they are not pulled from their position, for as soon as it relaxes, it returns to its place.
And if you wish, reduce the second in this manner: make present a man who is longer than the patient, and place him on that side, then insert his muscle between the testicles of the patient and raise the testicles up to the parts above until the patient is suspended in air; another assistant pulls the hand of the patient from the parts below their belly. If the patient is lighter, then make sure that nothing else causes it to be suspended, for then it becomes serious, as the dislocation returns quickly.
And it is reduced in another manner: a long stick is placed on the ground with its head shaped like a mortar's pile, neither too thick nor too thin; then it is positioned under the patient; the pain stands according to the length of the stick, and the hand of the one who applies it extends to the parts on either side; and the body part extends from the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place at speed.
And if the reduction is difficult due to all the aforementioned causes, use this cure: take a stick whose length is equal to the distance between two arms (two cubits), and its thickness from the elbow down should be four digits, and shape it in this manner:
And place lion's fur around the head of the stick to prevent it from damaging the pain.
And then it is paused, the patient's thigh, and the hand or arm is extended over the leg within the spaces left, and the leg is wrapped over the helper, the arm, and the end of the hand.
It is then paused, the arm over a scale according to its length, and the hand is extended within the spaces left, and the other side is suspended from the other part, so that the joint is brought together within a little while.
And when the treatment of the patient is completed according to any method that is possible for you, and it is observed that you pause the pressure of the thread with a hope of wool in an equal amount; then prepare a plaster with powder from mills mixed with egg album over all the muscles, so they are revolved upon it, and the thread is tightened around the pressure at a decent place; and the ligament is revolved over the plaster, and the hand of the patient is attached to its collarbone, and it is left, and the hand of the patient is not moved for seven days.
And ensure that the patient's diet is restricted, as long as the member is supported, for it is lighter on the healing of the injury.
Then gradually increase the diet and exercise; if it is stopped and not softened, then healing has already occurred.
If the joint is dislocated due to humidity that occurs to it or another cause, then ensure that appropriate cautery is administered with three tools, as mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
And if all this is done and after five days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the bandages and tightness are reduced on him a few times, but it is not secured and he cannot raise that arm due to its nerves, which are at the top of the muscle, already damaged or stretched or softened, then know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
From the dislocation of that which is affected, you must reduce the foot and ankle or the joints behind, the reduction is done with pressure and extension of the limbs, so that it returns.
And both these structures should be managed, and care taken until they are healed.
If the healing becomes more difficult in the member and the movements are delayed, then the disease uses frequent baths to alleviate this gravity and return it to its original state.
Chapter 27.
On the treatment of hip dislocation.
You know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; it is dislocated entirely, most notably in front of the rear part, and the dislocation of it is not concealed by any swelling or touch, according to some figure being dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip, this is declared manifestly to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or touch its muscle.
And cover them with pillows, and reduce the dislocation as soon as it approaches the safe limit, for if it reaches the safe limit, reduction becomes difficult, and it is not easily healed; especially when it occurs in the back parts, for it is worse than all other types of dislocations, causing great pain, and often leads to death.
And the restoration of the dislocation, when it is possible to reduce it, involves extending the patient's hand with two assistants, expanding their legs, and the doctor placing his hands on the patient's thighs and pushing the joint back into place using the fingers of one hand or the edge of the palm of the other, until it returns to its normal position.
If the dislocation is in the front parts, then return the hand by bending it with the doctor striking the thigh with the edge of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply violent extension and strong motion.
And indeed, two assistants stretch their arms, and each hold this extension for a proper measure to avoid haste.
Then slowly rotate the arms through all parts, as it is wrapped with a long, folded cloth over their hand, or ligament.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he applies some oil to it to prevent those causes that lead to stiffness in the joint, and then gently pushes and rubs the joint until it returns to its place.
Then return the intestine to its cavity, which is pressed onto the paste in which it is stuck and sealed with white of egg, and extract it gently from constriction, then suspend the arm from the collarbone and leave it for several days.
Then it becomes loose, and thus if the joint is formed in its place, you loosen the ligament from it and leave that.
And if you see the joint is not tight, repeat the application of the plaster and lubricant, leaving it for some days until it is detached, then remove it carefully.
If it is a case of severe inflammation and the joint is in a state of movement, then apply moisture in the form of baths and gentle friction, and keep the affected area elevated until the swelling subsides; or, if it involves lubricating a grassy joint, then place a compress, leaving it for a day and night. Then secure that compress and immerse the affected part in a bath; when it is clean, repeat the friction of the joint with gentle, warm friction, applying it three times daily until movement ceases. in the bath, until it is relaxed.
And if you wish, place your hand over that wet and scalded wound edge and press down on it; do this several times, as that wound is moist and it will help to reduce it in size.
Chapter 28.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
In some cases, the hand's joint is dislocated, and its reduction upon displacement is delicate; conversely, other joints may be more robust, yet it is crucial to act swiftly during reduction in the moment of dislocation, lest the location become stiff or develop a bruise due to cauterization.
And the reduction of the dislocation involves placing the patient's hand on a table and extending their arm, while the doctor places his or her hand over the joint, pressing it back into its proper place.
However, it is necessary to consider if the palm of the hand has already been placed on the patient's abdomen, then the illness rests the back of the hand on a table in front of the extension and reduction; and if dislocation has occurred before, the position of the hand from within over the table, so that the doctor's hand may grasp upon that proximity of the joint.
And therefore, if this returns soon, it is good; otherwise, tighten the bandage gently, allowing the hernia to recede, and do not be concerned, as long as it does not cause suffering or hinder the reduction of the hernia over time.
However, consider the joint's range of motion according to its deformity; do not attribute any cause to the illness other than the hand being softened and unable to exert any force; know that the nerves are either torn or stretched, and it is only by cauterization near their attachment that you can reduce it and firmly establish a cure.
Therefore, when the disease returns, place your hand on the poultice we have prepared, and leave it for several days; then loosen it and place it again, and exercise your hand upon it.
If the movement of it is stopped and some gravity occurs in it, then apply gentle pressure with water and friction a few times, until it is alleviated.
**Chapter XXIX**
**On the Treatment of Dislocating Joints**
Sometimes, the joints completely dislocate.
And when a joint of those in the back of the hand or on the stomach is dislocated, tighten the joint and push the dislocation back with your fingers, until it returns to its place.
And then support the head of the finger, suspend the part that is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
And then suspend it and extend it until it is completely healed on that same day.
And at night, according to that narrative, continue to stretch it and do not stop loosening it during the day and practicing movements, and stretch it at night; do this for several days until it is tight.
And do the same thing if it is dislocated in the mother's abdomen, stretch it to that opening and make your first operation on it until it heals.
And do the same thing when it is dislocated in other parts.
Chapter .xxx.
On the treatment of dislocation of the spinal vertebrae.
When any of the spinal or cervical vertebrae become dislocated, causing severe pain, it is difficult to restore them to their proper position, as the damage can be fatal to the patient.
And the sign of this is that the management of the patient's condition is beyond their control, and they cannot hold onto it; sometimes the muscles of their legs or both legs or both arms or one of these become softened, or a vertebra becomes dislocated, because often times it is dislocated and removed from its four parts.
Therefore, when it is dislocated at the rear parts, it is called 'gelbousness'.
The treatment for it is that you must consider whether the swelling occurs from childhood, because at that time there is neither cure nor complete healing.
If you see it caused by accident or impact or something similar to these, the ancients have already described lengthy ways of treatment, most of which are profitable; but you should have already been familiar with that about which there is little excuse due to its excessive size, through my proximity to understanding, to which I have here exposed and shaped from various instruments of which I will now show and spread this.
And for those, there is cure only for that which occurs in the back itself, as you have already understood.
And it is that the patient should be stretched out on their back with both legs drawn up towards the wall, and then stretch them out firmly so that the patient's feet are not bent.
Then a straight stick should be placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the patient's leg around their head, and another stick should have the patient's feet held in the other end of the leg.
The practitioner should hold the stick, and it should not be fixed in a pit; another minister should hold the other according to that form.
Then cover the patient's head and leave the tight bands unloosed; extend the end of the band to the stick which is against their head, and tie that to them; and tighten the other band over their hips, towards their knees, and adjust all the bands, tying those to the other stick which is against their feet.
And then the surgeon should stretch the bandage around the leg, and do not remove the splints or bindings from their positions in which they are fixed, but do not make them too tight as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he places them on one table, and then adjusts the patient's feet on the table until they return.
If it does not return in this manner, then take a table whose width or length is three bras long, and dig into the wall of which we have said that it is closest to the disease's location. And then place the weight of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other extremity, and presses until the spine is constrained and returns to its place.
And if you wish, open and turn it with your hand; and since you must stand on the ground, place the patient's head at the back of the punch with two fists, the length of which should be a arm, and place his head at the very back of the fist with two punches; and the distance between each punch should be a palm, and already a cut has been made in each punch through which blood flows, and every part is firmly held down on the ground so that it does not move.
And make another punch where the flow turns, and turn it in the two channels of the two punches.
And at the end of it, there is a channel in which the punch is formed, the length of which is a palm where it turns; and the other two punches are similar to that one.
And then tighten the ligaments you have straightened on the patient's foot at the pull where his head is placed, and the ligaments you have tightened on his thighs in the turn that is directed towards his legs.
And then you should take each turn and have a minister twist the turn with their hand, and the doctor aligns the spine as we have said.
And when the spine is returned to its place, and the position is corrected, then cover it with a dry, clean cloth, and stop. Then place a piece of tablecloth over it, whose width is about three times the length of the affected area, and its length covers the entire region of redness, and above the point of the spine.
And then, using the aforementioned method, apply a gentle treatment with subtle nutrition to ensure it heals.
And if any danger is perceived in the area at the end of healing, then medications that soften and soothe should be administered through table treatment for a long time, which we have recommended; and this has already been applied to that place with lead leaf.
And in some cases, there occurs a threat at the rear of the spinal bones of the back, which is caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone which you must be aware of, for it will cause great harm to him if this medicine is not administered promptly, as it can lead to death.
Chapter XXXI.
On the cure of a dislocated hip.
You know that the hip joint and the muscular joint should never be dislocated except in cases where it occurs with other joints of smaller movement and curvature.
And the hip joint is dislocated in four ways, for it can be dislocated inward or outward, or in front or behind.
And it is most commonly dislocated within the joints, less often in the joints facing forward or the rear joints.
The sign of dislocation within the joints is as follows: when you adjust the leg of the patient towards health, it becomes longer and the opposite side protrudes more than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot in the normal way, which is where the limb's aponeurosis becomes tight, so that the head of the bone has already reached this point.
The sign of the condition in which dislocation occurs is in the external joints, as the accidents of the limb are opposed to this accident.
The sign of the condition in which dislocation occurs at the front joints is that the patient extends their leg completely, but they cannot bend it due to the pain located on the opposite side, and if they attempt to walk, they cannot do so; the urine may be retained, and the limb's tendon becomes tight, requiring them to bear weight on the foot.
And the sign of a dislocation in the rear parts is that it does not extend the pain, nor can it bend the part opposite to the bent knee, and the leg of the patient is shorter on one side than the other, and the joint is softened, and the end of the limb is usually at that location.
The primary reduction of this dislocation is that you should consider, and if the dislocation is old and long-standing, having been reduced once before with your own hands according to its position, it is not suitable for further treatment; therefore, no further intervention is necessary.
In the case where the dislocation is recent and one of the four types, you should do this: turn the joint and extend it both inside and outside the affected areas, and also to the right and left, so that it returns strongly and does not require further treatment.
If it does not return in this manner, be prepared to make a strong minister and extend the patient's bed from below, or add more, or apply what is tied over their abdomen; and another minister extends his hand from that side so as to place his hands behind the patient's thighs; and tighten the ligature around the root of the thigh, and have another minister hold the end of the ligature.
And if it is an extension of him or the removal from within the angle at the departure of the fork, or from behind at the departure of the back.
And it is the extension of all of them at once, as long as the patient's condition is elevated to his body from the ground and the hangnails are hanging down.
And this type of extension is specifically unique to all four.
And so if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it will be good; otherwise, it will be necessary for every kind of case to say something about its own treatment.
In the reduction of the hernia, when it is dislocated and the dislocation occurs within the folds, the patient should be placed on their side; then, the ligaments should be pulled tight across the root of the fold in that area where the hernia protrudes between the top of the fold and the location that leaves the pain; and then extend the ligament above from the part of the angle to the most upper part of the furca.
And another assistant should strongly hold the patient's arms, press the thick part of the affected fold, and extend it outward forcefully to ensure it returns to its proper place.
And this type is of the most light treatment to which this member is reduced, as compared to other species.
If it is excused on your body and you do not disobey the treatment of this type of cure for all, then you should tie both feet of the patient together with a strong ligature, lighter, on both the shins and both the heels.
And the length of each of them is according to the quantity of four parts, and the affected limb extended more than the other by a quantity of two parts.
Then the hernia should be suspended over the head of the leg, and it should be in the lower part; and the length of it from the ground is the quantity of two arms' length.
Then command a strong young man to reduce the head of the hernia, and hang it from another young man, and let the other young man press on the hernia with force, as the joint returns to its place at great speed.
In the reduction of dislocations when they occur outward, it is necessary to keep the patient in a state of tension according to what has been previously recommended regarding immobility; and tighten the ligament specifically on the affected thigh and leg.
Then use two wooden splints, one on the patient's feet and the other on their head; and place a splint adjusted to the middle of the leg, wrapped with damp cloths, so that the malady is not harmed by the splint between the patient's thighs, so you can prevent the extension to the parts beyond.
And each minister should extend their part, and the doctor with his hand performs the reduction according to art (or skill).
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, you should extend the leg slightly, and according to this method, as I have described for the foot; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand over the affected joint, and then with his other hand he pulls it, extending it fully from the opposite side.
And if the dislocation is in the back parts, you should not stretch the patient out fully, but raise him above the ground; when you have placed him comfortably on a hard surface, thus as we said about his posture on two legs; and his face and limbs are extended, according to what we have said, without any harm.
And you should apply compression with a splint over the area where the joint is dislocated.
Therefore, once the reduction is complete according to need — and the sign of the reduction of it is not hidden from you, since you extend two thighs from the patient's condition, and when you see those engorged veins and the patient extrudes their thigh and expands that as an excuse, then you know that the member according to its place has returned — and now you adjust two things and apply a poultice and remove the bandage so that the opening is not made larger in any of the parts; and keep the patient at rest for three days or four.
Then carefully remove the ligament and poultice, and compare one thigh to the other.
Now, if you see those veins on the surface, then you will know that the dislocation is already healed, and therefore let the patient go.
And if you see any sign of softening, then return and apply poultice to that, and remove that according to your initial stretch, and let it be for three days.
And then gradually withdraw it, causing the patient to walk slowly on their own within a few days, until they are healed.
**Capitol .xxxii.**
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: when it moves apart, or inside, or to the side more than is normal, or when it does not move at all forward.
And the sign of a dislocated shoulder is that you tell the patient to apply their leg against the thigh; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And the restoration of all these ways is that you make the patient cease their movement directly, so that they extend their leg if possible; join their hands to the shoulder, and place the foot of the dislocated arm between them; then take hold of the shoulder with your palms, and press those between your fingers over the shoulder of the patient until it returns to its place.
And the sign of its reduction is that its leg adheres to the thigh in a non-labouring state.
Then apply a poultice to adhere the leg to the thigh, and then bind them with bandages for three or four days, and then remove those.
And do not use the patient's mobility for some days, unless they feel well and comfortable.
If the reduction of the hernia is not justified, then administer a strong extension to the limbs whose treatment has been described in the preceding narrative.
Chapter .xxxiii. (Note: The number xxxiii is in Roman numerals, translating to 33)
On the treatment of the dislocation of the talus.
The foot, in some cases, is remedied with slight removal, and in some cases, it is dislocated completely; the dislocation is made either within the joint or outside of it.
And the sign of the dislocation of the foot is that the toe swells up towards the joint where it is dislocated.
The cure for the dislocation of the foot is with gentle reduction, and it should be extended to facilitate the joints and then wrapped until it returns to its place.
However, in the cure for a completely dislocated foot, you must cease the patient's movement directly, and have someone of great strength and courage hold the joint firmly in its proper place behind the patient's back at the middle of the dislocated part.
Then you should place your right hand on the top of the foot from the dominant side, and your left hand below the foot at the location of the ankle.
And then gently pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and with your left, for two times, extend it; push the foot's heel towards the bed's edge as you work.
And do it twice as we have counted.
And on the third time, push the foot's heel towards the bed's edge while you are at the patient's side.
So if you return in one or two times following this manner, and if you turn the foot inside out, it is good; otherwise, continue the operation over that place.
If it is forbidden for you to reduce the hernia in this manner we have recommended, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground and stretch a hard board across their thighs, and wrap them tightly with cloth so that the hernia does not escape.
And then the doctor should position himself, and another minister extends the foot with its toes or the bandage that lies on the top of the foot; and another minister stretches this same minister against the extension of his leg, and the padding between the patient's thighs holds it in place so that the treatment is not pulled away from where it needs to be after its extension.
Then the doctor re-aligns the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh on either side to prevent the dislocation from returning.
And once the dislocation is correctly realigned and the reduction of the joint is declared successful, then bandage it and reinforce that ligament strongly, and tie the foot to the leg with bandages.
And be careful of the nerves that are behind the sole of the foot, so as not to strain or injure that ligament strongly.
And then apply heat for two days or three; if the inflammation subsides, remove it.
And on the third day or the fourth, remove the pack, and forbid the patient from walking for ten days. If it is necessary to move the patient before the pack is removed, there is a risk that the dislocation will not heal properly, and this may result in permanent damage.
And if a feverish apothema occurs, apply what we have mentioned before, in addition to other remedies and baths, as long as it is necessary.
Chapter XXXII
On the cure of dislocations of the feet's joints.
Know that one who is dislocated should be immersed in water of a certain extent for their treatment; and what is not difficult, it should be lifted sooner.
If the dislocation is in one of the joints of the foot, then you should make the patient lie down with their foot elevated at a height equal to that of their body or on a table, and keep it in that position as if they were walking.
And then you stand on your feet, place your own foot on what you suspect to be the affected joints, press gently until you feel the dislocation return, and ensure that it is completely reduced and does not reappear in the prominent area.
And then place a board under the patient's foot that takes weight, with two ends, and hold it tightly with a strap in a comfortable but firm position for three days; after that, remove the board and allow them to walk slowly for several days until healing is complete.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the types of dislocation that are caused by illness or fracture or any other event.
When any of these causes occurs and you address the cure for it and the restoration of its health, sudden complications may lead to death.
And for this, it is not appropriate to presume over the cure of it, but rather he who is skilled in the art, of long experience, mercy and compassion, late, not hasty or presumptuous; and that he use in the beginning of medicines that yield gentle purges solely, and leave the disease to divine judgment, except for him through whom you hope for salvation from perdition, alleviation of ill-health, and in which there appears some hope. And therefore, as soon as possible, strive to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, before applying violent purges.
And when the member returns to its normal state, then administer treatment that prevents further inflammation and heals the wound with appropriate dry compresses.
And if a dislocation occurs as a fracture and the bones are separated, then you should perforate their joint, and do as we have said about simple injuries of this kind that precede in the places of those mentioned.
And be mindful and avoid, according to your virtue, the instrument in the ways of fear as it is preceded by my preaching; for this is better for you to your Creator, and may perpetuate your glory, and bring greater health to your true body in its proper time. Thus, these words of Albucasim are perfectly completed from which God be blessed. Amen.
