O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, most dear sons, I have completed this book for you which is the last of medical science together with its fulfillment and have made an end by its explanations and through its elucidations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hands, namely "surgery.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of the hands is neglected in our region and is foreign to all, its knowledge has been lost and cut off, and there remains nothing of it but small descriptions in ancient books that have been passed down by hand.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	From this has come error and vanity, and intentions have been clouded, and knowledge has been pushed aside.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I will revive it along with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and explanation and abbreviation; and I will come with the forms of cautery instruments and other tools for work together with the adjustment of their preparation as required.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good master of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine has extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for one who undertakes this to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that they know the judgment of limbs, their forms and connections and separations, and have knowledge of bones, nerves, muscles, and the number of veins, and the movement and position of moving and resting vessels, and where they emerge.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And thus Hippocrates said that the name with the wound is great, and with the action is little; especially in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that those who are not knowledgeable about the aforementioned matters, should beware so as to not fall into error and cause harm to people; just as I have often seen many of those who involve themselves in this science without knowledge or experience, and thus abandon reason.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish surgeon cut into an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman and severed the arteries there; so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another surgeon treating a bladder stone in a man and carried away with it a part of the bladder; the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if he were cut open, he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another physician who took care of the Duke of our land, who had a broken leg and an open wound from the break; and the physicians, full of ignorance, set the fracture onto the wound with strong ligatures, leaving no room for drainage, and left him like that for some time; they commanded him not to untie it; and he remained like this until his leg became completely swollen, his foot as well, and he came close to death.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to go treat him, and I hurried to come and release his leg; and when I released it he found peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But nonetheless, the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the entire limb was lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And then I saw another physician who would destroy an abscess instead of treating it, and then set it alight with the malevolence of his authority.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	Because cancer, when it is riddled with melancholic humour, should not be treated with the iron [blade] unless it is in such a position that one can entirely remove all that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear son, it is necessary that you know that surgical work is divided into two categories: namely, works where there is danger in many situations; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For this reason, it is necessary for you to be cautious so that the foolish doctor cannot speak ill of you. Take up your arms in consensus and approach your patients lightly but firmly, using the best method so that by God's grace you may attain salvation and be praised; leave behind terrifying diseases with great severity; remove your weapons from whatever makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can pass from this world to the other in glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on any illness as a cure unless you are called a foolish doctor.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauterization and other medical treatments using heat, and the chapter is organized from head to toe; it describes the forms of instruments, the implements for cauterization, and everything that is necessary in this practice.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and the use of cupping, wounds, arrow extractions, and similar procedures; this chapter describes the order and forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and distortions, and related matters; it is organized from the head to the feet, and describes the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Before we remember the work, it is necessary for me to explain the quality of aid and harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of aid and harm is the longest word and most subtle science, a hidden response; many sages have spoken about it, agreeing with each other; I will suffice with few words of theirs, as I fear lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cauterization aids universally all complexions where there is matter, except for two complexions: these are a warm complexion without matter and a dry complexion without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In a warm and dry complexion combined with matter, some argued that cauterization is greatly beneficial; while others said the opposite: that it has no value for illnesses arising from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is inherently warm, and it should not be used to treat illnesses arising from warmth or dryness; and the one who disagrees says that cauterization provides great relief for hot and dry ailments present in the human body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	When you compare the human body's moisture to the warmth of fire, you find the body cool.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in any case, let no one intercede who has not experienced it, and who does not understand through long practice the chapter of cauterization, and the diversity of human constitutions, and their dispositions and the causes of their illnesses, and their occurrences and the passing of time; we have no fear for other constitutions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the doctors assembled and agreed upon the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my son, that cauterization with fire is one of the secrets of healing, and of greater benefit than any burning medicinal substance.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and it does not arise except on the member that is cooked, and it harms no other member if properly used.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Irritating medicines come from one member to another in remote fashion, and cause the member illness of slow healing; and by chance they kill the patient. Fire for its height and for the goodness of its substance does not do this, if there is no superfluity.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experiment and through the length of my service and study in the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself for the length of speech, because it does not please me that I should deprive you of the secret which is reposed in fire, and the quality of the work, how it cures bodily illnesses, just as the philosopher says in demonstrating it; now receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be done, and chose a suitable time.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	I say that cauterization is appropriate at any time, for it alleviates sudden harm with its aid; especially when the cautery is needed urgently for pain or haste so as not to wait for a greater evil to come upon the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as the foolish doctors do; for with a disease that is cured by cauterization there is no recurrence; and they say it thus; but it is not as they believe, because cauterization is only a medicine that alters the complexion, dries out the humors which are the cause of pain, and is better than other medicines due to its swiftness in action and the power of its effect.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	Et it is a powerful thing that the illness comes sometimes according to the constitution of the patient and the location of the disease and its nature; and are gathered in him the superfluities through the acquisition of meat and similar things, if it were not for cauterizations administered where there is little superfluity and moisture, just as dental cauterizations for pain, and similar things, and such pains do not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last resort of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cauterization comes after medicine, their thoughts are mistaken, and cauterization is indeed the final stage of medicine because when we apply different treatments for a disease and they fail, then we apply cauterization, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	So it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterization with a gold instrument is more beneficial than with iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and the excellence of its substance; and they claimed that the color of cauterization does not cause corruption, but this is not true as I have proven it, and I have found that it is indeed true in some people; and cauterization with gold is better than with iron, just as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	However, when you heat a gold instrument, you cannot know when it is hot by its color, and it cools down quickly; if one heats it too much, it melts in the fire; thus there are many obstacles to this method.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use fire cauterization which we have tailored to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Here we have ordered this chapter on the head to feet, so that it is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	Olive oil cautery.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is beneficial for moisture and coldness in the brain, and there are two ways it is done due to a sickness called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the head into the eyes, ears, and with numerous dreams, tooth pain, sore throat, and especially all illnesses that come from coldness such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged with a solutive medicine, modifying the head three or four nights according to what their constitution and fluids can bear; then let the head of the patient rest.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on top of yours; afterward, put the root of your palm onto the root of his nose between his two eyes; allow your two middle fingers to come close together, then bleed a little and warm up the cautery called 'olivare', this is its form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	Place it on an ink-stained support, and make it descend while squeezing your hand back and forth repeatedly in a twisting motion; then lift your hand slightly, and withdraw the place if you see a small bone appear; if you don't see it, resume cauterizing until you do see the bone as I told you; afterward take a pouch of silk, and put in it some soft cotton, and place it on top, leaving it there for three days; then apply moist cotton wool soaked in butter; leave it on until the scald is healed; afterwards treat the wound with an ointment called 'tetrafarmacon', until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients say, that the longer a wound remains open, the more it purges itself; and thus, it heals better.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	They say that one should leave the cautery in place until a part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone, and it shall be healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	Some say that one should leave the cautery in place, pressing it down with such force that it pierces the bone as wide as the needle women use for their seams, so that the humors may flow out more readily; and then let the wound remain open for a long time; afterward, it must be cleaned and sewn shut.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	These two methods of cauterization seem to me not at all good for every case; only in some patients where there is fear may it be effective; and I must leave its use entirely, as it weakens the tissue due to continued action by nature, just as we have seen in other body parts; even when the patient's tissue is naturally weak, and the first method of cauterization seems more safe and beneficial to me, and this is what I generally employ for a successful outcome.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	Of old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When in all the head there is chronic pain and it persists for a long time, the patient must use herbs and pills called "cochie", and purgatives for the head, oils and poultices; and if one applies the cautery as we mentioned before, but it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take note if the patient's shoulder is of a strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize beneath that cautery just mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After that, make a cautery on each corner of the head down to the bone, as mentioned before, and perform the cautery where it is called "vasselz"; these are places where cups are applied; and be gentle with your hand so as not to reach the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than the others, and I will speak of it later; and make sure that the cauteries on the corners are more subtle than those used for the top of the head, and this is how you do it:
dou cautere dou chief	For cauterization of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in a part of the head and extends up to the eye, and the skull is cleaned by appropriate medicines, and other treatments I have mentioned for different diseases are applied but provide no relief; then treat it with cauterization using two methods: medicinal paste and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The medicinal paste cautery is done as follows: take a fig of almonds, remove the skin and pound it into a fine powder with two eggshells, then make an incision in the temple where the pain resides in such a way that you can insert the almond powder under the skin; once inserted, bind and hold it tightly for twelve hours; afterwards, untie it and treat it with strong garlic juice, leaving the wound open for two or three days; then apply cotton soaked in butter until it is healed.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment, wait until it is healed; and if you see any of these symptoms reappear, use some of the burning medicinal remedies that I have described in my twelfth treatise on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done in this manner:
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery with this implement:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called a "clamp" because its head is shaped like a clamp with a slight curve and an appearance of smallness in the middle; place it on the painful area, and hold your hand so as to slightly twist the iron, until half of the blade's edge is scorched; then lift your hand before burning the artery which lies outside, from which flows copious blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After apply cotton soaked in linen oil, and place it on the area for three days; then put moistened cotton with butter, and subsequently treat the wound until it is healed; if you wish to cauterize this migraine using the 'cultellare' cautery at its tip, take care not to cut the artery during this treatment of a migraine that is not chronic.
de emigraine	De l’emigraine.
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine as we mentioned earlier in the division of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cautery methods previously described in medicine or iron do not suffice, then it is necessary to heat the 'cultellare' cautery until it turns white; perform a cut approximately half an inch long on the area where the migraine occurs, take your hand away once, being careful never to cut through an artery nor reach down to the bone; and watch over the jaw so that when someone chews their mouth does not open widely, do not allow the nerve to be stretched or spasms to occur in the patient; further watch out for excessive bleeding from an artery after it has been cut as this is very dangerous especially if you are not a student nor experienced; but leave the work half done. I will now tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery has been cut, and show where such treatment is found within this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauterizations are not sufficient for the illness, and the patient is still suffering, cauterize him near the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you wish, apply the cauterization method we mentioned in the chapter on arterial extraction, using the cautery with two knives; this cauterization is better and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	From the pain of ears due to coldness.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is ear pain due to coldness, and one has applied dissolving medicines and other treatments as we have said in the division, but the pain does not subside, then heat this cauterization point, which is called a "pin," and its shape is as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After prick around the affected ear, or around both if pain persists in both, and move slightly upwards from the root of the ear once you have marked the site; make ten pricks around each ear; then treat the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	Of the torture of the mouth.
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be treated with cauterisation is apart from those caused by flux, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not use cautery for similar conditions arising from dryness and nerve spasms.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this similar form of torture caused by fluid from ulcers and head purging, as well as gargling, and it doesn't improve, then it is necessary that you cauterise the patient with three cauterisations: one at the root of the ear, another slightly outside the temple, and the third at the join between the two lips; apply the cautery to the part that appears healthy, and perform the cautery towards the top of the ear a little below the crown of the head, and another on the temple as long as a thumb; leave the cautery in place until half the heart's beat has passed; this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it resembles the cylindrical instrument that we mentioned before, but it is slightly more subtle and requires a slightly thicker blade; treat the area as described earlier until it heals properly.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is an old ailment and you treat it as we have described earlier, but there is no improvement and the patient has no fever, then apply four cauterizations: two on the two corners of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one at the location called "vessel" as mentioned before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; treat them as described previously.
de litargie	From lethargy.
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, give the patient large herbs and pills that soften the brain; afterward, rub his entire head with oil and apply a mustard plaster on the occiput as written in the treatise about plasters; here is how you perform the cautery: do it as I have described above.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healed like this, then it is good; and if not, make three cauterizations from within the head down to the neck, with a space of two finger widths between each cautery; treat him as you would others, and if you want to proceed, and the patient can bear it, then apply one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, add two more on the two horns, treating until he is healed; and let these cauterizations be called 'olivare', as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	From the coldness of the head.
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	The head must be cleaned of hairs and other things as we have said before; then shave the patient's head, and apply a cauterization in the middle of the head and on each horn, and one behind and three along the spine of the neck; if you need to do more, and the body is moist and the patient can bear it, and the disease is severe, apply four cauterizations along the spine of the back; let them burn until the greatest part of the heart is scorched, then lift your hand; treat until he is healed, and let these cauterizations be called 'olivare' as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptic should not undergo fire cauterization unless they are phlegmatic; and it is necessary to first modify the brain with herbs and other treatments we have mentioned in the section for when the patient is large and suffering, unable to take medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot endure this, let them perform gargles and mastication to modify the brain often with good meats; then raise their head in the middle, and apply cauterization as we have said before, and cauterize on the vessel and each corner; and if the patient is strong and suffering, perform cauterizations as I said for one who has paralysis and body weakness, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped according to the method I described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, perform this subtle cautery as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause is melancholy due to excess humours or corrupted moisture and thick phlegm, then cauterize with three cauteries as we have said for one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause is melancholy due to humours declining into melancholia and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that purifies the brain, according to what was previously stated in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	First, bind the head of the patient; then make a well-formed linen pad in the shape of a circle and place it on their head; have the patient lie with their legs crossed, holding them firmly from all sides; apply the liniment, preferably old sheep butter; heat it to moderate fire so that the skin can withstand its application; empty the circle within the head, let it cool down; perform this once a week for the patient along with other good treatments until they are cured.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Where you see cauterize with points, make several at each point of the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This manner of cautery moistens the brain equally; then apply cotton dampened with butter and goose fat.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes' soreness.
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When soreness first comes to the eyes by means of the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient things purifying for the head, protect them from all moisture, and make them sweat in the bath several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After this, command him to rub his head and make a cautery between the temples; do two cauteries above the two temples if the soreness descends into both eyes together or one if it descends into one alone; and be careful not to cut any veins or arteries beneath the heart when cauterizing; make sure the cautery is as long as the width of the temple; beware excessive blood loss, and if you see too much blood issuing forth, stop it with whatever power you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and the incision, cautioning how to staunch it; sometimes the cautery or iron is applied below the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed to flowing over the veins, or close to the arteries that appear outside the head; and it is evident that they are cold, phlegmatic excesses, then perform on them the cautery which I mentioned at the beginning for weeping eyes: one cautery in the center of the forehead, two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries with an iron below the two bones; and if further treatment is necessary, carefully cauterize above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Through the body of tears from within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat him according to what we have said in the division, and he does not benefit, then give the patient to drink three nights of cock's broth; afterwards, raise his head, and cauterize him at the middle of the olive-shaped bone; and make two 'clavilis' cauteries above the two wrists, a little below the hairline; be careful of the artery so that you do not cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the 'clavilis' cautery:
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called 'olive'.
de coi ci est li forme:	For this reason, it has this form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that [the patient] has two cauterizations on the two index fingers as long as the fingernails are; and do not remove your hand from it until a third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair which pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the eyelashes are turned inward and prick the eye, in which case one performs cauterization according to two methods: that is, with fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and remain even, then place the patient in your care; afterwards, trace on paper for the eye a shape that is like the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs; then put moistened cotton with egg white and parsley poultice on the eye, then heat the cautery which has this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the shape you have marked, do it again and again many times until the heart of the area is burnt; and the sign of success in this work is that you see the paper shrivel, and the hairs rise to the tip of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then put moistened cotton with butter until the scald is gone; afterwards cure with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterward the hairs grow and the skin is softened again, then resume the cautery on that same spot as you did initially; but if the hair has fallen out, cauterize it until the skin is raised to its natural level, and be even, without pricking the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning medical cauteries are that you instruct the patient to leave the hairs as long and even as they can be; then make parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf; take French soap and live heat, each one part by three parts, and grind them together well; do it quickly so that it doesn't cool down, then spread it on the form you have made like the myrtle leaf, and place it on the skin around the eyes; if the disease is only in one eye, operate on just this one eye, but if also in both; put cotton moistened with egg white below the eye; keep the patient's head still and point your finger at the medicine, press the thumb and forefinger every time the patient feels a stinging sensation from the medicine, for they will feel it as if it were fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for some time, remove the medicine with your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the bite has passed, lift the place of water, and observe if you see the paper raised just as it was raised by the constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is not, apply more medicine to the place where the medicine has been opened, until your work is even and your eyes are precise; then put on moist cotton in butter until the burning heart is cooled, afterward cure the place of ointment which is called "diaphoretic" or another, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you must be mindful of your work, do so with great care to ensure that none of the medicine reaches the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterward, and the hairs grow back in the eye, you must repeat the medicine on that spot which has softened from the paper itself, just as you did before; after healing it until it is healed; and this is the form of the myrtle leaf:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this be your guidelines; and do not deny the correct path to one who studies this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	On the treatment of fistula by cauterization:
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the classification of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary for you to perform cauterization according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	For the sick person, command them to place their head on your lap; hold the minister's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or shift; afterward, apply moist cotton in egg yolk or parsley juice onto the eye; then heat the cautery which is like this: and there are holes at the top of the head just as with a quill pen, along with the cautery; if you wish, point them from one end to the other, and if you wish, make it also like a tent; but nonetheless, what has been described here (the quill-pen) is more useful for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After that, press the fistula if it is open and remove the pus, then dry it; and if it is closed, operate on it and draw out the bowels; afterward, apply a hot cautery moderately, and keep your hand near the cautery at the part of the nail above the eye, so that your hand does not slip; place the cautery in the fatty tissue around the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you cauterize down to the bone, it would be effective.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, restart the cauterization once more, and if needed repeat again, leaving it for three days; afterward apply damp cotton soaked in butter, and treat it with a drying ointment until it heals, and if forty days pass without healing, then apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and continue according to what comes in its chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	There is also a method of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	For a fistula, open it up, then insert into the gap one subtle chamois of its own kind:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and make it to the size of a .З. of lead; and hold your hand or arm firmly, and do not let the patient move at all, so that the molten lead does not flow into his eye; and one must put on the sick man's eye moist cotton wool in egg white or in wax: the lead thus fills the place of the fistula, and the wound heals with wonderful health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we have mentioned, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, one must administer an opening in the hand, and bring the fistula to the body of the nail according to what is appropriate for its proper place.
des crevaices en levres	cracks on lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often there are cracks on lips, which are called "chaps," especially on children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as mentioned before in the division of treatment, and the treatment is not effective, then heat a small knife-shaped cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	Place it on the cracks until it reaches the bottom; afterward, treat the area with wax until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	on abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess forms at the root of the throat or in the uvula, palate, or tooth roots, it then causes decay and becomes rounded, swollen, and fistula-like; you treat it as mentioned before in the division of treatment, but it does not heal: then you must take a cautery according to the size of the fistula; after that, probe the opening of the fistula, and keep your hand steady until the hot iron reaches the bottom or back of it; do this once or twice, afterward treating as mentioned before in treatments, until it is healed; if it heals like this, it's good; otherwise, you must uncover the area and remove the corrupted bone according to what you find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	From the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it doesn't work, then place the patient's head on your lap; afterwards heat the cautery which will be formed as follows here: put a rod over the tooth; and insert the hot cautery inside immediately, holding your hand so that the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth; then lift your hand and resume the cauterization according to your desire; after fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and let them hold it for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	In this way, the moving tooth is confirmed to be stable, the soft gum is restrained, and the corrupted moisture dries up.
de la dolor des dens	From the toothache pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache pain comes from coldness, whether there is actual cold or not, and medical treatments are ineffective, then two types of cauterization are necessary: butter cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Butter cautery is done by taking cow butter and putting a bit of it in an iron or brass spoon; then take cotton and wrap it on the point of a needle, dip it in boiling butter, and place it on the aching tooth until it cools down; do this often so that its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. If you want to moisten wool and cotton with cold butter and put it on the aching tooth, place an iron heated by fire on top until the heat reaches the end of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cautery with fire is such that you take a rod of iron or copper, and it should be thick enough so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth; afterward heat the cautery, from which the form will come later, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand there until the cautery cools; do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And the patient should fill their mouth with good butter during the application of this cautery, and then let it cool afterward; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make any type of lip cautery that you want, according to your abilities; and this is the shape of the rod:
des scrophules	The sores
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the sores are caused by phlegm and cold moisture, and they do not respond to digestion through medicine, then heat up the cautery tool which is described below, and make two openings for the smoke to exit from the other side of the cautery; place the hot cautery tool on the abscess once or twice if necessary until it reaches the base of the abscess; if the abscess is small use a smaller cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like this for three days; then apply moist cotton with butter until the burning sensation is gone; after treat the area with ointments and bandages until it heals.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture prevails over the channels of the lung, especially when it arises from a cold constitution, then the patient must first be cleansed with dissolving medicines; afterward, cauterize at the root of the throat, but beware not to reach the throat itself, and only burn a little of the heart.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards, apply another cauterization at the joint where the neck meets the head on top of the spine, and let the cauterizations be those called 'clavicle', as described before; treat the area as mentioned previously until it is healed.
de la toust	Of the cough
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all lung diseases are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, especially if it is an old illness, then perform two cauterizations above the clavicle in their armpits; another cauterization between the breasts, which should be those called 'clavicle' according to the form described before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see fit, perform cauterization by pricking with the 'punctum' cautery as described before in the ear disease section; and let the punctures be up to 30 or so around it.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the area according to what has been said before, let there be three rows of cauterizations following this pattern:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because these cauterizations are lighter, you do three at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Of the shoulder dislocation:
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After, remind the patient to lie on their back and side; then lift the heart which is inside the thinness of your left hand's fingers; and if the joint is dislocated within, heat the cautery that has two cords, here is its shape:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the heart until it is pierced to its side, and there would appear the shape of the cautery as four cauteries; and for this reason, the cautery has three cords, so that the figure of cauterization consists of six cauteries; and the nerves according to a subtle tent, and this is the shape of the cautery with three cords:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And sometimes it is adjusted on this one nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After apply the pork rind cautery, grind it with salt; then let the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated again soon after, then quickly apply a thick clavi-shaped cautery or many cauteries at the base of the bone.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	Because the joint is closed again, and moisture is removed, the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and excessive moisture come to the stomach, removing it from its natural state, and catarrh is multiplied within him, and usual treatments are not effective, then the patient must be reminded to sit upright, extending their legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	Of this one thereafter make three cauterizations one below the armpit of the size of a thumb, on each whole side, and two cauterizations outside the two sides so that the shape of the cauteries is in three angles, and has such space between one another that they are not joined together when they cast out corruption; and be the cautery so perfect that it cleanses the two parts of the heart, and be the figure of the cauteries according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and for him who will fear this cauterization, cauterize by pricking and bleeding on the stomach at one point according to the size that you wish to assign; then cauterize it entirely with the cautery which is called "point".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound we treated before, until it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver is afflicted with pain due to cold and moisture and excessive gas, as it has been moved from its natural complexion by superfluities; and the patient is treated according to what we have said in divisions, but it does not benefit them, then the patient must be reminded of their own nature; and apply three cauterizations according to this form, figure, and quantity on the liver, below the hypochondria where the waist of a man lies; and leave space between each cautery equal to the thickness of a finger; and let the cauteries be as long as the body, without pressing too hard with your hand over the entire cautery; and only burn half the heart, and have the patient stand upright on their feet; if they cannot, then lie them down, extend their legs, and lift their arms; this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if it is your wish, cauterize these cutellarius cauteries, if you are skilled and wise in the art, and be cautious not to burn the entire heart, for you would cause all the body to wither; and do not reach up to the mouth, as the heart is very delicate there, and know this by observation.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you wish to know if it is within the flesh of the liver or its membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient will feel pain but not too intense; and if it is in the membrane, they will experience excruciating pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And so when this wound requires treatment, it is necessary for the patient to be reminded of their head; then bleed from the spot where the abscess is located, and afterwards heat the cautery which resembles a rod, from which this form arises:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize the wound until the heart is burnt, and it reaches the bone, so that the flesh is all charred; afterwards treat according to the cure for wounds, until it is healed; and none but those who have studied long in the art of medicine, through whose hands these illnesses have sometimes been cured, should use this cautery.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he may operate boldly, yet it seems to me that one would be better leaving him alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	Scarification with moxa.
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should make moxa scarifications with the roots of aristolochia, and in this way: take a long root of aristolochia, the largest you can find; let it be dry, and also as thick and long as your finger; soak it in oil, and then take it to the fire, and scarify between the jugular vein and collarbone, and two small scars slightly below, towards the part that is under the beard; and two scars between the fifth rib and sixth rib, on a slight slope behind; one scar in the middle of the chest, another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two at the sides of the previous scar between the two shoulders; do not press your hand hard, but make them lightly as if you were scenting.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And some ancient experts say that men should use cauterisation with fire like the barber's tool, heating it up and placing it between the ribs until it reaches this abscess; if it alleviates pain, as we have said about liver abscesses.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this operation there is fear that the patient may die now, or a fistula forms which cannot be healed.
de la mice	Of the mouse.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the illness of a mouse according to what we have said about dividing treatments, and it does not improve, then there are three kinds of cauterisation which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	The first method is to perform three or four cauterisations in a line according to the length of the mouse, following the shape of the liver cautery we described earlier; do not press your hand on the entire cauterisation, and have the patient lie prone on their back; another method of cauterisation involves heating the cautery with two nerves as we showed for shoulder dislocation; lift the heart which is at the location of the mouse, or where the disease comes from towards the left side, and elevate it according to the centreline of the body, and let the cauterisations be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After treatment when there is long-term suppuration, this requires more frequent changes than other treatments mentioned previously.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not suitable for dropsy, except in the case of the condition known as 'ascites'.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods we mentioned earlier in the divisions, and your treatment does not bring improvement, then you must perform four cauterizations around the chest, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back on the spine, and one near the navel; ensure the cauterization is close to the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	Afterwards, leave the open cauterization to allow long-term suppuration, but do not let go of the patient's treatment after the cauterization; healing will be hastened and the two intentions will come together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly is the clover we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what was previously stated.
de l’enfleure des piez	Of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the foot is swollen in a person who has dropsy, and it is full of yellow water, you should cauterize on the back of the heel between the little toe and the ring finger; raise your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not go too deep, lest you dry out the yellow water, and let the cautery be according to this shape:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	Afterwards, make two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the little finger; let one cautery be lengthwise below the knee in front and another outside, halfway down the leg; leave the cauteries open for a long time without treating them, until the water is gone; afterwards treat the other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	From the mansion
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the problem with the stomach comes from cold and moisture, such that the retaining and digestive powers which are in the stomach and intestine become weakened, and it cannot be cured by ordinary methods; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong constitution, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before concerning the stomach cautery or circular cautery; and four small cauteries around the navel like the clavicle cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, perform a cautery on the wrist, one cautery above each elbow, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	For the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are found at the base of the rectum, either one or multiple, and they are old, consisting of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and treatment as described in divisions is not effective, then apply cautery: three cauterizations on the spine above the buttocks, arranged diagonally, and one underneath the anus for two days; if you suspect that their stomach is chilled, meat is not being properly digested, and swelling of the face is observed, then apply one large cauterization on the stomach as previously mentioned, another one on the liver, and one more under the navel with all three cauterizations being clamped; leave the cauterization open for a long period.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, let the wound heal until it is healthy again.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Of fleshiness, which is named 'thelul'.
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you treat thethelul, heat the cautery until it resembles a razor, and then place it fully heated on top of the treated thethelul; leave your hand there long enough for the cauterization to reach the depth of the vein, from which blood will flow out; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of thethelul, cauterize each section as we have described previously; after that, treat it with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you use a larger cautery on alchatim, it will provide greater help.
de plaie mal curee	Of an improperly treated wound.
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, as we will discuss in its place, such a disease arises that can only be healed through cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When an abscess comes about and is filled with suppuration and corrupted moisture, you should examine it thoroughly with a fine needle, taking care to know the entire depth of the abscess.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cauterizing iron like a razor, insert it into the abscess according to how far the needle went in, and repeat the cauterization as many times as needed: once, twice or thrice; but take care not to burn any nerves that are nearby nor large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the abscess reaches into the body of the bladder and intestine, avoid these places with your cauterization iron, only cauterizing fleshy areas; also know that this is not always effective, so proceed carefully. After treating such an area, heal it thoroughly, but if it is salty and matter has been draining for a long time, then know that it is fully healed; yet if the pus keeps coming, realize that there's an opening to bone at its base, corrupted through and through: this will be discussed in greater detail elsewhere.
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and there is severe flatulence, and it does not resemble a female condition, then you must perform cauterization over the kidneys on one side and the other at the clavicle we mentioned before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a line, and they will provide greater relief.
de la vessie	Of bladder disease
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, such that the patient retains urine, then cauterize outside over the bladder where the arm hairs begin, on both the right and left sides, each cautery should be as long as the nail of a thumb; and perform one cautery outside the back, or two if needed; and let the clavicle cauteries follow the form described before.
de la marris	Of the sad/unhappy [person]
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the womb is cold and moist, preventing conception, and the flowers [eggs] are corrupted with late termination; when they come, great pain is felt: then it must be treated with three fire cauterizations around the navel, as we have said in bladder cauterization, and two outside the back; and let the cautery be clamped, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the hip [joint]
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moistures descend to the hip socket, causing its dislocation from its place, and the sign is that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the place of departure is found visible, then you must cauterize the patient on the hip socket with one circular cautery, and mark in front of the place around the socket as it turns, so that the socket is inside the circle; and let the cautery be like that used for the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this caustic is not present to you, make three large olive oil caustics, and let the caustic be as perfect as all hearts; and treat it until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of hip pain
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain arises in the hip joint, caused by cold and dampness, and the patient has been treated as we have said in the division but there is no improvement, and the illness is chronic: then you must purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After making the caustic application; and the manner of the caustic is according to two methods: that is, with burning medicinal substances, or with fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Cautery with fire is done in many ways, one of which is as follows: apply three triangular cauteries to the hip bone like this; make them deep and large, leave some space between each equal to the width of your thumb, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped. Sometimes a cautery is made in the middle on top of the head of the hip bone, for which there are four done according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see fit, use the circular cautery we previously mentioned for hip dislocations; but do it in such a way that the circles enclose the entire hip bone and all the space around the heart is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	This is how it's done for sciatica when the pain is in the hip and doesn't extend down to the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes down to the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations where the patient says the pain is located, and four cauterizations above the ankle on the left side, slightly less; let the cauterizations be cutellary, and burn away the thickness of the heart; and if the patient feels that the pain extends down to the toes or close by, cauterize it with three points or four at the point called 'point'.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	If necessary, do more; and if you know that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, perform a cutellary or circular cauterization, and be very careful with all your cauterizations not to leave it so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause greater harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who were cauterized on the ankle of their foot, and they left it until their leg was entirely swollen, and their feet as well, and all their feet were pierced and corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an abdominal operation from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, cauterize in one part and then in the other, according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the sages said about cauterizing the hip, regarding this method, make such an iron tool and have it as wide at its head as a two-digit navel (or slightly less), and have it perforated with holes and let there be the space of one thumb width between each perforation; and the perforations should be oriented towards two sides, and they should also be like knots, and let there be a well-made iron handle attached; and this is its form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it until it is all red and throw hot coals on it, then put it on the sick hip bone and turn him onto his healthy side; cauterize once with one iron and leave it three days; then apply an ointment plaster, and leave the wound open a long time; afterwards treat with ointments until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasis says that we use this cautery rarely due to its appearance and because few people use it; yet it is one of the good cauteries, which can be tolerated if applied where there is no fear.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cauteries of medicine that burn are made with a latticework instrument in which the width of the opening is adjusted by means of sliding margins, and it may be made of copper or iron at one side; have two feet high and each foot equal to the thickness of a thumb; they are open from above and below, and join together according to this shape:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After, place the box of the hip on the patient lying on their healthy side, and quickly press your hand firmly above the hip box; afterward, pour between the two circles of hot water that has been heated one peck over fire, and leave it for an hour's time, and let the patient bear the heat and burning.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is true that there is a cauterization as well with fire; and when the cauterization has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip in warm water, and leave it thus for three days, and apply butter until what is black from the scalding is removed; and leave it three days so putrid matter is extracted; and this would be the last aid after the cure of ointments until it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or down to the leg, make an instrument for him that holds heat according to what you did at the hip similarly; and this is how to apply hot poultice, which I have written about in the treatise on medical correction.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take quicklime and alkali, equal parts of each, grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	where there is a small opening through which the point of a razor can enter; place another well-sealed pot on top of it, and put sweet water above the lime and alkali so that there are two fingers' worth of water over the powders when you have tightly sealed it with your hand; leave this setup until sweet water and moisture has descended into the sealed pot, then take all that water and pour it back onto the lime and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And so it will be very hot and administered in many medical procedures and cauterizations of other members, for it does the same work as fire, and has other medicines with which one can cauterize well the hip, such as thistle and acacia honey and heated soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a treatment where a man was cured of hip pain and sciatica, and he praises it greatly, saying that no other treatment was applied, and that he was healed in one go when this cure was performed, and he had bathed as he teaches below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says to do it in this way: take some fresh and dry verdigris, grind it very finely with one pound of grease, put it on the hip, thigh, and leg where the pain is located, then bandage it; leave it for three hours or as long as necessary until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then have him enter the bath until his body is a little raised, and let him go into bed, and the pain will leave entirely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use the cautery with such treatments unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dyascorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat fat, it helps greatly; and the cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen and grease it with old oil, and place it on the hollow which is between the thumb of the foot and the other one called 'foscile'.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After that, take dry goat fat and hold it to the fire until it becomes charcoal, and place it on the linen, leaving it there until it is extinguished; repeat this process again, and do not stop doing so until you feel that it has reached up to the hip, and that the pain has ceased; and this kind of cautery is called 'goat cautery'.
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether due to falling or impact or excessive strain, or similar matter spreading coldness, for none of these situations is cauterization useful except for that which arises from an influx of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	One must, after ensuring the patient is free of foul-smelling pills or other similar substances that could be applied to their back where the pain persists, make three rows marked with ash, and in each row place five cauterizations or more according to the potency and quantity that the patient can endure; and let these cauterizations be made following the method called "poking"; and if you wish, make three or four cauterizations at the middle of the clavicle following this pattern:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this illness comes to small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a narrow chest when lying down, and fear; you find in the last vertebra of the spine and in us an appearance that arises on other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this one and treat it, cauterize it with the red-hot iron according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	The cautery should thoroughly burn each part of the vertebra equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see it, cauterize around the vertebra with the iron making two or three pricks, and let these be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treat the place until it is healed according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply the iron in a bend of nerve tissue.
de la dolor des jointes	From the pain of joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of joints is caused by moisture that spreads to every limb of the body, and when the pain occurs in the foot, which doctors call "podagra" properly, and when it is due to cold and cannot be cured by medicines, then it is treated with cautery in this way: make a mound of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a need to apply it to the sole of the foot, make a cautery at what we call "the point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	If the pains reach up to the knees and other joints, and this happens frequently, apply three or four cauteries on each knee, all olive-shaped; and if you need more, do more, but do not hold your hand there longer than it takes for the heart's iron to burn.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, administer the cautery as we have described in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make two lines of points around the wrist; and if there remains any pain in the fingers, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come down to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and provide good care for the patient and give them medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you provide good care and purge the phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	On fractures of the hip.
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When fracture occurs in the thigh, and the bones descend into the hips, if it is recent, on the day you treat it, make sure he does not eat; and have him use things that empty the belly so that the excrement leaves his stomach; afterward, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath until the bowels are restored, and bring them up with your two hands, and bleed underneath the fracture near the hip bone, and over all of it make a sign similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery in this way:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as they are white and emit no odor.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Put the balls back in place; and have your assistant hold their hand over it so that it does not return backward; and support the patient's legs well, and put a pillow underneath them and another under the knees to hold their hands; then apply the cautery with all your might, and press down straight until you reach the bone; if you do not make it the first time, repeat again until you come right up to the bone; be careful that the ball does not jump out when you are doing the cautery so as not to burn it; for fear that by this the patient may die or have some other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	Know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is useless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And the cauterization for children should be subtle according to their size, and for adults it should also be proportionate; after three days treat the place of the cautery with butter until the burn is healed; afterward cure other ointments so that it heals, and let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the wound is fully closed; and make sure that their nourishment is satisfyingly long so that the bowel does not protrude when they try to go into rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when they wish to get up, provide them with a well-made bandage, and wear it for another forty days; ensure good rest, let them work little by little and avoid overfilling their drink or food intake, as well as too much screaming; once these instructions are followed, the patient is fully healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	Et I shall say hereafter the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, if it requires fire cautery, burn the third part of the heart; afterward treat as we have said; and some ancients say it must be cauterized with a three-angled cautery according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But first mark the place of incision and make a line across the width above the rupture, then another outside it; hold your hand in between during the entire cautery procedure.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizations are lighter and gentler.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	From old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, either from falling or injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and medical treatment is ineffective, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called 'point', and the cautery should be applied according to the length of the limb, its smallness, weakness, strength, and location of torsion, as well as its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it is healed from the first cautery, that is good; if not, apply another cautery over the previous one, for such is the custom, as it must be changed to the limb nearest to it, which is why you should continue with cauterizations until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	Of surgery.
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The months are aided sometimes by cautery with great help, especially illnesses that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	If you see him being cauterized, pay attention if the illness is in its beginning stage and if it has been cured according to what we said before regarding divisions. If the disease persists or stays around and you suspect that corruption could affect the whole patient then perform five cauteries on his head: one behind the ear at nine o'clock, another towards the forehead near the end of the hairline; two more by the temples, and finally one at the back of the head. You must allow the heat to penetrate as deep as your hand reaches so that it reaches the bone, burning until you see scabs form on his skin allowing vapors from any thick humours within him escape - cauterize him over his nose according these instructions above.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	Et si la maladie est répandue partout ; et qu'elle perd manifestement, il faut que tu la cautérises avec ces cautères que nous avons dit pour le chef, et un cautère sur le nez, et deux cautères sur l’épine du cou, et six cautères sur l’épine du dos, et un grand sur la croupe et un autre à côté, et deux sur les deux épaules ; et deux sur les côtes, et deux sur les tendons de la cuisse, et un sur chacune des articulations des mains et des pieds, et sur les creux des mains ; et prends garde aux nerfs qui sont sur le talon arrière, que tu ne les brûles ; et parfois fait on cautère sur l’os du poignet, et un autre sur l’os de l'estomac, et un autre sur le foie.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	Et sache que plus tu fais de cautère, plus tu l'aides, et cela lui profite ; et sache que les malades ne sentent pas de douleur au cautère comme les sains la ressentent, car leur corps est déjà tout corrompu.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterizations be large and small according to the members and joints, depending on how you find them arranged with the irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treating it, place the part in flour paste mixed with honey and other treatments until it is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, but it is not healed, then apply cautery to the limb according to its size: let the cauterization be a little deep into the flesh; treat it afterwards with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes cautery is made on the hand, foot or back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; yet be careful not to do so unless you are knowledgeable about limbs and the exits of nerves moving the body.
de albaras	For boils
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is persistent, and medical treatments are ineffective, then cauterize it with a perfect cautery, according to the quantity of the heart's species, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changes; then treat it with a mixture of flour from vetch and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of pigeons and doves, each in equal parts; blend everything together, bind it with a cloth, and expose it to air until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	treatment of cancer through cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When cancer appears at the beginning, and you want to stop its growth, then cauterize it with a circular-shaped cautery around the entire area of the cancerous growth.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And yet the wise ones said that a cautery should also be applied to the middle of the chancre; and yet it does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen this happen once; and it is more proper for it to be cauterized around, with the "circular" cautery, as we said before about many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has an illness called 'adubelati', and it prolongs death either due to the excessiveness of its nature or because of the patient's wateriness when they are decrepit (meaning very old) and have little blood, or due to the season; and you see that their death is hastened: then cauterize them all around with many small cauteries, pricking [with each]; afterwards leave them be.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced through all the cautery, heat the cautery with what is formed here:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	Place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the heart, and make such cauteries that the patient feels them outside in a way that reduces the course of corruption.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After treating it, wait until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire treatment with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	There is another kind of illness called "corrodens", which is nothing but the wasting away of limbs, as it withers the limbs just like fire dries up branches.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this illness in a place that can endure fire cautery, then heat the small and large clavicle cauterizers very slightly, according to what is appropriate for the location where the illness is; afterward cauterize it from all sides so much that you eradicate every corruption, leaving nothing of it behind, such that everything corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Leave it for three days, and apply to the cauterized locations a soft ointment with oil so that the scalds from the fire are removed, along with all corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	Afterwards treat the resulting wound with ointments that produce flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days you see that healthy flesh is not growing, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains of the corrupted places.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this treatment was sometimes cured by medicine alone instead of fire cautery; but nonetheless fire cautery is more helpful, and I have already described the cure with medicine in another section: use it when you need to.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	sores that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often, on the feet due to injury, a disease arises which we call a 'claws', and it is a large faulty growth that wounds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterization for this disease follows two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cautery, and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is when you heat a hollow quill-shaped cauterizer like a goose feather until it is red hot, and make sure it is good iron of the right size so that it can cover the nail on all sides, and has fine edges; after, put this very hot on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail until it reaches the base of the nail; then leave it like this for three days until it begins to discharge pus; afterwards make an emollient with crushed mallows and raw wool grease, and let the emollient stay on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat the place of application with soothing ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are caused by the corruption of the body, occurring frequently in hands and feet, you must apply hot water cauterization; it is done like this: take a copper or iron rod, or a goose quill, and place over the wart and arum, which means verrucas warts; place the rod so that it surrounds it entirely, then pour some hot water into it, hold your hand firmly, and press your hand turning it in such a way that the edge of the rod reaches the base of the wart, allowing for deep penetration by the hot water down to its root; allow the patient to experience the stinging sensation from the hot water for an hour; then leave them like this, and all roots will be completely eradicated.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another until you have treated all those that are in the body, then treat them with ointments which generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	The doctor of trembling/shaking.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone shakes due to coldness of nerves or quartan fever or any other, you should make four cauterizations on the spinal column or three if on the back, one between each vertebra; and one cautery on the foot, and one above the stomach at the olive-shaped organ; thus will stop shaking and hasten recovery from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	Stinking pustules/blisters.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes on the body appear swellings or stinking blisters that come from gross corrupted matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	So it befits the first when they appear that one performs a cauterization on each head of the pimple: a subtle cautery with myrtle wood, so that its point is taken by fire, or with long aristoloche root, or with the lens-shaped cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And one should cauterize them at the beginning when they first appear, according to this method, and they cannot grow from then on, but the excess that causes them is broken, and they are healed; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	There are often great outpourings of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes on top, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cauterization of the member, and with similar things; and it is a very difficult thing to staunch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet when this happens to someone, quickly place your index finger on the wound's injury, and press hard so that blood is calmed beneath your finger, and no more drops out; then put many small and large olive oil cauterizers onto fire until they are all red; then take one, big or small depending on the wound and the location of the artery, and place the cauterizer on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep it there until the blood is stanched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if the blood should spurt when you lift your finger from the wound, and the cauterizers have cooled, then quickly take another one of the cauterizers that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	Do not cease doing this one after the other until the blood is fully stanched; and beware that you do not burn the nerve nearby, and that no further harm befalls the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be properly stanched especially if the artery is large, unless by one of four methods we have mentioned: cauterization, or extraction if it has not been treated, or tight binding with thread, or medicines placed on it which possess the power to stop blood; and let this be tied and held firmly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will bring about restraint by tightly binding it with cloth or placing hot objects on top of it, or other similar methods, will not be successful if there is no benefit from doing so.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and they have neither mirror nor medicine at hand, then one must place their index finger on the wound of the vein as we've mentioned before, and stretch it until it is constricted over the wound and the vein; do not move your finger, but moisten it with cold water often so that it is very cold to freeze and thicken the blood and constrict it; then make preparations beforehand for what they will need in terms of cauterization and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book on surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all about illnesses that require fire cauterization or burning medicines, and their effects, causes, instruments, and forms of cauterization; I placed this chapter on the head down to the feet, and I will go through this same route in this chapter so that what one seeks may be found more easily.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, as I begin this work, dear son, you must learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first about cauterization, and thus it requires even greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For people come for treatment in many ways.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	Some come of such a state that they are so afraid with their illness that they die quickly from the fear and severity of their condition; and one must have fear for these cases.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And some will give you their opinion, saying: "Wait, I am healed"; but the illness is deceitful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	You must not consent to those who come to you with such mannerisms, but put greater trust in your honor than in your greed, and do not act foolishly but wisely in matters of which you are certain and from which you can gain fame and profit; and make use of prognosis and indication in treating your patients for their benefit; this will help you acquire a good reputation, glory, and praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	My dear son, may our Lord give you good understanding and guidance, and may he breathe into you the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter by dividing it into chapters, according to what is set forth in the chapter on cauterization, which I divided for you from head to toe, so that you may more easily find what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Head full of water.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness often comes to children at birth, and when the midwife grips the child's head too tightly; sometimes it also arises from an unknown cause.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this illness occur in anyone but children, and all of those whom I have seen were doomed to death; thus it seems best for me to leave off treating such cases.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose shoulder was full of water, and the head swelled each day to such an extent that he could not bear it; and the moisture grew so much that he died, and this moisture is gathered beneath the bone on the scapula, between the heart and the bone; and in cases like these where the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should make an incision in the head a thumb-width wide; and it should be as long as two thumbs, so that the moisture flows out; and see here the form of the spathula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess larger, then make two incisions in the form of a cross, according to this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the sutures of the head opening on each side, and the water leaps forth when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not respond to treatment: then you must make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision extract all the moisture quickly.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Afterwards bind the wounds with cloths and apply powders, then add wine and oil, and leave like this for five days; then release it, treat the wound regularly and anoint equally, and give the patient dry meat to eat until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another method of incision is to observe where the swelling and accumulation of pus appear; for sometimes it presents itself in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and other times on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut there where the abscess appears and the pus accumulates, and open it according to your ability; be careful not to cut an artery, for if blood flows out, the patient may die from loss of blood and moisture evacuation.
de reume	Of rheum.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When someone has a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or throat, and it is chronic with no improvement from medical treatment, then the final remedy is cauterization along with cutting of the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	You should therefore make the patient turn their head back when cutting these veins; afterward rub this place with a coarse cloth until you can see the arteries appear, then strap the patient's neck tightly with another piece of cloth; then observe which way the vein flows, and which are the two that lie on either side behind the ears, those being the ones to be replied upon; then mark out these veins, and cut one and then the other with a sharp spatule in two parts, so that your incision reaches down to the bone, doing this across the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see it, push the spatula beneath the artery and the cup above, cutting as deeply as necessary through it.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut open, blood will always spurt out upwards continuously.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the artery does not open easily to palpitation, you must measure a space of three fingers wide and make an incision until the bone; the quantity of blood that comes out should be six fingers deep, perhaps more or less depending on how much the patient can take and the fullness of the arteries. Then look at the wound: if there is any bone still visible, cauterize it so no abscesses form, then pull back the skin and bind the wound; apply treatment until it heals up.
de emigrainne	Of a migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine comes with a persistent cough due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temples, along with old frequent seizures and similar symptoms, and despite being treated with various medical cures, none provide relief - we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have explained.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	The method of extracting them is as follows: the patient should shave the hair from their temples and pay attention to the artery that appears on the temple, for it becomes visible through its pulsation, but may be harder to see in some people with cooler skin tones; if it is less visible, the patient should constrict their neck with some cloth, then rub the area with a coarse cloth and apply warm water until the artery becomes clearly apparent; then take the spatula which has this shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it upwards with pincers, and remove any remaining membranes from each side; and if the artery is delicate, turn it towards the tip of the hook, then cut off that part according to the size of two joints.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, the blood will not flow out freely at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	Pull out the blood from six places to three; and if the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk so that there will be no further swelling before the wound heals, and blood flows freely; then cut off the excess between the two ties at the same time, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with the knife cautery until the bone is exposed, so that the joints are severed; this is a delicate operation if the patient has no fever and is of warm constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cautery is helpful to finish moisture; therefore, it is of great help for moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries, one should fill the place with old cotton and apply well-made bandages; and when you release them, treat with dry medicated dressings that promote flesh growth, and with bandages until it heals; and if blood escapes from the artery while you work, quickly cut it off with cautery, or use vitriol and squeeze it in your hand to stop the bleeding; and if you don't have these present, put your thumb over the wound until the blood coagulates, then wash the area with cold water until the bleeding stops, and apply pressure as needed; and what is tricky and lighter in extracting an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery in two parts, but make sure the incisions are deep to retain heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too thin, they retain less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have a gap of two fingers' width between the two blades, and then when you have pressed them into place, put the hot iron on top until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein into two places; let these be separated by the two shoulders since this cautery is not continuous throughout. And this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes flow down from the veins that are above the top of the head with force, and it does not benefit to treat it with medicine, and you see the patient's face turn red, and feel a sensation of trembling on their forehead; and their eyelids are thin and moist so that the hairs inside have fallen out, and they are scalded by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», and it is that you do to the rear of the patient who has this illness the hairs which he has on his forehead; then make three incisions equally spaced along the length of their forehead. One incision should be positioned in the center, extending downward toward the nose; the other two are placed above the temples near the hairline. Take care not to cut into any arteries located at those points and keep your hand away from where the mandibles connect. Each wound should measure three fingers across when closed together. Have ready a piece of sponge cloth with lots of soft fabric strips for absorbing blood; then insert this narrow spatula made up of two parts whose shape looks like:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the first incision which is above the temple to the second; remove all skin located between these two incisions down to bone level, then do same thing from middle incision up until other second one and finally take out this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you insert into the first incision the instrument which is called "cultellaire", and it is very sharp on one side, while being soft and not sharp on the other side; this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the cutting edge towards the flesh near the heart, and the soft side towards the bone, then insert it until it reaches the middle incision.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to that which appears from the heart, and then do likewise in the middle incision until it reaches the other side; and then extract blood evenly, and press on the place for the blood to flow out; then insert into each incision a bandage of old cotton, and apply moist cloths soaked in wine and oil and egg white, ensuring that hot abscesses don't form there; and on the third day remove the binding, and soak it with a lot of warm water, then treat it with basilicon ointment along with rosehip oil, and other treatments used for wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	Of the kingdom of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When someone has chronic cataracts with accompanying symptoms, and you see their eyes drooping and small, their vision weakening, and the corneas burning; and hair falls out, there is a painful ache in the head, and the patient sneezes; then know through these accidents that this matter and this cataract comes from many sources, and the appropriate cure for it is this:
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	That you instruct the patient to raise their forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another from ear to ear.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	Starting from the incision on the left temple, move towards the right temple, ensuring the cut reaches down to the bone; keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that control eating; once the bone is exposed, wipe away all blood with a sponge, then insert old cotton and linen threads between the two lips of the incision; cover this with moistened cloths in wine and oil, taking care to avoid hot abscesses; when it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat it with drying substances that promote flesh growth.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of colophony, make a plaster with it; apply to these wounds to encourage flesh growth all around.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	The cleaning of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of four things: grain, creature, or stone from mines and similar objects like iron; seed, such as nuts, beans, peas; or flowing matter like water and oils and similar substances.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When stone or any other object that does not fit in the ear falls into it and cannot grow within it, expose the ear to sunlight.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you can see the stone, then drip a drop of violet oil or seed oil and apply extraction; have them sneeze with cumin, and block their nose when sneezing comes, and place around the ear pieces of fine cloth or wool; and extend the ear above it.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Mout de fois vient fuer par cete cure; et s'elle ne vient fue, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme: 
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; 
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she cannot be cured of all these things that we have said, then hurry to split the ear rather than let a hot abscess come, and spasms; and the way of the incision is such that you first make the patient bleed with a cephalic vein cut, and extract blood according to the measure of its virtue, then seat the patient between your hands and turn their ear upwards, and make a small incision in the root of the ear at the fat place where it depends; and let the incision be like a moon, so that you reach the stone, then remove it as best you can, and suck swiftly to your mouth; and treat until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that has taken root and swollen, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then apply the thin, sharp spoon in this way:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and lead to an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not attempt this if you think the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many incisions; then extract it with subtle pincers and by sucking, as we have said, so that the extraction is eased.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the water that falls into the ear, the patient should first use sneezing remedies, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let them lie on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it should jump out because of this, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, take many small and light stones according to the length of your thumb, and warm them slightly over fire; place these for the patient in their ear opening, and jump upon it with your feet from another side, pressing down on the stone that is in the ear with yet another stone; do not cease doing this, passing one heated stone after another until all water has come out, and thus it shall exit entirely; if you wish to try a rush instead, insert one end into their ear canal, and light fire to its other end so that most of the rush is burned through; then replace with fresh rushes repeatedly, as we have said for stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	For the removal of insects from the ear, if it is small like a flea or similar, treat as mentioned earlier in the division; but if it is large enough to be felt, proceed with extraction using pincers; and this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When extracting worms embedded in the ears, if you treat it as mentioned previously in the division and use distillations, but the treatment does not work, then you must examine the ear in sunlight: if any worms appear, remove them with fine pincers; and if none are seen, take note of the shape described here.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is narrow underneath and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Push the finest tip into the ear according to the extent of the patient's suffering, then suck firmly along the entire length; do this often until all the worms emerge.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey and come out, pack cotton around the cane as I have said for stones; and if they still don't exit as we've stated, administer distillations that ancient doctors have proven in the excision of worms, and you will find them in the treatise on distillations; and distil your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, such that this is its form as you can see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	Let it be made of silver or brass, narrow below at the small openings, and above for distilling; and to press within the distillation with a brass instrument well-made for this purpose, and if you wish take a razor and wrap around its point like cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever of your medicines into the cane, which is in the ear; then insert the razor with all the cotton inside, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled to the end of the ear; and let the patient smell it within, and let this distillation be just warm enough when you distill it into the ear; take care that it isn't too cold, as the medicine would not be so effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	On the blockage of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without a perforation in the ears; and this same thing happens to men due to blockage caused by a wound or wax inside the ear, and these blockages sometimes become embedded deep within the ear so that one cannot see them; and at times it occurs when the opening becomes blocked from outside, and one can see it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which becomes embedded deep within and cannot be seen is of urgent treatment in many cases, and for the latter case where it can be seen you must place the patient's ear in the sun; and look inside: if you see apparent obstruction then perform this operation with all the necessary tools as described.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be sharp and pointed both in front and behind, so that it does not hurt the ear; if the inflammation is from flesh or body of the ear, hold the delicate pincers there, and gently pull out all such flesh.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the inflammation is deep inside the ear, take a delicate and light razor, heat it slightly over fire, then place it on the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the inflammation which causes the patient great itching in their ear, pierce it gently, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then place in the ear a tent according to the width of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this on any day when the wound is healed, take a cloth and dampen it in rose water, then sprinkle powdered vitriol over it; if you see swelling of the ear, apply pressure to the cloth and replace it with another moist cloth made from a mixture of rose oil and wax until the swelling subsides; then treat it until it is cured.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is discharge of blood, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and employ other treatments that stop the bleeding as mentioned in the section on distillations.
de la char des papieres	Of flesh from paper.
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This treatment is for cataracts that come from paper in the eyes when they are moist and dry, you must extract them with tongs and forceps, then cut it away with a spatule at its roots; afterwards apply powdered vitriol to the area.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	Et if it is not removed, then cauterize it with the subtle lenticular cautery, and the cauterizer after the incision becomes useless; and they often reappear, when something remains from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burnt and do not return.
de la gresle	Of the hail.
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times there are on the eyes things that seem like hail in their form and hardness, and for this reason, this disease is called "grandine," and it is an assembly of thick moisture on both sides of the paper; the treatment is as follows: take note if the grandine moves from one side to another, and it is a light thing to know; make therefore an incision at its widest part, then gently peel off the skin from each part, then grasp it with pincers, and remove it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cut it without piercing the paper slightly, it does not harm the patient; and if the tear is large, join it with a stitch, and treat it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not force it, for ointments will restore it quickly and promote flesh growth.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	If the cataract has descended into the ear towards the upper part, turn it over, and extend the cataract with pincers, cut it and press it from one side to the other; if the paper is separated by incision, it does not harm; when the cataract is removed, wash the eye with salty water, and treat the area where flesh grows until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	Of the fat from the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that gathers on the paper of spectacles above, and this happens more often in children than adults, and it greatly affects their eyes, causing them to have cataracts in the mornings, and they cannot bear to look at the sunlight because tears rush to their eyes; thus, they lie down on their faces afterwards, sleeping face-up, and their paper lenses beneath their eyebrows become moist, as exinach has covered their appearance and swollen it so that it shows in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press your finger to the place and feel exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of this work is that you have the patient place their head in your lap; then take some linen cloth and prepare a tent-like structure shaped like a circle according to the amount of exirnach it contains on each side, then put it over them; press with your fingers from one side to another so that the exinach gathers within the circle; next make an incision in the middle of the moist area with a sharp spatula, and do not let this be any bigger than the wound you would make when opening a vein; cut through the skin until you reach the exirnach; often several pieces of exirnach will appear out of the incision, shaped like a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract it then in one piece of cloth-padded forceps between your two fingers from the outside and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out; be careful not to insert it into the crack lest you reach the spatula all the way up to the eye, or hurt it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	If the splinter does not come out at first in the crack, increase it slightly and gently until you see it; then extract it as we have said, afterwards moisten cloths with oil and water and put them on the wound, and bind up tightly with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there be such men who grind lime and put it on to corrupt this moisture that remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat him until he is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it reaches the place of the hot abscess, then treat it with soothing emollients until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	The hairs on paper.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow on paper, they are not natural and should be removed as they can harm the eyes and lead to various diseases such as accustomed tears, softening of the papers, and albuginea, causing eye destruction; this requires treatment in four ways: either by cauterization with fire, or with medicine depending on what is presented here or in the chapter on cauterization, it can be done either by incision and suturing or by using canes as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You should place the patient's head on your lap, then turn the paper from the eye onto your left hand; if it is reversed, that is good; otherwise, insert a needle with thread above it; whether this is near the margin of the paper where the hairs grow or near these hairs, pull the thread over all the paper and turn it towards the razor; then cut in the lower part of the paper beneath the unwanted hair at every spatule from the large lacrimal gland to the small one; finally, remove the thread and place under the paper a small tent of cotton and linen; sign on the paper a figure similar to that of myrtle leaves, and always make sure that the figure fits the amount you want to raise in the divided paper.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	Et si a teil qui a mestier c'on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc'a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l'oncine en l'un des II angles dou keur, puis l'escorche toute;
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut off this which overlies the small muscles equally according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the forceps, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle with thread, and place it between your fingers; insert one thread near the large ridge, and the other thread near the small (one), and join the threads equally between your two fingers; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin above what you have seized, as we have described, then join the two lips of the wound by stitching, and treat it until it is healed; if an abscess appears at your incision, soothe it with ointment made from pitch and similar soothing substances; and sometimes happens that the hairs of the paper are converted: in this case, you must use what we said about incisions; but suturing on one side or another is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of the chains is done in this manner: you should convert the paper and make a slit within it according to what I said, then make two strips by art, along with two delicate bindings as long as the length of the piece of paper, and also wide like the width of the spatula; cut at the two ends of the two parts where you hold the strings together; then assemble one with the other delicately on top of the paper over your eye, and strain the two chains from their respective sides; leave it there for a few days until the skin that was strained dies, darkens, and rots away by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes too long, cut it with some force and treat it until it is healed. Once the wound has closed up, remove the paper and no more hair will grow on this spot; here are two chains that you'll be making according to this pattern, as well as these measurements of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	li ovraiges est telz that you take one needle fine, and put in it thread of silk soft and fine; then assemble the heads and knot the one and the other finely, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then arrange into the shaft another thread thin of silk quickly, and knot the ends of the thread; then have the patient place their head on your lap; and position them near sunlight so that the work is illuminated, for it's delicate and small work, then insert the needle all through the shaft to the root of the natural hair; then pierce into the skin swiftly until you draw it above the natural hair; then extract the natural hair up to the shaft, and place in the shaft this hair, whether there be one or two or three or more; then withdraw your hand so that the hairs come away from all through the shaft towards the skin together with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	Et if the shaft is treated and the hair does not come off with it, you shall treat the shaft from below along all the thread that thou hast ordered, so that the shaft comes out of the hole above and thou seest it by the sight of the eye; then shalt thou treat the shaft and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed II days or III, until the hair burns in its place and flesh grows over it; and if the hairs are small, so accompany one long natural hair with those that thou leavest, let it be raised up with them, until it is elongated and then remove it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the putrefaction of the eye.
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease which is called 'aleacrati' or putrefaction comes to the eye, there are two ways it can occur: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And they happen suddenly due to wounds, or from a tailor's [needle] or cauterization, and through similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of working on it is that you should split this suture, and separate its lips, then place within it tents made of linen, and bind it tight until it is healed; and make sure not to use anything drying or constricting in your treatment of it.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do not, the disease will return worse than before; instead, use softening remedies such as fenugreek; and cook together water or wine with flax seeds, melted diaklon ointment in any oil, wrap this around a tent, and treat it thus.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the secret of your treatment lies in ensuring that it does not join back together in its previous form; and these treatments we have discussed are only a means to manage this disease so that it does not return as before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	from the flesh which comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease, which is inflammation, truly called "axacrati", is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident arises from wounds, cracks, cauterization and similar things; and the way to treat it is for you to take a needle with double thread, insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from left armpit to right, so that the thread comes out of both shoulders; then stretch the skin above over the entire needle, and cover it with a spatula twice as wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is required, that's good; if not, take a razor and place it in the crack, turn over the paper, and make two slits on its edge; let the ends of the two slits be at the two corners of the incision you have made, and make them into angles so that when they are put together, the shape is like that of a letter which is called "Greek"; then remove that flesh according to how much it protrudes below what follows the paper, then bring together the two separated parts, sewing them with a woollen thread; then treat it with the softening medicines and bandages we have mentioned until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a crack or a suture or cauterization, you must make an incision filled with papers under the hairs, and according to what is mentioned above; then separate between the two lips of the wound as I said before; and one must perform the procedure according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and wise master physicians use all their skill and devices to make the figure return to its natural state; and even the patients themselves, depending on what treatment and tools are needed, present in various ways.
dou soudement de la papiere	Suddenly from paper...
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this welding occurs in the hand of a man such that the paper above is glued with the white of the eye, and it cannot move or perform its natural functions, you must therefore insert the tip of a razor beneath the paper and lift it upwards; and stretch it with pincers until you cut what is left at the thin spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too blunt so that the patient may endure the excessively sharp spatula wounding his eye; and your incision, by which you remove this assembly, must be gently performed such that the paper returns to its natural form; and all of this assembly is healed, and sometimes a saline solution is applied in the eye, or warm water, and with a collar; then place between the paper and the eye a tent made of linen, and apply wet wool on top of the eye soaked in egg white; after three days use the collar and other binding things until it heals.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the fingernail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the fingernail is of two types: it can be nervous and similar to hard skin, or another type which is not nervous but resembles white frozen moisture, when one touches it with iron and tries to remove it with pincers, they cannot; both types begin near the large tear duct, growing little by little until covering all sight, light, and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of incision is as follows: have the patient place their head in your lap, then open their eyes; lift up a piece of paper with your hand, then coil the fingernail around the pincers' small blades, and stretch it upwards; next take a needle, attach to it either a horsehair, cowhair or oxhair, and strong thread; double over the needle's tip slightly and insert it into the nail, piercing through completely with the needle, bind the nail together with thread and extend it upwards, then carefully peel off all the hair from alongside the nail towards the pupil and iris until only the natural flesh of the eyelid remains where tears flow habitually; occasionally you need to stretch the fingernail at its root alone, with just the pincers and thread as we said earlier; then use a very thin spatula and small forceps to carefully remove all remaining parts from within the tear duct's root, leaving behind only natural flesh of the eyelid so that tears may still flow freely through incision; this is the method:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And ensure that the spatula does not touch or break the fleshy membrane, and that the plumule is not pierced; after making the incision, pour a pinch of crushed celery seed into the eye, and apply a collar made from litharge, leaving it until the next day; then treat as necessary until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, and the hook cannot enter it, this similar appearance of a nail has often been treated by doctors; they arise as I have described in the division, and if you see them cut, treat the eye of the patient, and take a slight thin spatula shaped like this:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Then gently lift the nail, and if you see that it does not thin out and the reason persists, so pour from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litharge and red lead and crushed celery seed, and plug up the eye until the next day; then resume the other task according to this same work, until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, like a hot abscess, then lance it, and first treat the hot abscess until it heals, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of flesh around the eyelid harms the eye with great nuisance, suspend it to an onion, and cut off a part but not all, so that body fluid does not come out; then distill into the eye red mercury made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	Of the flesh that grows on the pupil.
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	In some men's eyes, red flesh sometimes grows, covering the pupil and spreading onto the cornea, looking like a pomegranate rose; the treatment is that the patient puts his head in your lap, then you open their eye, and coil all this flesh with appropriate hooks, holding it firmly; then cut off the first flesh, and keep cutting with a razor until finished, being careful not to injure the eye during treatment; and let the incision be with a spatula as we have said for nail incision and small forces from which one removes the sebaceous material, just like the figure in this chapter shows; and when the incision is complete and all flesh removed, then fill the eye with crushed wax or distill red mercury and similar corrosive medicines into it, and place cotton with egg white on the eye so that an abscess is prevented; and if anything remains, and hot blood overwhelms you, and you doubt a hot abscess, then leave the eye and treat the abscess with things soothing for a hot abscess; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do so for any flesh attached in the eye by this likeness.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nevertheless, you must ease the treatment of each weak eye according to its natural path; and for accidental injury with iron, do not place your hand in any such task until you see that this limb can withstand it.
des voines des eulz	the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Above the eye are red veins that cover it, impairing its function and weakening vision daily.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary for the first practitioner to examine the eye and determine if the redness is isolated or caused by another disease; then treat it in this manner: instruct the patient to place their head in your care, then carefully remove those veins entirely according to your knowledge, ensuring a double layer of fine incisions as follows:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	Et deux onces par degrés en le corps selon cette forme:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Puis avec les forces, ouvre délicatement ces veines, essuie le sang heure après autre, jusqu'à ce que tu vois disparaître ces veines loin de l'œil; et prends garde à ne pas blesser l’œil avec les pointes des spatules, fais cette opération à l'heure de midi devant le soleil, et sois très chaud dans ton travail afin d'éviter toute coupure sur ces veines; et lorsque tu auras fait cela, distille dans l’œil une colliere verte et rouge pour corrompre ce qui est demeuré du cébèle.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	Et si tu n'as pas le pouvoir de recueillir tout cela à cette heure-là, fais une cataplasme sur l’œil avec des choses apaisantes pour la douleur des yeux, et laisse-le quelques jours jusqu'à ce que les douleurs soient calmées et qu'il y ait assurance d'un ébouillantement chaud, puis recommence selon cette manière qui est devant jusqu'à ce qu'il soit guéri; et c'est la forme des forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the eye's fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The physician calls this condition "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cauterization and strong medicine as I have mentioned before, but it does not heal, then there is pus within that you must cut open over the abscess where it should die, and drain all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then remove all the instrument of which this is the form; it is called an "asper chief", and made from iron due to a head injury, and pointed like a file consistent with its current shape:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place on the spot of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand lightly until you know that corruption has ceased; do this several times, then restore the area with drying medicine.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	if the flesh is welded together and bone grows there, and the body of the wound has healed, and it remains that way for forty days, and it does not renew or become abscessed again, and no bad accident happens to it, you know that it is healed; if this isn't so, then there is another means to reopen the fistula at the navel according to this method: and it's like you uncover the bone a second time with iron [instrument] and sharp medicines; and when it has been uncovered you will take one iron rod in this shape, and the end of iron be three-sided, and the shaft is tapered down close to the tip as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then place the iron rod over the bone near the crest and move your hand away from the eye one span; then turn the entire instrument so that it pierces through the bone until the patient feels it via air escaping if they keep their hand on the navel; and you will restore this spot with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when new skin has grown over the fistula, and is hardened, remove the material from the navel; thus this procedure is less troublesome for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eye is completely open and there is no obstruction or narrowing of the pupil, you must bind the patient's head; then clean it and apply cups or leeches without causing harm to suck out the blood, then place on the eye a plaster made of acacia juice, aloe, incense, and gum arabic, then extract the eye and cover with plasters over bandages and soft cloths; and the way of these cloths is such that you take very soft cloths, each folded into four, and then place one upon another according to the quantity required by the eye; then bind it above with a hard piece of wood, and reapply cups to suck without causing harm; then remove the cups and keep the eye bound day and night, and if the bindings loosen you must tighten them well; then remove the bindings after day and night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not, repeat the plaster and cloths and bindings and cups until it heals.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	From the rupture of dry tissue
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a rupture occurs in the dry tissue, it opens up, and there is an expulsion of fluid like resin droplets, which is dreadful to behold; if you see it burst, the procedure is such that you insert a needle into the root of the lower part until reaching the upper part, then insert another needle with double thread from the eyelid margin; pierce through, and leave the first needle in place according to its position; then cut the double thread and tie a piece of dry tissue around it, securing it tightly, thereafter remove the needle and apply damp wool soaked in egg white onto the eye; leave it until the thread adheres with the dry tissue, then treat the eye with comforting substances until the wound is healed; sometimes the wound is bound with dry tissue on either side using a circle of cloth until it is completely healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes show great prominence, pierce them with a fine spatulum that comes in through the eye perfectly, and remove the white moisture and lower the eyes, and enter immediately; then extract it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the eyelid
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease, which is called "alcunnati," is nothing but the eyelid that is gathered in the eye, resembling descending water, and it is not water; and the manner of its appearance of work is such that you make the patient sit on a prepared straight chair, then take their head between your two hands, and move it so that you see the eyelid come above your eyes; then be fixed, and do not descend and remove the light, and let the patient see things as they used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the descent of the eyelid is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	sit the patient between your hands, then take the fine spatula and make an incision on the horny tissue one hole along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the horny tissue and the cornea until the bowel comes out; when it has come out, drop into the eye warm water mixed with honey, or water in which fenugreek has been boiled and honey, then treat it again with another cure until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	water from the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have found these waters in the division, and what needs to be pierced; it is done according to healthiness.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	Have the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light so that he is not disturbed by the sun, and tie up their healthy eye tightly; then place some paper on your left hand if their eyes are left, or right hand if they are right; take in your right hand, if their eyes are left, an instrument called "almagda", or with your left hand if their eyes are right; then put the tip of the instrument next to the cornea as thick as a line in that whiteness of the eye at the part where the lower tear duct is located, then push the instrument called almagda carefully, and turn your hand so it pierces into the white part of the eye, and feel that almagda reaches something hollow; and you must make sure that the measure of the path of almagda equals the exact length from the limit of the pupil to the end of blackness which is the cornea of the eye; then you will see bone on that paper due to the clarity of the cornea, and place the instrument where the water is located and express it below a way into another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the water drains now, the patient sees before them and an instrument in their eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After rest for a short while, and if the water flows upwards again via the second passageway, insert the forceps with the instrument, and when it is securely attached and does not rise, extract the almagda lightly by turning your hand back and forth; then put some sealing gemme in the aqueous humour, and remove this from inside the eye.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then apply over the eye pads or moistened linen with rose oil and egg white, and bind it to the healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, apply ground cumin with plenty of egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the ointment cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are such men who have overly hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called 'alberit', of which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep, but make a subtle opening, then insert the ointment, as we have said; and upon completion of this work, provide the patient with an agreeable bed, where they can lie on their back in a dark place; be free from all movement, and take light foods, and do not move their head to the right or left, and be bound according to their condition for three days; then untie them in that same dark room, and test their vision, and make them look at some objects, and then rebind them until the seventh day; and it is not fitting that you do this during the hour of the cure or after incision just now, but it is necessary to delay due to the rapid rise of fluids.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	If a hot abscess forms, remove the eye before the seventh day and treat it with the usual remedies for an abscess; when it has healed, uncover the wound and apply ointment to its edge for one day, then place it back in this dark room.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	Go out of the dark house with a small knock and a big one, and if it changes in these ways, know that no disciple should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And someone came to us from Iran who told us that in their country they make a pierced alembic to extract water, but I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; perhaps this is a new invention.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are similar to the appearances of the shapes of almagda, so that those who do not recognize them may see them; and they should be made properly with brass.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the head of the ears be of this same subtle material, and the end be in three pointed angles.
de la char sor le neis	over the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes there are born or arise diverse creatures with joined bodies, from which there may be some that appear as scorpions with many feet; and if there should be such where the body is adorned with bright colors, and if it has a soft body of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In this case of such creatures which are soft and not adorned, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; open their nostrils, and apply the ointment to those creatures, drawing them out forcefully; then cut off what you can hold with a subtle sharp spatula from one side, until you know that all of the creature has been removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if anything remains that cannot be cut away, then open it up with all the delicate instruments lightly so that nothing remains; and if you are overcome by it, or there is a hot abscess, treat the wound as necessary; and if they are malignant abscesses, hasten to cauterize until the blood is drained and all flesh removed, then rinse with hot or cold water or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the abscess opens and moisture seeps out until it reaches the palate, know that it is healing; and if the moisture does not drain properly, understand there is new flesh on the bone which prevents the instruments from cutting: in this case you must insert a piece of linen thread slightly thicker than a hair into the nostril to the point where one can feel resistance. Tie two knots along its length with about an inch between them and have the patient pull at each end until the moisture drains through the nose; children often do this at school, it is quite easy provided you are careful not to put any strain on the thread itself. Hold onto both ends of the thread in either hand and gently pull one after another until all that can be extracted has been removed.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this so that you know that the worms have corrupted this flesh, then pull out the maggots, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and replace it back into the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all remaining flesh; and then put a piece of lead in the nose for some days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them; and that is the form of the instrument to purge the head, at which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be made of silver or copper, resembling an open lamp, like a tube in shape and size; and lead it this way (to the nose); and if you wish, make a closed tube, and let the instrument be full to purge the head; and have one hand on the head to hold it when heating oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	From skin over the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Often there arises in the head of the nose a disease called 'telul', and it grows and becomes large over time, becoming an unsightly thing to behold; and so you must cut it out at its beginning, removing all of it, then apply cautery or burning medicine onto it; and if one waits too long to cut it while it is still small, take heed if it is hard, of dark color, with poor sense: do not touch it with iron for it would be an aggravated abscess, as when it is cut once, great harm comes to the patient; but if the abscess is easily touched, and not of dark color, and you see that one can remove it all at once, then empty the patient's insides and cut out the abscess without fear, treating the wound with drying and constricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when the treatment of continuous dislocation affects one of these cartilage works, it benefits little, even though some men may experience relief.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	You must therefore consider when this happens to anyone, examine whether the wound is fresh and full of blood; then adjust the two lips for a suture, treat it until it heals; and if the lips are already separated on both sides, you should remove all heart tissue from those parts until they bleed, then join the two lips in a suture, hold them together, apply powder of dragon's blood and ground incense over the wound; place a piece of strong or other escharotic plaster on top of these powders, leave it until it dries by itself, then treat it with ointment until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way of suturing is such that you bring together the edges: either with needles, as we have said for stitching the abdomen; or with thread, as I have made known to you.
des apostemes des levres	Wounds of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Men with wounds inside their lips have hard abscesses, resembling grains of barley, small and large; then you must turn back the lip, cut into each one, grasp it with forceps, and scoop out its contents in every part; afterwards fill the place after incision with powdered vitriol until the blood is dried up; then leave it alone, and treat the area with dry substances until it heals.
de la char des gencives	On the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a fleshy growth appears on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus"; you must hold it with forceps and cut it at its root, allowing the bowel or blood to pass; then apply ground vitriol or other styptic and drying powders; if this flesh grows back after incision, and does so repeatedly, cut it a second time, cauterizing it: it will not return after cautery; these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of sores
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes sores are found on the gums inside the mouth, rough and unsightly crusts; sometimes teeth are black or yellow and green, so decay has reached the gum, making the tooth stink; you must seat the patient between your hands with his head in your lap, and extract any loose teeth or crusts until nothing remains; do likewise for blackening, greening, yellowness, and other discolorations, cleaning them thoroughly; if what caused this is not removed at first instance, repeat the process on the second and third day until everything has been cleaned; be aware that teeth require various forms of instruments to extract depending on what the work requires, as the rasp used for extracting teeth from outside the gums has a different shape than one used between the teeth; you should possess all these forms and others.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the tooth for its pain that you delay the extraction as much as you can, because it should not be done at all; for it is a highly important substance until such time as there is no excuse to remove it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is forced to extract, you must be certain of which tooth is causing the pain.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the pain leaves the patient, and they believe it is in a healthy tooth, leading to the extraction of a good tooth; yet the pain does not leave due to this, as the true cause remains, which we have already seen with these sufferers; and when you are sure of the painful tooth, you must scrape all around it with a strong spatula to protect the gum from all sides; then move it with your fingers or delicate pincers in the first place and gently remove it, so that it is well loosened, then firmly grasp the pincers; and have the patient's jaw in your holy hands between your knees, hold it tight so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth without breaking it, and if it cannot be done, take one of these instruments and gently insert it from each side, moving it like you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is perforated and worn down, you must fill it with small pieces of cloth where the holes are; gently grasp it with the forceps so it does not break when pulling; one must work very carefully around the gum to remove the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	Be careful not to break it and leave a part behind, as the remaining root can cause even greater pain for the patient.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	Beware not to act like the ignorant surgeon, who in their haste and boldness sometimes breaks the tooth, and fails to achieve what we have described; but instead causes great harm due to the remaining roots or broken pieces, as we have often seen; when the tooth is extracted, clean the place with wine or oil and silk; if there is bleeding, which often happens, fill the place with powdered vitriol; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, with which one extracts teeth first, should have long points and thick handles, so that they do not bend when you extract the tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should have thick bodies so that they do not bend during extraction, and be well-made iron, and have teeth to hold the tooth firmly.
de la racine des dens	From the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains after extraction, you must place moist cotton wool soaked in butter over the socket for one or two days,
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the socket softens, you can insert the forceps which are called 'algefri', giving the head the appearance of a bird's beak; and they should be made like this:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tongs, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root, and place the instrument known as 'althali', which is a type of pliers, like this:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	Let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps due to this, it is good; if not, then assist with all instruments, of which forms come after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you require assistance from this instrument with two blades, here is its form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron instruments that are used in front of the teeth, as well as this large instrument resembling tongs, which has this form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this instrument be outside that it cannot break, and know that there are many dental instruments; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise subtle masters find their own instrument by themselves, according to what their works and the illness show them, because there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach any instrument for its diversity, and if one breaks from the chariot or the other bones, in that case look for instruments that they need, which I told you, and help with gestures, of which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be thick and well-holding to hold the bone so that it does not slip away but can grasp and remove it; then restore its place with medicines suitable for this purpose, and if there is any decay in the bone, and it is small, then take out all these instruments:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, and the form is ugly, especially in virgin women, you must know if the tooth was born after the other teeth  and it's not right where it should be, and can't be treated or filed down: then extract it; and if it's hollow with the tooth, take this instrument of which here is the shape, and is similar to a little beak, and let it be made of iron that's sharp on top
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the gum several times with your hands for the hardness of the tooth, and so you don't move the other teeth, and if it's apparent that one can file it down, then file it with this type of rasp as shown here:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it's also like the rasp used to make needles; and you file the tooth several times with your hands gently, so that it doesn't move when biting; then plane it at the end with any type of rasp, and if the tooth is too sharp and hurts the tongue, file down its roughness until it's even, so that it doesn't hurt the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	When teeth loosen
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the front teeth loosen due to impact or falling, and the patient cannot bite down without them falling out, even after being treated with constricting medicines which prove ineffective, they must be secured with a gold wire, as silver wire turns green and rots but gold does not change; let the wire be neither too thin nor too thick according to the space between the teeth; if you wish to straighten the teeth, take the wire and pass it double through two healthy teeth, then place the loose tooth or teeth in between them until you have reached safely the healthy tooth on the other side; restart the covering process towards where you began and gently yet firmly pull your hand so that there is no movement; let the ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cut the shoulder joints with a wire using pincers, and join them back together, and put them between healthy teeth, and make sure it doesn't injure the tongue; then leave it so tight for as long as it can stay that way, and if it loosens or the wires twist, tighten it again with another piece of wire; and if it stays in place like this, it will serve you forever, and here is the shape of teeth and how to fix two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, put it back in its place immediately, as we have said; and do not let anyone but a wise and skilled person interfere, and sometimes you make a false tooth from cow bone, placing it where there is a gap, then tightening it like we said, and it will stay in place for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cut the tongue's tie.
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	This tie that comes beneath the tongue by nature at birth, or due to an accident of a healed wound; and the procedure is as follows: you open the patient's mouth, have their head in your hand, and lift their tongue; then cut the nervous tie broadly so that the tongue detaches from its base, and if there is hardness or swelling caused by sudden injury, insert the uncine and cut this tie broadly; be careful not to go too deep as it may pierce the artery beneath; when you are done, rinse with rose water and oil, or cold water, then place a linen cloth under their tongue; the patient should hold their mouth open each night so that the wound does not heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bleeding occurs, apply powdered vitriol to the spot; and if the blood escapes, then cauterize with the fig-shaped cautery, which is good for this; then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	if you see it turn red or black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a cancerous sore; if it starts to lighten in color and moisture appears, then remove the crust and clean it with a thin spatula, and relieve it on one side and the other; and if blood escapes during your work, apply powdered vitriol until it stops flowing, then return to your work until you have treated everything thoroughly; then raise the area gently with ash and silk, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	From abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes lumps come inside the throat called "godath," which are properly known as tonsils, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard abscess with little sense of feeling and faint color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is swollen, do not touch it with iron due to blood loss; but let it be until it becomes soft, then you can remove it, or else it would rupture on its own; and if it is white in color, moist, and the root is subtle, prepare your tools for cutting, but first ensure that the abscess has cooled down and is calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, and his chiés soit en ton sain, and li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, and presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; and soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	When you press the tongue with all this instrument, and you see the abscess, take the onion and fix it into the almond, then pull hard on top as much as you can; and pull something out of the cloth with it, then cover the instrument, from which this is made, that looks like a pair of tongs; and nevertheless the head [of the instrument] is bent, and one side against the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this instrument at hand, use the pincers, from which this is made:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And they should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other; and when you have extracted one of the almonds, extract the other in the same manner; after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, warm water and vinegar, or if there is bleeding, then gargle with water, boiled pomegranate skin or myrtle leaves and similar things until the blood has stopped; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses occur in the throat besides the two almonds, so extract them therefore like the two almonds equally.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that had formed inside her throat; it was a small one, but it almost completely blocked her airway so that she could not breathe through it, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if left like this for just another day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	The abscess was so swollen that two tubes had been inserted through the two nostrils to keep it open.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I therefore hurried and inserted one tube into one nostril, then the other into the other nostril, and I opened her mouth and pressed on her tongue; after inserting a tube into each abscess and cutting out some of it, only a small amount of blood came out; thus the woman's airway was now clear and she began to drink water and then wine, and I did not stop cutting away at this abscess for quite some time; but the abscess would grow again and fill up the space that I had emptied until once more it became very large; so I seared it with a red-hot iron inside her throat: thus it stopped growing any further; from here on in, I left these matters to God.
de l’uve	Of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When rheum descends to the eye, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called a "perpendicular"; and if it is below, thick, and round, it is called an "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the sore has healed, and it is subtle, then you must cut it; and for one which is round, gathered together, and not long; and it is bloody or of a false color or black, then you must avoid incising it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner I have described, regarding its whiteness and length, you must make the patient sit facing the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument we have mentioned before; then insert the hook into the eye, and draw it out, and cut it with one of two instruments I said in the incision of the testicles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must not cut any flesh beyond what is superfluous outside the natural limit; for if you remove more, it will be harmful to speech and voice; and after the incision, treat it as we have said in treating the two almonds, and continue the treatment until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient fears cutting, you must employ an engine for their sense of fear to be cauterized.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The manner of the cautery is sharp, like a needle.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient should place their head in your lap, and then press their tongue against the instrument we mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and seal it with hot sharp liquid so that it is neither too thick nor too thin; and use this device, which has the following shape: [shape description here]
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or cauterization. If it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calmly and mix hyssop, oregano, rue, chamomile, artemisia, and similar herbs, combining all or some of them into a pot with ease; boil and ensure the pot is well-glazed with strong earth, containing within it an instrument pointed like so:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be made of silver or copper, with one end inserted into the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the eye through the nose until the eye is withered; then repeat often until the eye dries out and make sure not to do this at the beginning of hot abscess emergence because many things happen; nor perform it except during the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and place a piece of egg shell inside the patient's mouth so that it does not become too hot; for the egg shell does not allow the vapour to damage the mouth, and this is a good treatment combined with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Often there is an obstruction in the throat due to a fish bone or any other object; therefore, you must extract whatever you can see and press the tongue towards the sun with all your strength so that you can view the object; for what does not appear and remains stuck in the throat, you must make the patient vomit until the food is digested in the stomach; perhaps then the object will be expelled through vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel [orange peel?], or a lettuce root, or a crumb of dry bread; tie a string to the sponge and then have them swallow it; when it reaches the obstruction, it will expand, and then you can pull it out; if it does not come out with what we have said, take an instrument made of lead in this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instruments be bent at the head so that they can enter the throat more easily, and keep his head raised upwards; watch out not to touch the epiglottis for it may cause choking, nor should you push on the bone too much; better have the patient do it himself because he knows where it hurts more; let him put them down or pull them up as long as they go evenly deep until they reach their deepest point.
de la sansue de la gorge	Of the worm of the throat.
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Never has the worm been cured by medicine, as I said in the division of treatments; and when it doesn't work, then look into the patient's throat under sunlight, while you press their tongue with an instrument like the one mentioned before.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the leech, pull it out with your little fingernail or use delicate pincers suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that does not work, take a hairy goose quill and push it down the patient's throat; then insert the hot end of an iron rod into the tip of the quill and repeat this procedure frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And keep the patient soaked in water all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then fill a glass with cold water and open the patient's mouth, pouring it in without allowing them to swallow; keep moving their hand frequently and as soon as the leech senses the water it will fall out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not fall out as mentioned above, then fumigate the patient with asafetida using the instrument I described for smoking the eye; do this several times because it will eventually drop without causing any damage.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot with visible coals and cover it with a perforated lid in the middle, through which the head of the instrument should be inserted; then add your fumigating substance, and have the patient put the end of the tube into their mouth and close their mouth so that the smoke doesn't escape but instead goes down to the tonsils. The tonsils will now become red, and if they don't, repeat the fumigation several times; let the patient suffer from thirst, eating salty things without drinking water; eventually, it will be necessary for them to spit it out through this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument used to treat tonsils is like a curved pair of pliers when you can see it, designed to enter the throat; and it resembles a bird's beak with roughness like a file, so that whatever it grasps cannot be released. Here is its form: [drawing or image could go here]
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapter of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are many types of abscesses, according to the following recollection from this book and others, and they vary in perforation and size; they occur in two ways: one is due to its own nature, and the other because of moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for those places where they occur in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For abscesses of the head are different from those of the anus, and abscesses in fleshy places are different from those that occur in joints, and each has its own treatment.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And one should not lance abscesses when the bowels are dead according to their condition; and for those that must be lanced when they are ripe, and do not die according to their condition, such as abscesses near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses develop around joints, and one leaves them until they are completely rotten, perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint become corrupted, which is why this causes contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Where an abscess is located near the main limb, and if you delay perforating it until it dies, this will harm the main limb; when it is near the fundament, pierce it before it dies; and one must not perforate an abscess which appears without complete digestion, unless it is near the fundament, so that it does not rot completely, become elongated inside, develop into a fistula, and cannot heal for a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you must know the moment for perforating an abscess which has died according to its completion, and this is when pain subsides, fever decreases, inflammation of the skin reduces in redness and swelling, and other symptoms; one should perform the perforation at the lowest point of the abscess, where it appears most mobile; making the incision on the surface of the body, and if the abscess is located on the hands or feet, joints, nerves, arteries, and all equal surfaces without curvature.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those who bend, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when the abscess is in fleshy place, it is better that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed to be digested completely, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before then, the body of the abscess will be elongated and full of much filth; and perhaps the lips and depths will harden.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if for any abscess that is pierced according to the breadth of the body, according to what the limb needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you must bring small abscesses with small openings; and for large abscesses, make large openings, and many incisions according to the likeness of the size of the abscess; and for such abscesses where it is necessary to cut out the core, do so when it is fresh like cloth, and is softened, then you must do as with boils: and there are those which are split into three angles, and some that are cut like myrtle leaves, like abscesses from scurf; and there are those in which a round incision is made, other incisions and similar cuttings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the spirits sometimes flutter with the exit of bowels, which may cause the patient's death, and you might not notice it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and once you have pierced your abscess, dry the wound, and examine if the abscess wound is small; and if it's a full-blown ulcer, provide linseed or old cotton bandages; and if it's a large abscess with numerous perforations, ensure each one contains a tent-like structure so that they touch each other; and if you've cut away some of the skin around the abscess, fill this gap with either old cotton or shavings of linen cloth without moisture, bind it until the third day; then remove it, clean it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if there is bleeding during your work, bring cold water and apply it gently, moistening the cloth, and place it over the bleeding site repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the bleeding persists, apply compresses and poultices, and use the powders I mentioned on various occasions in this book. If it is winter and the skin or abscess is very sensitive, it is appropriate to place warm wine-soaked cloths over them; but if it is summer, and the skin is fleshy, use water-soaked cloths or cold oil-soaked ones instead, for up to three days as we have said; then remove the compresses, dry and treat the wound as required until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this must be universally known in abscess treatment: now I have told you how to proceed with abscess treatment, and here is the chapter.
des soros	scars
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	From the brain of the head come small abscesses, and they are like threads, just like a hen's egg yarn, and there is an abundance of similar things.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some fatty and soft ones where there is moisture like pus; and of the kind that are hard and stoney to cut into, and one must have no doubt if an artery does not interfere.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of cutting is such that you test every instrument which is called an "entromissoire", from which its shape originates, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they do so above the long one.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is drained, thoroughly remove and scrape away the skin that contains this moisture, for it will return if nothing is left behind; then soak cotton in Egyptian ointment, if present; if not, use water and salt, apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; this will draw out whatever remains from the night before.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then renew the cotton, as before, on the second day and the third, until you know for certain that nothing remains from night to night; then treat the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess persists in a fatty area, remove it in this way from end to end; cut away your edges and scrape off all the skin around it, focusing on draining out as much pus as possible where it lies; but if an artery opposes you, then do what I told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do this for an abscess if it is a hard one, and of cutting and treating as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	He cuts into the hard abscess and moist tissue, which is less painful, as they contain little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And for some of these abscesses or bumps where there is no moisture involved, I recall one abscess that I lanced from the head of an elderly woman; and I found it as hard as a stone, rough and white, and could not break it; had anyone struck it with any instrument, they would have caused her as much harm as if it were a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	Other abscesses that occur on the head are those which come from children's heads and at the roots of their ears, should always be lanced as low down as possible to allow for drainage; they should then be treated appropriately.
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Often these abscesses occur on the neck, and under the arms, and in other places of the body, and they are very common, and become intertwined with one another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly within its own place, just like the abscess of the head and other swellings we have mentioned earlier; there are many similar cases.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	Some contain moisture, and there are others that are malignant and refuse to respond to treatment.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In those that are well-disposed to treatment and resemble the colour of the body, move from side to side without being too close to any nerve in the neck or artery, and is not deep; you must cut it on top, peel back its skin on each side, and stretch open the two lips of the heart with hooks if necessary, just as we have said before about abscesses in the head; drain it thoroughly, be sure that you do not damage any nerve or vein, avoid sharp instruments so that the hand does not slip, and do not go too far ahead to cut what should not be cut.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work, then put in the wound ground glass or some powders that stop bleeding, and hold the wound; leave it until the abscess is eased, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the bleeding is stopped, return to your work until you complete it; then check with your right index finger if there remain any small scabs, cut them and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large wound in the root of the scab, it is not fitting that you cut that scab at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall by itself without harm; then dress the wound with old cotton steeped in Egyptian ointment, and heal it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you remove the entire scrofula, you must then join the two lips of the wound together, stitching them now, as there is no excess tissue left due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	you must cut out the root of it and extract the pus, then stitch it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For scrofula with excess tissue, pierce it where the dead flesh ends; and perforate it as described before, depending on the situation, then treat it with poultices and similar things so that it does not corrupt what remains of the corrupted tissue; and when the wound is clean, treat it with ointment to promote flesh growth until it is healed.
de squinance	to a twisted place
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke of the operation to cut into the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is a record of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those with squint, it is necessary that the fold in the throat called the "epiglottis" be avoided; and do not seek treatment from them, because all the veins and passages of the patient are affected by those who have abscesses hot in the mouth, or in the throat or tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the passage of the windpipe, it is necessary to cut through the epiglottis to avoid the danger that comes from suffocation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is necessary, when we want to split the epiglottis, that we split it below III circles or IIII with a small crosswise incision between the II circles or through the quantity of the wound on the surface, not in the cartilage; and these veins are suitable for the section of the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long from inside.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat thoroughly, then cuts the heart until reaching the windpipe; and remove the blood vessels, should you see anything, and then cut the surface as we have said; and it is proven by the section of the windpipe which must be through the broken place, and by the defect in the voice; and leave the wound open for some time.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed which you fear will lead to strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound from the heart, and cut it completely clean without the cartilage; then administer medicines that foster flesh growth until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Al-Bukhari states that one should not proceed until the throat is entirely blocked, and the patient is judged to be at death's door, and breathing stops.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then cauterize the epiglottis so that the patient cannot inhale, and they breathe through the wound, thus saving them from death; and for this reason the ancients ordered to leave the wound open until the evil of the illness has passed, and it passes in three or four days. Then they ordered to sew up the wound and cure it until it is cured; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a damsel took a knife and thrust it into her throat, cutting part of the windpipe; I was called to treat her, and found her as good as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found blood issuing from it, I knew she had not cut a vein or inflicted damage on her throat, and breath was escaping through the injury.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried and sewed up the wound, treating it until it was clean; all that befell the damsel was hoarseness of voice, and afterwards she returned to her senses; thus I say that there is no fear in cutting into the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the thick throat.
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Cist apostemes is called "hernie de gorge", and it is a large abscess in the colour of jaundice, and it is very common in women; and it occurs in two ways: natural, and accidental; where there is no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental is of two kinds, one resembling fat lumps, and the other type resembles an abscess that comes from our arteries; and there is fear, and it should not be treated with fire unless it is small, and you must test and probe thoroughly: if you find it similar to a fatty lump, and it cannot open into any vein, then cut it as you would a boil, and treat its covering entirely, until it is healed perfectly.
des nous	de us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways of addressing us, all of which I will describe here; now it is necessary that I explain the entire distinction between our group and theirs.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that theirs is marked by chills and fever, until the boiling passes, and the putrefaction is complete; then the fever and chill subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	Among our group there is neither chill nor fever nor pain, and it contains I syfac, which is its own sack and is according to the colour of the body, and begins like a boil, and becomes large; and there are two types, either hard or moist, and very varied in colour as I have said before.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	You must, when you come to the treatment of the bone, first test and inquire about all the instrument called an "introducer," according to how its form will appear in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method of examining abscesses inside us is that you take hold at the moistest place you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers back and forth until you know the instruments have pierced the heart, then do so according to the size of the abscess; then remove the introducer, taking care not to drop it.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If running moisture is short and whatever its color, do it as I have said for other abscesses; if after the introducer no moisture comes forth, know that it is fatty, so make a cross-shaped incision, take pincers, and gently peel away the skin on either side and hold the coat in which it lies so you draw it healthy with the bone; and if you cannot draw it out whole, then pull it apart piece by piece until nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if anything remains inside, it will cause the wound to return many times; and if a small piece remains, and it irritates you, fill the wound with some sharp corrosive powders, constrict the wound, apply warm soothing abscess-relieving substances over it, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed; and if the swelling is large, cut both lips of the wound, and treat it with something that promotes flesh growth.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the wound opposes you or others are in a hurry, apply powdered vitriol, leave it on for two or three days until the wound rots and stops bleeding; then return to cut away whatever remains of the rot.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the shapes of the instruments used for incision, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small; there are also three types of squares called "albaret", and one type called a "breb"; these also come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, to probe fistula abscesses; they are like the needles used for sewing wounds, made of yellow brass, iron or silver, with those made of yellow metal being more valuable; they are also coated in black pitch when probing fistula abscess cavities; they too come in three sizes: large, medium, and small depending on the size of the openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of the uncines are very similar, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and there are uncines with two curves in three ways too; and there are uncines with three curves, also in three ways; and there are uncines with two curves, and uncines with only one curve, also in three ways; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of these has what one makes sharp, and there are some that do not cut the flesh except from one side, with which one removes the scabs, so as not to damage the vein or nerve; and for these introductories there are the dull-pointed ones in many, so that the patient does not perceive them when opening an abscess; and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you can see; and one should only use them on fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, armpits, and similar areas; and sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling a scab remover, according to this shape, with which one stops the blood flow.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it is sometimes put back into place by clamping veins or arteries together, but other times according to this large form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, appearing like the breasts of women; they remain ugly and swollen, and if one wishes to cure them, it must be done according to this form from line b. to g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape the fat and fill the wound with medicated meat, then bring together the two lips of the wound by stitching them up, and treat it until it is healed; if the breast sags downwards and its consistency is softened due to its size like that in women, make two incisions above it through two similar cuts so that one may be attached to the other at each end so that the largest line contains the smaller according to this form from line b. up to g.; then remove the skin between the two lips, and take out the fat, and use what we have mentioned about stitching and powders, and anything else necessary for treatment until it is healed; if it isn't healed or the incision isn't complete because the patient doesn't want to rest or due to loss of blood, you must fill the wound with wet cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; leave it until it drains out all remaining fatty tissue then treat him again until he is fully healed.
des apostemes des asselles	Of abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come beneath the armpits are like hard scrofula, or it has sides, and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b. to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the entire bowels that are in the abscess are emptied, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it there until the next day, then remove all the cotton and treat gently until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, treat it as we have said for scrofula incisions, and if the wound contains bowels, apply cauterization as mentioned before.
de la routure de l’artere	From the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is ruptured, and the skin above it is fused together, there are often abscesses that form, and likewise, the vein also becomes swollen and abscessed; you can identify this when it is due to the artery because the abscess will be long in its entirety; and when you feel it with your fingers, you will sense a constriction; if it is for the vein, then there will be visible swelling on the surface; it is foolish to cut into such an abscess, especially when it is located below the axilla and at the breastbone, or around the neck and in many other areas, as it would be very extensive.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	You must therefore avoid iron treatment and do so for the one at the head as well, and in case of swelling due to a ruptured artery, make an incision above the skin lengthwise; then open the cut with scissors, and separate the artery from its surrounding tissues until it is exposed; insert a needle underneath and pierce through to the other side, securing the artery by running a double thread through two points as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries found at the temples; then press on the area between the two threads with your finger until all blood has been expelled from there, and treat the abscess; gradually release the pressure point so that the ties come loose; proceed to clean what has been treated, ensuring it is properly healed; if the abscess results from an incision into a vein, you should hold in place with your hand whatever part of the abscess you can reach while keeping all skin intact, then insert another needle underneath where you are holding the abscess with your hand and pierce through so that there is a double thread on both sides; fasten the abscess by tying off either side as I have explained to you using one end of the two-part string; if you suspect this will not hold, place yet another needle at any point along its length directly beneath the incision made with the first needle and secure these threads in four places; cut away all excess from the heart of the abscess until nothing remains but what is tied off; apply a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil over it before administering further treatment in form of tenting or ointments to ensure complete healing.
des apostemes des ners	Of abscesses of nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also abscesses come in the artery and in the vein, abscesses occur in nerves when they are damaged or due to excessive work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	They occur more often in shoulders and hands and everywhere where there are joints, and they are serious abscesses, and their colour resembles that of the body, and it appears in various forms without pain; and when one presses firmly on them, the patient feels pain, and they are not situated on the surface of the body but below the heart; and they spread in all directions, neither forward nor backward, nor downwards or upwards, and those which occur at joints should not be cut open with an iron instrument: perhaps it would result in contraction; and those that appear on the head or forehead should be lanced with a spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, hold it with forceps and cut into its root; if it is large, suspend it with string, then remove and suture the wound, treating it until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	Large boils hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	They may occur in the belly and nowhere else; it is an illness called "fungus" due to its resemblance, with a subtle root system, large growths; some are small, others quite big; I saw a man who had two on his stomach that looked more like fungi than anything else - no difference at all: white in colour, delicate roots, neatly segmented, and moist inside.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them and found that one weighed eighteen ounces, and the other six З., and for the operation of incision, consider if the patient is moist, and the color of the artel is white, moist, and has a delicate root; then with a wide spatula, cauterize it in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	When cutting, there are often excessive losses of blood, and if you faint from it, then hasten to cauterize; and if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the incision with the iron, take a well-made linen thread and tie around the artel as we have said, and leave it for two days; then restrain the patient, and do not cease tightening the linen thread until you cut into the artel, and each by itself without effort; and if the roots are large, be afraid to cut especially in the belly area, but you can well cut half of them, then cauterize so that it does not return; treat the wound afterwards, and take care not to cut the flesh which is of a lighter color, of poor substance, and resembles milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an increased abscess, and I shall come to the treatment of cancer afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the wound festers deep down
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the wound comes from cauterization of a sore or crack in the skin, and it is on the belly with some of the bowels showing, as happens with other ruptures, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is mentioned before, or of windiness; and if this is due to the rupture of the skin and the discharge of pus, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, it is a slight matter without pain, and appears with various discharges.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if this is due to the discharge of the intestine, then it is more varied, and when one presses it with their fingers, it retracts and returns, and perhaps it is constipated, and swells greatly at the entrance of the bath and due to great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a minor issue, and it shows when you press it with your hand, there is no restriction; but if it is because of blood, then it presents with these signs: large and hard abscesses, fixed in place according to an amount; and if it is due to windiness (gas), it is soft to the touch, and the treatment depends on whether it appears to be arterial bleeding or from a vein, or gas.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	You must leave the treatment alone.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	Because there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if it appears to be concerning the intestine or anus, you must instruct the patient to hold their breath and lie straight and still; then bleed all around the belly button; then have them rest often between your hands, then go around the place that was marked with a span's width; then stretch half of the abscess over all the large inch; then bind it tightly with strong thread or firm silk cord, and let the knot be above; then operate on the stretched-out half of the abscess which is above the knot, put your index finger in and search for the intestine; if you find it caught by the knot, untie it and push the intestine out of the belly; and if you find the anus, grab it with the inch and trim the excess; and if the artery or vein gives you trouble, go around them carefully, then return to your work and take two needles, put two strong threads in them, and put the two needles through what was pierced crosswise; then extract the abscess by pulling it four times on the needles, and if you can see clearly, remove the needles, and leave the place until it rots away by itself; or you trim off the dead flesh when it becomes soft and rotten, treat it with what is necessary, and finish the abscess as we have said before; drain out any blood or moisture that you find, then treat the area accordingly, and seal the wound.
dou chancre	De la chancre
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have mentioned in the division the appearances of chancre, and how it should be treated with medicine, and how one must avoid iron-based treatments; we speak now of ulcerous chancres within the marrow, and great caution is required in their treatment, for the ancients said that when a chancre arises where it can be scraped away like those which appear on nipples, thighs, or similar places, it should all be removed at once while still in its beginning; but if it grows large and becomes ancient, one must never approach it, as I have never seen anyone healed of such, nor has any ever been cured before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient once of black bile; then make them bleed if they show signs of fullness, then put the patient into a good position to carry out the procedure; then cut away your warts or chancres with a knife, and shave over the whole area, removing it all without leaving anything behind; and let the blood run freely, and press well on the place with your hand or something else, and if the flow of blood opposes you in making an incision into the artery or vein, cauterize until the blood is stopped; then treat again until it is healed.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have previously spoken about the similarities of dropsy, and how the collection of water is formed, and the signs of each type, as well as the treatment with medicine or surgery; only the latter will be discussed here. It should not be treated with a surgical instrument in these two types: that is, tympanites and ascites, for they are deadly conditions. Therefore, when you treat this type of dropsy called "eclites" with medicines, and if the cure does not work, consider whether the patient is weak or has another condition like constipation or diarrhoea; do not use a surgical instrument, as it is dangerous. If you see that the patient is healthy and only suffers from dropsy, and they are neither too young nor too old, then proceed as follows: lift the patient upright with your hands, and have assistants press on their abdomen to move the water down towards the lower part of the back; then take a surgical knife in this way...
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	Et let it be divided into two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	A needle, yet not so deep as to reach the intestine when inserted and cause injury; then observe if the dropsy is caused by the intestines: in such a case you must make an incision above the navel three inches directly below the pit of the arm; and if it be due to disease of the liver your incision should be on the left side of the navel, three inches; but if it arises from an excess of moisture let it be on the right, and take care that the patient does not lie upon the wound while the superfluities flow towards a weaker place: then pierce through the skin with an instrument, press it in, and raise your hand so as to take out all the spatumile between the skin and the syfac like as when skinning with the quantity of a nail or somewhat round about; then penetrate the syfac till the spatumile reaches the empty space, which is the place where water collects; draw this forth, and thrust in this instrument of which here follows the form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Et is semblans a une caine d'argent subtil, and it is made of light brass or silver, and has on the lower part I small hole; and on one side III holes; and II on another side, and I on the other; and the head is shaped like a pen, which is how writers sharpen their pens.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	Au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l'aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l'estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu'il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l'arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l'estrument et retien l'aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j'ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l'estrument l'autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l'aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu'il ni demore mais c'un poc d'aigue.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient's condition, and leave too much water inside them, treat them with burial or hot sand, and through heavy sweating or a bath and in the sun, and abstain from drink; heal them with drying medicines until they are cured, and cauterize their stomach and liver and spleen after the removal of the water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Restraining the penis.
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born without an opening in the penis, or with a small one, or it is not in its correct position.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary to sometimes pierce it with a very thin, sharp instrument in this shape:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then put the subtle silver tube into the hole and bind it there for three or four days until he wishes to urinate, then remove the tube so that he can pass water, after which replace it; but perhaps this is unnecessary because the outflow of urine will not allow the tube to stay closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the hole is small in those who are treated with a silver tube as we have said it will widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who have the hole not in its place are blemished because none are born with it at the tip of their penis which means they cannot urinate unless they lift up their penis and this prevents them from having intercourse for sperm cannot reach the womb; a terrible condition.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of treatment is such that the patient often lies on their back; then stretch the head of the penis and the scrotum like a feather's size so that the hole opens in its center as it should be; and watch out for blood flow which happens many times, if it does happen you must stop it with what stops bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	Pustules on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often these abscesses appear on the penis and are an ugly sight; some are malignant while others aren't; you must catch them with a subtle hook, then scoop and clean them all out, afterward put on moist cotton with Egyptian ointment on it, then treat it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the cancer is malignant, with a foul color and stench, you must apply cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cauterized it, and if the cancer is located on the surface of the penis, with part of it underneath the skin and part outside, you must first remove the cancer that is inside; and when it is healed, treat the part that is outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it all together, the head of the penis is not assured to be spared from perforation, and blackening and corruption occur on the surface of the penis and scrotum; thus you must cut away everything that is black and corrupted, then bind it with a poultice made of honey and flour from bark, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar caustic in this manner:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauterizations assist in two conditions together: that is, for bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, you must insert a lead pipe into the urethra, and let the patient urinate through it; and when the skin is peeled at the tip of the penis which happens to those who are not circumcised, or due to injury or abscess, then you must remove the skin with a sharp instrument so that the ligaments are loosened, and the head of the penis is freed from all sides; and if this is a serious matter to treat such a condition, then you must remove the skin with a spoon-shaped tool at the tip of the penis and peel off some of the skin; then carefully separate between them, and place a fine linen cloth moistened in cold water, so that it does not dry out again.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not the breaking of continuity like other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this operation of our own will, and especially on children, it is necessary that we do so with the greatest skill and in the most gentle manner for their welfare.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision on their children, for it was not used in their law, and we have only acquired this knowledge through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For most of the masters and elders performed circumcision around the first day of the month, by force, and with one knife; their hearts were not pure because there are two stars here, and perhaps they struck the top one and left the bottom one intact.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Now they come to cut it off, and the pain is doubled; during the cleaning process that must be done due to its severity, the point of the limb isn't properly cleaned; and while trying to clean under a nail, the iron instrument might slip away and injure the flesh, sometimes leading to infection despite not requiring cleaning in my opinion.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the cleaning that is done with thread I have found the goodness of experience, for the threads cut precisely both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you press your hand, you cut evenly into the entire tension; but let the thread be tightly wrapped around the skin; and with regard to the initial procedure, make sure that the child understands that you are not forcing him or her to tie the string around his or her penis - just do it quickly so they cannot see what's happening; then have them sit between your legs in any position possible; next put your hand on their penis and blow into its head, pulling upwards until the tip is inside out; then clean off all dirt carefully, and fasten the foreskin with a double thread at one end, securing it to another link; hold the second loop with your index finger and thumb, cutting between both threads; lift up the skin so that the glans are exposed, drawing the head of the penis upwards; let the blood flow freely as this is healing mucus; then apply powder on top, and a cloth glued together with half an egg cooked in rosewater, mixed with good fresh rose oil, leaving it there until tomorrow, curing him or her until they heal.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of forceps for cauterization is as follows: the two blades should be curved and sharp, and the blades should be as large as the handle equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The mistake in cauterization occurs when the core inside escapes through the incision; therefore, you must extend it to your nail, otherwise, the handle will cause an abscess; and cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, then hold it with pliers, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they exceed three days, and what is beneath the handle is swollen, let it be until the hot abscess is soothed, and lightly peel it; cut it as much as you can move, and beware of the part of the handle, this will not harm anything.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure the place of burning wounds with powder as we have said in the chapter about powders, and if it goes beyond the heart excessively, and it rises above, then it will not harm; heal it accordingly as we have said until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	of urine retention
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	If the retention of urine is due to obstruction from stones, frozen blood, bowel, or newborn flesh as we have said in our classification system and if it cannot be released, and you see that there is retention caused by a stone at the bottom or neck of the bladder then the patient should bend over their knees; place their feet on their back with their belly stretched out from above the spine, restrain the patient's loins as much as possible, this then forces the urethra to open up allowing for release of urine. If it still does not come and you see that the patient feels great pain, administer an extraction using all the instruments called a "syringe" which is shaped like the following: made from fine silver with hair-like softness, like the feathers on a bird; its tube should be half palm long and very slender at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, and put the head of the thread inside a bag made of wool or cotton; place the bag at the end of the syringe; and trim the excess wool so that only the head remains; then grease the syringe with oil or butter as well as yolk of egg, and seat the patient on a chair. First moisten the bladder and penis in olive oil and lukewarm water; then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the organ; then wrap the penis with a cloth from top to bottom so that only its head is left uncovered; after that put the syringe forward up to the bladder, which you will feel by the patient saying he feels something go inside him until such point when nothing more comes out. This procedure is not carried out following this order but because the path through which it goes is twisted; then stretch the thread so that only the wool bag remains and urine follows the wool; then remove [the syringe] afterwards, and let urine flow out; start again with the syringe until the bladder has been emptied completely, and let the patient rest.
des maladies de la vessie	Of bladder diseases.
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scalding or blood occurs in the bladder, and putrefaction is gathered there, and you see that water and medicine must be distilled into it, do so using all the instrument which is called 'clepsydra', and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and has three openings: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and let the tube that carries the medicine be such that it closely fits around the penis without addition, so that moisture can be drawn out of it, and expelled when necessary; and when you wish to pour your medicines into the bladder, place the end of the funnel in the urine, and draw up with the attached tube; thus drawing the urine up through the funnel, then strongly reattach the tube; this will cause the urine to enter the instrument, and come back to the bladder now, so that the patient can feel it; and such is the form of the subtle clyster which is used for clysterizing the bladder: its form is thus:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	Et est d'argent ou d'archaut, and it is the head that is higher; and below at the side where the ribs fall; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture with which you wish to clysterize the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts firmly with a good double thread, and heat the pot of this moisture over the fire; then introduce the head of the clyster into the vulva, then press your hand onto the bladder for all of the moisture to come out, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment paper, make it round, perforate it around [the edges]; then insert a strong thread into these holes, then bring together the circle as one brings together a dal, and put inside whatever you wish of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do so as you did with the bladder, pressing by hand until the moisture comes out to the bladder.
de la piere	Of stones
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already mentioned in the division the types of stones, and their extraction along with medications; and I have explained the difference between gallstones and renal calculi, all the symptoms, and which stone requires surgical removal; as well as those in the bladder and urethra; and now I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stones which form in the bladder occur more often in children, and this is signified by the urine resembling water in its subtlety; and it appears sandy, causing the patient's urethra to be irritated, and they may urinate frequently, then become constipated; and many of these have hemorrhoids; and the recovery is quick for children up until four years old, but severe in the elderly, and average for those who are young adults, between youth and old age; and the treatment is more straightforward for those with larger stones than for those with smaller ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, to remove all the bile that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For sometimes it obstructs when seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, lift them up and move them downward, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it comes out from above; then have them sit between your prepared hands, with their hands beneath their thighs, so that the bladder is fully declined downwards; then seek and touch inside; if you feel the stone in this place, now hasten to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not fall out upon touching at all, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand if the patient is an infant, or with your middle finger if the patient is an adult; and insert it into their anus, seek for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, guide it to the neck of the bladder; then press upon it with your finger, and push it outside where you intend to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with their hand, and tell them to extend their right hand upwards towards the testicles, while removing the skin beneath the testicles from their left hand in the area where an incision is made; then insert the spatuala cutting instrument, which has this shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	Make an incision between what is located between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the scrotum; it should be positioned directly over the stone, and your two fingers should be placed either next to or at the anus, and make the incision so that it is wide externally, and narrow internally, according to the size of the stone, without making it too large; perhaps when you press it with your finger which is at the anus, it may jump out without any effort; and know that there are some stones with angles and edges: these are easier to remove; and there are others which are underneath, similar to a pea, and round, from which the discharge emerges lightly.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle neschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, one must take care of it, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either they die, or urine returns through the wound that cannot heal; but nonetheless try to drain it, or clean it with tongs, until you remove it in pieces; and when you have completed your work, then fill the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, and bind it tightly, and place a moist cloth on top soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then lay the patient on their back, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen the bandage, then wash the wound thoroughly with oil and water, and treat it with ointment of saffron and basilicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses develop in the wound and there are blood clots in the bladder, and urine is retained due to this, which is known to happen when urine cannot pass freely: therefore push your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, the bladder will be damaged, and become infected; then treat the wound with water, linseed, and silk, and help in every way you know until it heals; and make sure each time you treat him, to bind his two thighs together, and apply medicines to the affected area.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small and lodged in the urethra of the penis, preventing urine from passing; then treat him as I have described, cutting several times until it is removed; thus you are excused from any blame regarding this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven this thus.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take an iron rod forged in this shape, with three angled points fixed into a shaft.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone [in the urethra], so that it cannot slip back into the bladder; then insert the rod gently into the penis until it reaches the stone, and turn the rod with your hand in the stone back and forth until you can pierce the stone from the other side. Then urine will come immediately, and press your hand on what remains of the stone which is inside the urethra.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is crushed [the stone] and comes out with the urine, then the patient is healed; but if you cannot do this due to any obstacle, bind a thread below the stone and another above it, then make an incision in the penis where the stone lies between these two threads, extract the rod, untie the thread, and clean the coagulated blood from the wound; treat the wound until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	Of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	When a stone is formed in women, and it happens occasionally, the treatment is difficult, and it is prohibited for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a skilled woman who would uncover herself before men, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third reason is that one may not be able to find a skilled woman in this medical field; and the fourth reason is that the stone in women is usually deeper than in men, thus requiring a more profound incision, which is greatly feared. And if necessity arises for such a procedure, then you must take an experienced midwife, who is hard to find, and if not available, one should seek out a chaste woman with subtlety; and present her to a wise elder in the life of women, or to a woman knowledgeable about medicine, commanding her to perform what you instruct regarding the examination for stones; also, pay close attention whether the woman is a virgin: then she must insert her finger into the anus and search for the stone; and if she finds it, force it downwards under her finger, and advise her to insert her finger where the patient hurts, and press with her left hand firmly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; 
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know their symptoms, you will understand the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood overpowers you, place some ground vitriol on it, and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your work, ensuring the stone is fully removed, and have the tools I mentioned earlier for extracting stones from men ready to assist you in your task; and if the blood overpowers you again, and it is the artery that has been cut, apply the powder to the spot and some tent and bandage extract, and do not begin anew with this patient, leave the stone be and do not try to remove it anymore, for there is a chance the patient might die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the spot is ready, return to your work, ensuring that the stone is fully removed.
de hernie carnouse	Of fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Rupture of the water bag is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white pultis, which is beneath the heart of the foal, contained in the egg; and it is called "pultis", and sometimes it is properly on the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that this is another egg; and it is the skin of the foal between the white pultis that we have mentioned; and they do not have their name.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the cause of this rupture is the weakness that comes to the foals, and this matter is spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from a blow to the foals, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a shade tending towards yellow, or it is bloodless, black, white watery, and more; these are signs for knowing about this assembly, because if it is on the membrane of an egg that we have mentioned, then the abscess appears round, like the figure of an egg, and does not open the foals, as there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the underlying tissue, then the abscess forms with part of the egg [pus], and because of this it is believed to be another egg; and when the moisture is between the leather-like skin and the white subcutaneous layer, one can feel it well; therefore, to know the colour of the moisture, test with any intramuscular injection device as described before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the introduction, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron [cauterization], the patient must be bled according to their strength and the fullness of their body; then lay them on their back, on something slightly raised, and place lots of cloth under them; then sit on their left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on the right, extending the limb towards one of the two sides of the heart in the loin [i.e., to expose the kidney]; then take the spatula and cut the leather-like skin between its length until past the wrist, and make the incision straight while removing the skin as far down as the white subcutaneous layer, doing so carefully according to your skill; next pierce the subcutaneous layer full of water [pus] with a wide opening, and extract all the water [pus], then insert your fingers, and stretch the subcutaneous layer upwards; do not touch the heart in the loin but only the subcutaneous layer; cut everything away in one piece especially the side closest to you, being careful to cut cleanly or else the water will return; if the egg [pus] does spring out during your work, then put it back into place once you have finished working on the subcutaneous layer; then join the two leaves of the heart in the loin with a suture, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then you must bind the vessels that are suspended, fearing the flow of blood; then cut away all the surrounding tissue, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the water has gathered in two parts together, know that these are two roots; then cut away the other part as you did with the first, evenly, then wipe off the blood, and place on the wound moist wool soaked in rose oil; and cover this with more wool moistened in wine and oil, and place over the two roots, then cover with doubled cloths, and bind all above with a bandage shaped thus:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths, and fill them with wool charpie shaped thus and sew them together at the waistband of the breeches, and one of these place over the buttocks to the back, and the other part around the wrist; and another over both angles (shoulders), and assemble all the ties in the buckle of the belt; and sometimes this root is treated with cautery instead of an iron cut, and you must take a fine cauterizing knife, and cut away the skin above the roots, and heat it as we have said, so that the white substance containing the water is exposed; then take the cautery shaped thus, and pierce that white substance with its point, and scrape off this skin with this hot delicate cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And cut it in all ways you can, so that everything is removed; and be careful the fire does not touch the testicle; know this operation is safer; watch out for loss of blood, and follow the surgery procedures; if anything contradicts your work, or there are abscesses, loss of blood or other issues, treat what opposes your procedure as explained above.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	If the patient is fearful and does not want to wait for this operation due to its horror, then provide an outlet as I explained; when you are certain through the signs we mentioned that watery discharge is present, have the patient sit on a raised chair; perforate the abscess in the area below with a spatula-like instrument, making the incision long along the body; let the openings be wide so all the pus can flow out; then place cotton on the spot and bandage it, leaving some space for remaining discharge to come out; treat the wound until it is healed; if white tissue does not allow the discharge to exit into the mouth of the wound, you must insert a quill or an instrument used to draw water from the hydrocele, as described before; enlarge the wound and know that pus will return after six months or thereabouts, and when this happens again as previously explained, so shall pass the patient's days.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of abscesses on the buttocks
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the surgery of this branch, there is fear in many situations, which makes it seem better to leave it alone; and I will tell you about the operation and similar cases of abscesses.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses occur on the body, especially on the buttocks; it is a common occurrence.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is caused by excess acidic and sour humours that spread to the buttocks, or due to impact; and the colour of the abscess matches the body's colouring; there is no pain, but it is a deep abscess; sometimes a swollen abscess with pus may be hard and stony, and varying in colours, and at times it comes from arterial blood or swollen veins.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is due to an arterial rupture, it is recognized by the hot swelling that appears when you press it with your fingers; and one must not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	One who is suffering from vein rupture is recognized by the sensation upon touching it with one's fingers, and one can easily perform an operation on this type of swelling and other similar swellings; where you must cut out the heart of the tumor, then open up the egg above, and remove its white matter carefully, and free all parts of the egg from its covering.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already hardened with these tumors grown on it, then one must remove the egg and cut it out; and if it is an air bubble at its surface or inside the vessels, one must free all this tension and cut away the covering roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is at the back, then you must cut it all away and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Once your work is complete, fill the wound with damp wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other cures until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	of boils on the buttocks
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a dressing similar to the buttocks, with the softening of the flesh, and the patient experiences severe pain when moving; and treating this disease is almost as fearful as what we mentioned before, yet we will tell you about its treatment following the method of the ancients.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then fasten the scrotum's suspension strap around your two fingers, to all vessels located near the penis, and hold them firmly while stretching them outward; next, cut across these vessels with a wide-bladed spatule until they are uncovered, then remove the skin from either side, as we have described when extracting arteries in the temple region; insert a needle at this point where there is double thread, tie it to the first location where the vein appears and retie to the other end; cut directly through these parts along the length of the body, removing any corrupted tissue that may be present; then cauterize the wound as you would others in which bowel evisceration occurs, so that no vessel dies thus preventing nourishment from reaching one of the testicles; for by this there comes no harm and if all vessels die then remove the testicles along with these vessels to prevent them losing their nourishment due to incision, drying out and dying.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the rupture of the diaphragm
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The occurrence of this rupture is due to the incision that happens at the diaphragm or the extension on the abdomen in the region of the ribs, which causes the intestines to descend through this rupture into one of the cavities; and this rupture occurs either in the diaphragm itself or its extension, and it arises from two main types of causes: impact, jumping, straining, lifting heavy loads, and similar activities; the signs when it is an extension of the diaphragm are that it happens gradually over a long period without sudden onset; and the abscess becomes equalized toward the surface because the diaphragm compresses the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are that when it is a section of the diaphragm, it causes sudden pain at first, and the abscess appears in various forms beneath the skin, close to the surface, which is due to the exit of the intestine and the body beyond the diaphragm.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the muscles descend with the intestine, becoming entangled there, causing great pain to be endured by the patient, especially when they are constricted.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments with fear, one must proceed carefully.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the manner of performing this operation is that you instruct the patient to draw back the intestine with their hand into the wound if it can be done; then have someone support them by their neck between your hands, and lift their thighs; then stretch the heart upwards, and cut away all the skin from around the anus; next insert the hooks of the instrument inside the wound as much as is necessary to open the wound, making sure that the esophagus can pass through it; then peel off the subcutaneous tissue which lies under the skin of the testicles until the white hard fascia is exposed on every side; then with your index finger separate what is behind the testis and between the second layer of fascia, and push this aside along with the second layer of fascia; and using both hands turn the white hard fascia upwards, and lift the testicle toward the wound with all its covering; and instruct an assistant to stretch the testicle upwards, and free it from any binding behind; look with your fingers if there is a portion of intestine wound up in the white hard fascia, and if you find anything put it back into the belly below; then take a needle provided with thread made up of X threads, and insert it through the posterior part of the subcutaneous tissue that lies after the skin of the testicles, beyond the scrotum, then cut off four threads from the threads which appear above; assemble them one over another in the form of a cross, and tie this to the subcutaneous tissue, of which we have said that it is beneath the skin of the testicle, with a strong ligature in two parts; then wind the ends of these around the threads, and bind them firmly on both sides so that none of the vessels from which they derive their nourishment can enter into contact with the air, to prevent the formation of an abscess; after this apply a second ligature along the first longitudinally, at twice its distance from it, and then leave a portion of subcutaneous tissue under the heart of testicles equal in length to that of your finger; and finally another one according to the circumference which the egg presents; next cut off in the part beneath the skin of the testicle so far as blood and semen escape, as we have said before; then apply wool moistened with oil, and put it on the wound, and add the ligature which we have described.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white scar is cauterized as we have said, after the incision, due to doubt of excessive blood loss.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens many times, and leave the cord until it breaks by itself; and if it delays in falling off, let it be soaked in warm water, and place on it what we have said, until it breaks; then treat the wound with another cure, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	Of hernia cruris.
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone who dared to do the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is done like the branch which is together with ivy, in such a way that you bind the vessels, after cutting above slightly beneath; then cut in half, and treat the abscess of what operates, until the vessels fall out; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Certaines fois vient rupture dans l'angle, comme nous l'avons dit, et les tissus deviennent apparents ; mais aucun intestin ne descend vers le cou, et s’il y en a un qui descend, il est peu nombreux et réparé à chaque heure ; néanmoins, s’il reste trop longtemps dans cet état, la blessure ou le séphac augmente jusqu'à ce que l'intestin descende ; et cela arrive par l'extension du syfac qui est dans l'angle, comme nous l'avons dit, car il est étendu, puis adouci et enflé les tissus deviennent apparents ; et la guérison s’opère par cautérisation, comme nous l'avons mentionné auparavant; et parfois, elle est guérie avec du fer de cette manière : le malade est souvent couché sur son dos entre tes mains, puis coupe le lieu de la rupture enflée d'un large diamètre correspondant à trois doigts ; ensuite retire le syfac qui est sous la peau que tu as ouvert, puis prends l’aiguille et place-la sur le lieu apparent du syfac; appuie l'aiguille au fond du ventre, puis coupe les deux tissus apparents du syfac au-dessus de la tête de l'aiguille, et coupe chaque côté ; ensuite retire la tête de l'aiguille, sans couper du syfac ni étendre l’œuf ou autre chose, comme je te l’ai expliqué dans le traitement de la ramification des intestins; puis soigne-le en suivant le traitement des plaies.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you treat the child, clean him/her thoroughly and cure the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The surgeon is constrained, and has no appearance in the fracture; cautery is more suitable here, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	From softening of the tendons of the neck.
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	In many cases the tendons of the neck are softened in certain men due to softening of the internal muscles and this is visible. And when one wishes to treat it, you must make the patient lie on their back; remove the softened tendon from the natural skin, then sew together both lips with a stitch. If wished, cut away the superfluous part of the softened tendon into three or four firm stitches, then cut between these and cure as other wounds, until healed and remove stitches.
dou chastrement	Le castration.
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Know that castrations are forbidden in our law, and for this reason, I would prefer not to speak of it in this book; and it is only necessary for two reasons: one is so that the surgeon can know how to respond when asked about it and perform the cure; and the other, because we often need to castrate certain animals to assist us, such as goats, sheep, cattle, and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that castrations are performed in two ways: either by traction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the method we perform through traction, have the animal sit in warm water until the testicles are softened and hanging; then take them in your hand, gently stretching them until they are repositioned and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of castration by cutting: you must hold the animal and press its skin with your left hand, then bind it with a cord, and strike each testicle once with one blow when they are well-stretched; leave some of the skin from the scrotum and the fine membrane that covers the vessels; this method of castration is more certain than that which is done by ligature, because after the latter operation something may remain of the testes, whereby lust will be excited in the animal; then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites:
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism is of two kinds in men: one is when between the two testicles there appears a structure resembling the opening of the female organ, where it may have hair and sometimes emit urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is so in women, and has on the wrist as well as a rod and two knots.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment of men and women is such that you remove all joined flesh, and treat them like other wounds; in the second manner, for men whose urine comes out through the skin above the knot, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	Of the testicle.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Testicle is a joined flesh on the natural part, so ugly to behold; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is its treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You must hold the excess of the testicle with your hand or pincers, and cut it lightly; and do not go too deep, lest blood flow out, then treat any other cure as you would until it is healed; and there is another flesh that grows at the mouth of the wound, and remove it, and perhaps it will burst, and it is like a cow's disease, thus the ancients called it "cow-like illness".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	You must cut it as we have said for tentigene, and treat until it is healed.
de erratique	Of erratic.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic is when the woman's nature is not pierced or the opening is small; whether it is natural by birth or an accident due to illness that has occurred; or if it is attached to flesh, a subtle sinew or tendon, and remains completely inside the belly, side, below, or wherever; and prevents conception, childbirth, and perhaps flowers (a period) from occurring; this knowledge is gained through observation of the womb.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If it protrudes obviously, use your fingers or a rod (rait).
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is very soft, and it is close to the two lips, hurry up and do this: put your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then stretch the two lips apart so that the soft cervix becomes rounded, and cover the os uteri; then take wool, dampen it in oil, and place it on the spot, and make the woman lie with a man every day until it cannot heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the cervix is hard and thick, you must cut it with the spatula which looks like myrtle leaves.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the os uteri is made of new wood, suspend it on a hook and cut it; and have ready some medicines that stop bleeding, such as dragon's blood, incense, mixed with egg white; then bring a large piece of lead pipe so that the wound cannot heal; and let this go on for a long time, and bring her a dry linen tent; then treat other wounds until she is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when a child is born with a caul, you must cut it according to this method, unless there are embedded abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscess that is embedded in the caul, one must not attempt to cut it open.
des emorroides	Of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that usually bleed, and when hemorrhoids are old they become dry; I have previously spoken about their similarities to other conditions, as well as the signs, and now I shall tell you which ones can be cured.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and dry hemorrhoids, when they are completely inside the anus and cannot be felt, should not be treated with a cauterizing iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the marsh, where one can feel them, are those that one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	You must therefore place the woman in a cold house, then extend the tumor with tongs and cut it at its roots, then sprinkle it with medicines that restrain blood flow, such as dragon's blood, incense, and similar things; then press her feet against the wall for an hour, then immerse her in cold water; if bleeding occurs, have her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate rind, galls, and other like substances, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and egg white, and make an ointment to be placed on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops bleeding, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, have the patient undergo cupping therapy on their back and breasts without causing injury; then take linen, dampen it in juice of plantain or goosefoot with old wine, and apply to the affected area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Once the abscess subsides, treat the area with ointment until it heals; and the one called 'albathir' is red, resembling a harsh scab, so you must cut it as I said for 'thelul'; and then treat it until it heals.
des apostemes de la marris	Abscesses of the scrotum.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscess develop in the scrotum, such as cancer, stony abscess, herpes, cysts, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the classification.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is necessary then that I speak in this treatise of the hot abscess which forms in the armpit, which is not one of those abscesses that fall away; and if you wish to know the work of iron, look to see if the abscess is acute at its beginning, full of heat and fever, and if it turns red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore, do not hasten to pierce it, but let it die until the pain subsides; then have the patient sit on a seat, and provide two small stools for them to lean against, supporting their back and bringing their feet up towards the outside of their legs; and let their thighs be spread apart, with their arms placed beneath their knees, binding them well with a strong bandage. Then suck out the pus from the right side, and introduce the instrument used to open the armpit, which will later form here; and when you wish to introduce this instrument, it is necessary that you first make a small incision in order to know the depth of the armpit, so that what enters with the instrument does not go too deep inside, and does not harm the patient. If the instrument is larger, one must cover the depth of the armpit with cloth, so that the instrument does not cause pain; and it should have its horn at the top, while you hold the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess opens, and one makes it soft with their hand, they must cut open its head or spit out pus; and when the bowels are empty, then one should place wet tents soaked in rose oil or dry green oil into the wound; put the tent deeper inside the wound's cavity and add clean woolen cloth wet in water or boiled mashed mallow on top of the abscess and wrist; heal it after two days of this treatment until the wound is healed. In some cases, one should raise the abscess and wound by enema with water and honey, then with water or roots of iris and long aristolochia boiled; then go back to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is covered in the cavity, then one should be careful to not burn with iron; but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is necessary first for the midwife to know the nature of childbirth and its signs: when you see the woman press downwards and wish to smell something: then the child hastens to come out quickly; therefore, know that these births are natural, and the infant comes out head-first, with the midwife assisting him/her; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press her belly so that the infant comes out soon; for when he descends face down, the midwife assists him, and the woman is relieved of excesses through proper delivery; and those who come otherwise do not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For sometimes it comes feet-first, and the body or shoulders come out first, or the hands, or it may come out belly-first, or often with other poor positions; the midwife must therefore be wise and skilled in these things, avoiding mistakes and deception, and I will show you all the ways to help her.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out headfirst due to natural birth, and the woman labours painfully, and her strength is weak, have her sit on a saddle or be held by women; then stimulate her nature with oil from fenugreek that has been cooked, and insert between her two legs the small spatula of which here is the form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And split the amniotic sac, and cut her nail so that the moisture within flows out; and press on the woman's belly until the child descends, if it does not descend, then administer an enema to the woman with a mixture of fenugreek mush and sesame oil; then make her sneeze using condiments, and hold her mouth and nose for one hour: now extract the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands come out first, you must gently pull them back one at a time; and if they cannot be pulled in, place the woman on a chair, and lift her feet upwards; then stand up the chair on the ground, and hold onto the woman, so she does not fall when rising; and if the hands still cannot be pulled in, and the child is dead, cut its hands with the knife mentioned before, and extract the child, resetting it equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	Of the emergence of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child rises to its feet, you must push them up; and then turn them back and forth until they are steady; then take one foot and stretch it gently.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	When they jump up to their thighs, you must instruct them to grasp it, and make them sneeze hard; if they jumped freely, may God wish it so.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if they were not able to do so as we said, then turn them back and forth until their form is natural again.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For at that point, they will be lightly built.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if they do not succeed as we said, then take some musk root and almond oil, and molten gum, and grind it all in a mortar; apply this ointment to the genital region of the woman inside and outside, then have her sit in warm water up to just below her ribs; once she is softened from beneath, make a collar of myrrh for her, place it underneath, and leave it there for an hour; then have her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze hard, and hold her mouth and nose shut, gently press her belly, for the child will now jump.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the exit of the child onto his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes out in this manner, put the nurse's hands here and there; then let her be attended to by someone else for her neck, and hang his feet downwards, and let him lie on the bed; and fold his hands here and there, then take his hands on her stomach, remove the cushions from underneath so that she is lowered down; if the child does not breathe, take his feet and move them vigorously, then push up his belly, then put both your hands inside; assist the child in breathing here and there; instruct the woman to hold herself until the child has exited.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the exit of the child that comes out with one hand hanging downwards
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I must arrange to bring the hand back: if you cannot pull it back, have her get up and walk; if she can't walk, then make her lie on the bed, and vigorously move her legs upwards; then administer the medicated oil that I have described above; if she does not deliver the baby, then have her sit on a chair, then try to bring the hand back; and assist the child in breathing according to his natural form, and make her sneeze, and instruct her to hold herself until the child has completely exited.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	Of the emergence of the child onto its mother's neck, and it has spread out its hands, and its face turned towards her back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I agree that the midwife should hold her hand, then turn it back and forth, and move it lightly; when it is even, apply some moistened wool mixed with oil, as we have said, and tell her to move it gradually; once you've done this, make her sit on a chair, and ask her to cough; make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same way for all secondary dislocations.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes out in this way during the secondary dislocation, scrape away the secondary material with your nail until the moisture is drained; if the child falls on its face or neck, pull it from under her nose so that it's not obstructed, and kill the child; then push the child inside again until you've placed it correctly, and tell the woman to cough once: then it will come out gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	On dislocation of the hip joint.
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	You should know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born at once; this is not a strange thing, and it often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two heads are strange and do not live, if they have such a name; I know that they be multiplied, and they come apart through the surgeon's work which divides them, which is tied to their navel; sometimes they issue naturally like one child alone, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they issue violently, then treat them as we have said, and let the surgeon be skilled, and do his work quickly and lightly; and act thus for their salvation.
de plusors enfans	from many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	There are seven or more formed in the womb I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, and they are all shaped like children by the measurement of the glorious blood, and it is fitting that the priest knows all this, for perhaps similar things may happen to him; he should act accordingly.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat a woman for a dead child in the womb, as I said in the division, and there is no natural delivery, and you must perform manual labor; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or fear of death. The woman should be positioned on her back, with her legs elevated, and her hips inclined downwards. Have an assistant hold her down firmly onto the bed so as not to hinder the extraction of the child. Then, anoint the mouth of the womb with moist oils mixed with a poultice of althea and fenugreek seeds and flaxseed; then grease your hands with these same oils and poultices. Afterwards insert your fingers gently into the womb. Take care that if the foetus is presented headfirst you do not injure its face by inserting your fingers in places where they should not go, but rather in a suitable place for the extraction of the child's body parts; prick with the finger(s) in their eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or around the jawline or near the sides. If however, if the presentation is feet first then insert your fingers between its thighs and at the midsection and prick there as well while being careful not to touch any vital organs. Make sure you are holding onto one of your fingers with your right hand and use the curvature between two fingers from your left hand for leverage when pricking into various parts such an eye or neck etc., until finally extracting whatever remains inside through gentle pricking motions using all available digits at once in any direction possible including upwards towards the head region if need be according to what has been described earlier on. This is how you should form your finger:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then insert another hook opposite the first one, or use a third if needed to ensure equal extraction; then stretch it evenly by moving from side to side, to get it out, and make sure the hooks are serrated to hold it in place, just like this:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	If any part remains inside, anoint the wound with one of your fingers coated in oil, then push against that part and pull the other part; if there's still a point remaining, place this hook higher up and keep doing so until it comes out entirely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	If one hand comes before the other and you cannot reset it due to constriction, then you must wrap it in a cloth until it is fully extended; cut off the skin at the wrist joint or with a knife, and do likewise for the other hand and both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; 
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on their feet, then the traction is light, and the alignment to the mouth of the womb is also light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	If they are trapped in the belly or pelvis, it is necessary that you extract them with the cloth wrapped around your hand; and make an incision into the belly or pelvis until the moisture inside flows out; and if other parts have been removed but the head remains, push your hand up against the base of the womb, and draw the child forth to the mouth of the womb; then insert one or two fingers, and pull it through; and if the mouth of the womb is narrowed due to hot inflammation therein, there must be no effort made to enlarge this, but rather moist and fatty substances should be applied; administer plasters, as well as mild water-based softening and moisturizing agents.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is on their side and you can make them lie flat, follow what we have said for a living infant; but if it does not work, then cut it into pieces and leave nothing of the caul.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	Once you have done this and the child is treated as we said for hot abscesses that come in a womb, if discharge of blood occurs, it should be bathed with cold water while being held still, and other treatments will follow.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose belly had contained one child who died, then another was conceived on top of it and the other died too.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess formed on her breast and swelled until it opened up, beginning to emit a foul smell.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought long about it, but could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong attracting plaster, and an bone came out, then after some days another one followed.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly amazed, for the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it might be the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I felt the wound and extracted several bones until the woman improved; she lived for a long time with one piece of bowel missing; I have never forgotten this chapter except that when masters find an unusual case, they must know how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To bring the marrow to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Here comes the form of the pressor, for which we have two straps; and turning back to the second head of the two limbs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the horns should be more subtle than those of the restrictor, and they should be made of ebony or boxwood; the mouth of the trunk should be two inches wide, and the margin of the trees should be one inch; it should be a palm and a half long; and between the two limbs are two adjustments of this same wood, which are firmly attached to each other at one end and at the other, being half a palm or slightly more in length; these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the marrow to open when you turn the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, resembling a pair of forceps; it will have two jaws with two adjustments, as you see here, one palm in length and two fingers wide; when you wish to open the mouth of the instrument completely, have the woman sit on the bed, feet hanging down and legs spread apart, then insert the two adjustments placed together into the mouth, and hold the head of the instrument beneath between her thighs; then operate your hand with the entire instrument as if it were forceps, equally so, according to the quantity you wish to open the mouth of the cavity, until she does what is required.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all well-crafted and their designs are varied; when the physician has them ready to use, his work is faster and he is held in higher regard by men for the quality of his treatment.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not despair of having the instrument ready at hand, for their need is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second stage of labor is prolonged, you should instruct the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze forcefully, and press your hands over her mouth and nose; if she faints due to this, it is beneficial.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, take a pot, make a hole in its lid, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; cook all these herbs or some of them in water over a fire; then insert one end of the pipe into the pot's opening, and keep the other end inside the patient's mouth, allowing the steam to enter her; then make her sneeze as we have explained.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If it escapes the initial injury.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment, and does not go away, instruct the nurse to wet her left hand with oil of sesame or muskroot juice, and then insert it into the vagina, and locate the secondin; when she finds it, she should grasp it and extend it little by little straight upwards, so that the patient does not choke during extraction; but she must move it lightly to the right and to the left, and then pull; it will come out and disengage.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the womb is narrow, we have mentioned the treatment of sneezing and herb fumigation; and if it does not go away with all that we have said, take care not to force the extraction; but you must tie what is at the mouth of the womb to the woman's thigh, then administer a four-fold ointment as an enema; this will ripen and reset it, and it will come out; however, when it does, bad odor may arise in the stomach and head, and harm the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So it is necessary therefore to use appropriate fumigations for this: some of the ancients have tried fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain her flowers (menstrual flow) and secundines (afterbirth) is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is of glass, similar to a vase, and has a refined head in the shape of nature (human form), with wide openings above the fire; place the fumigation on the coals, and let it be consumed entirely, then start another.
de percier lou fondement	To pierce the foundation (womb).
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born without their foundation being pierced, but have a thin membrane (amniotic sac) covering it: therefore in the bath she must pierce this membrane with her finger, and not use a sharp probe, lest she injure herself; then place upon it moist wool soaked in wine and oil, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not heal, insert a plank peg into the hole, and leave it there for several days, removing it when the child wants to go outdoors.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	This wound closure can sometimes occur suddenly from a wound or abscess; you must cut this sudden formation, and it should be treated as described with the plank peg.
de la fistule dou fondement	From the anal fistula.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Anal fistulas that form beneath the anus are nodules and growths which originate from inside or outside the anus in the area between the two parts; when there is a single or multiple fistula, and if this growth has been long-lasting it develops into a wound with moist white proud flesh or soft bumps, and sometimes these fistulas break open; they are recognized by those who experience them during defecation or flatulence, and perhaps a worm may jump out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And there are fistulas that perforate up to the bladder, and up to the middle of the penis; they reach up to the hip joint, and as far as the knee's navel.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one recognizes a fistula that perforates the anus, and does not perforate: it is when you insert your index finger into the anus, and gently push a fine needle of brass or iron into the fistula if there is no tortuosity.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is tortuosity, insert a thin tent made of lead or a horsehair so that you feel the tent or hair with your finger; and if you do not sense it, and there comes no egestion nor wind nor excrement as we have said: know that it does not perforate; hasten to treat it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula pierces all the way to the bladder or the urinary duct, then urine leaks out, and it cannot be healed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it pierces down to the hip joint, then the wound extends all the way there; if there is no twisting or swelling causing pain around it, then one must simply wait for it to heal naturally, and no medicine nor immediate treatment with ointments will help; in such penetrating fistulas, there is no cure except time and patience, and vain are the foolish surgeons who intervene.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the case of a fistula that is not penetrating and not old, there is hope for healing with iron, as I have witnessed; and this is how one must proceed: the patient lies between your hands on their back; you lift their legs up to their thighs, and tilt their thighs towards their belly; then insert an iron probe or a wooden stick if it's twisted, until you locate where the fistula begins.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around the anus, you must insert your index finger there, and if you sense that it has pierced the tendon, and is uncovered where you feel between your finger and the flesh, then know that it is perforated; do not labor to heal it since it cannot be cured.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	It is said that one can indeed heal some of these cases, but it rarely happens; and the aid one offers here is to heat the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as mentioned before, and insert it while hot into the fistula until you reach the anus; do this two or three times, until you know that those faulty tissues are burnt away which resemble bird feathers; then treat with moist bandages smeared in butter, so that any remaining tissue comes out, and then heal with ointment, binding flesh together
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If this cannot be healed in any other way, and if it penetrates within without piercing all the way to the right side of the fundament, and between your thumb and the incision place a thick covering of skin or syfac, and you see the fistula at that which sews the covering of the heart; then cut away from the beginning of the fistula, push forward towards the tent, and cauterize after so it reaches the head of the tent; and the tent will be released and fall out; then clean those faulty skins that appear like a bird's feather, and leave nothing behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood defeats you and escapes between yourself and the work, then cauterize it with fire or astringent medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery brings together two good things: namely, the burning of adjacent flesh, and the stoppage of blood and drying of moisture; then the treatment of wet tents with butter or crushed substances until the wound heals and bows away, and the flesh burns in the bow; then treat the wounds with softening ointments that harden hard flesh, and they are dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	When it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes up to the anus, and is removed from the body, put your finger into the anus, and inquire of it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent and find skin or syphac or flesh between two, where it is about to burst, if there are no other signs of hope and confidence, through administering one of three methods: cauterize it as we have said, cut until deep, or apply tents and treat like before; do not go too deep so that you do not cut the muscle holding the anus together, which would cause incontinence; then treat it as we have said; perhaps it will heal, or remove that covering and clean it once it has been cut near to the anus, with tent or other pointed instrument; then soften that faulty flesh found within the wound for as long as you can; then try to restore the wound, and keep the fistula outside of the anus: this is a lighter matter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are formed in this manner: it is when you push the probe into the fistula, and it is located on the side of the anus near the skin above, take a perforated probe with an opening at its head in this shape:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And insert the bent wire into it [the probe], and push the probe with the wire all the way into the fistula until its head is inserted.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it [the fistula] is pierced on the inner margin of the anus, then withdraw the wire from that opening, just as you would insert your finger into the anus; and pull out the head of the wire, and bring together the two ends, and press them against each other, and leave it for one or two days; sometimes restrain [the patient] so that the wire cuts through these tissues that are between them, and excretes; then treat the wound until it is healed and closed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not burst, make it burst by any means you can, unless it is too deeply embedded.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not suitable to perform the ligation if it is too deeply embedded, and then treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the sharp-pointed spatula used to make the fistula is very acute on one side and cutting on the other; and not so on the other side, because what should not be cut must not be cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	From hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two types: they can be inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there may be small or large ones, which produce blood; sometimes, there is one, sometimes many. They emerge from the anus and at its upper end. But those that come out have little moisture in them, rather a bit of yellowish water or a bit of blood, and they are the color of flesh. To treat hemorrhoids inside the anus, you should instruct the patient to strain themselves to go to the bathroom until the anus is outside, and its edges open; then be quick and grab it with pincers or hold it with your fingernail, then cut at their roots. And if the hook cannot hold them due to moisture, take hold of them in a piece of cloth, cotton, or chamois leather; pull them out with two fingers, then cut them off, and apply some hot powder on them as cauterization. Or you can cauterize them as mentioned in the chapter on cauterization: one can treat them by other means until they are healed. And if the anus cannot come out, then give the patient a mordant and bitter enema to wash what is inside of it so that it may emerge; when patients strain themselves and their edges become outside the anus, there treatment becomes easier. It is such: you grab them with your fingernail or pincers, cut them off, then treat them as we have said until they are healed, taking care to avoid incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to stitch the wound, you should proceed as follows: take a length of thread, insert one end into a needle, draw the thread through until the other end appears on the opposite side; turn over the two ends of the thread under the needle so that they are doubled up and tight. Draw the thread tightly, tie it off with a knot, remove the needle, and repeat this process for all but one stitch which is left open to allow excess blood or fluid to drain out of the wound. Finally apply an ointment made from rose oil or wax onto the wound, cover it with a cloth soaked in the same oil/wax mixture, ask the patient to rest; then leave him be until he passes stool and urine, at which point treat his wounds again using other treatments until they heal up completely
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	of the drying of feces or foundation (base/ground)
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is constipation in the intestine, caused by natural constraint, or when the illness is old and medicine has no effect on it.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	You must reset the point of a spatula or your fingernail on the bark above it, so that it does not get wet; then treat it until it is firm as necessary; and if it cannot be healed, start the shaving again more vigorously than before, until it bleeds profusely and becomes scaly; then treat it until it is cured.
dou fremit	where there is trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	A formica is a small faulty appearance between the body and goes very deep inside it; sometimes it finds cold, and one feels trembling like death all over the body, especially in hands more than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is such that you take a cane made from a goose quill or a strong vulture feather, and place this cane on the swelling so that the purple circles touch the swelling all around; then turn your hand over the entire cane so that you grasp it all around the swelling, and put it in perfectly, and uproot the swelling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you wish, make one from a brass or iron cane according to this form, and let it be hollow underneath and solid above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not pierce it, to hold it with your thumb and forefinger, and squeeze it; And if you wish, cauterize the swelling, as is described in the previous chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	Of the form of the clyster.
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never is the silver clyster made nor of quicksilver, or molten and cast bronze; and sometimes small and great instruments of these are made according as they have been adapted to.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	These then which are adapted in the treatment of children and for those who are feeble and suffer pain, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the great and small clyster is above broad, where the bellies are tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And if it has a discharge or the bellies are tied, as you see, and the head is pierced within; and have on one side two apertures, and in the other one; and be the bellies where the medicines are put of a beast's bladder or parchment, and be pierced all around with small apertures, and have between each aperture one finger's breadth, then push into these apertures one strong thread of twisted thread bent in an X or elsewhere around, and assemble the belly like a goatskin; and when the medicine is within, so bind it to the instrument before with a strong thread, then clysterize; and this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the doctor's hands not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the enema with oil or egg white, or something similar, then gently insert it; then have the assistants squeeze his two hands together until they are both visible, then withdraw the enema, and raise the patient’s legs against the wall, and if the doctor wishes to remove it, hold it as long as possible; and if he sleeps a whole night through, this is greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you enema him for a protruding belly disease, and the doctor is in a hurry to remove it, then recommence until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the haemorrhoids are at the anus or abscess, then let the enema be as gentle as for a child; and this is the form of the subtle enema with which the skin is tightened.
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already discussed the treatment of wounds in the previous section; now we will explain the remedies and medicines used for their care according to the procedure.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, where on the body they occur, and what causes them.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	Wounds are caused by various things such as the impact of stones, sword cuts and stabs from knives or lances, wood, arrows, or similar objects; they can also be classified according to their location on the body, like wounds on the neck, head, foot, belly, liver, and other parts. I will explain the treatment for each type of wound, starting with those affecting the head as a simple case, since further complications may arise in subsequent chapters.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is due to a stone impact or similar things, and the skin is still torn and the wound is large, and you have slight doubt of an incipient abscess: then let it bleed immediately with the cephalic vein especially if there is little blood coming from the wound, and let the bleeding be on the opposite side of the injured part; and keep the patient away from overeating wine and fatty meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to bleed, let his meat consumption be reduced, and do not drink any wine or eat any flesh at all; put on the wound, if hot abscesses appear, only moist cotton dipped in rose oil or astringent wine; but if there is no hot abscess, then apply to the wound, while it is fresh with its blood, and has not been moved by air yet, some powder that I will mention shortly; and if the wind moves it, then apply certain ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like that of a sword cut or similar, and the lips cannot be brought together with stitches, then join them by sewing, as I will explain for wounds in the belly, concerning its suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound exposes bone, is gaping, and holds only by a bit of skin, cut off this piece; then treat the wound with medicine, restore hard flesh in place of leather, and instruct the patient to eat coarse meats, such as beef and wheat puddings, also poultry, and similar foods.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find rotten flesh on the skin, and it has not reached the bone, cut away all the rot and throw it out, then treat it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which will not stop bleeding despite treatment, tie off the artery, and if you find it severed, bind it with a thread; and if this brings no relief, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: you must apply this powder which binds them as soon as the medicine moves in.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The manner of the powder is as follows: take one part incense; two parts dragon's blood; three parts quicklime, and finely grind the powder. Apply it to the wound, pressing firmly until it dries well and joins with all its blood. Then bind it tightly, leaving it untouched if there is no swelling; for the medicine must remain until healing is complete.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes quicklime alone is used when one lacks incense or dragon's blood, but the medicine must have already moved into the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the medicine has moved into an internal wound, then do not apply this powder there; instead use some gentle ointments or a poultice of barley flour made with water and honey until it becomes soft. Then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone fracture occurs along with the wound, and it is minor, then extract it using fine pincers; I will tell you about head fractures later on.
de la plaie dou col	Of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound occurs on the neck and it is straightforward, there is no significant difference between this and a head wound; however, if the windpipe or artery of the neck is severed.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the windpipe, there are no other options but to leave it untreated, and put nothing constricting on it, as this damages the windpipe and makes it recede; nor should anything cold be applied to the wound, because the substance of the windpipe is cool, and its continuation upwards is connected with the brain, which is the highest organ in the body. However, the treatment should involve moist poultices: boiled calamine washed in warm water mixed with rose oil, cooked leeks likewise boiled in warm water, or other metallic stones prepared in this manner, along with various ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, cut it open and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and filled with hair and pus, cut them open at a lower level; if an artery is severed and blood flows out, cut it further, tie it off, and cauterize as needed; if the windpipe or heart is damaged but breathing passages remain intact, incise over the heart on the neck of the throat without damaging the throat itself while restoring its natural shape; then compress gently and leave for a few days before treating with healing ointments until healed; if the wound has affected bone and broken pieces are present, remove those you can, and let those you cannot until the wound putrefies, relieving pressure and draining discharge; for fresh wounds apply powder as described previously.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has formed a fistula, treat it as I have described in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	Of wounds from lances or knives
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a lance or knife wound, and the wound is deep, examine whether wind escapes from the wound when the patient breathes: know then that the wound is fatal. If it is not deep, and fresh with all its blood intact, do not put powder on it in the first hour nor bandage it for the blood may leave entirely, return to the heart, and kill the patient; instead apply an attracting ointment and dress it twice a day; if you have no ointment, insert old cotton into the wound to absorb moisture, and let the patient sleep on his back for three days or four or more so that he does not suffer any spasm nor ill tremors of the heart or shortness of breath. When these good conditions are present then know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure it then with dressings and other treatments until it is healed; if it cannot heal, operate as you see fit to treat the fistula; apply proper wound care after surgery.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	If the wound is from a sword or knife incision and it is simple, on the chest or back, treat what is in front of you; if it is large, stitch it; if small, use powder; if it has pierced bone and removed pieces, clean the wound and realign the torn tissues if they are separate; if not separate, allow the wound to fester so as to ease extraction; for other wounds on other body parts apply judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Rupture of the abdomen.
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The rupturing of the belly can be large or small and even minor; from a large wound, sometimes the intestines or their nerves protrude due to this cause and the suturing is more difficult, and at times the smaller wounds are worse than the larger ones because it's harder to put back in the intestines without putting them back piece by piece as they swell up quickly when exposed to cold, making it even more difficult; therefore, a medium-sized wound is better since one can restore the intestine to its place more easily than the others. And know that there are four kinds of abdominal ruptures: two common types occur in the suturing of the belly, and the other two are for the suturing of other wounds in the body, and while these latter two types may be used in any wound they are more proper to the belly and I will explain each one.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small and something from the intestine comes out, and it is a difficult thing to treat, it can be done in one of two ways: either due to the small size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this way: moisten a sponge or soft cloth in tepid water only, or cook it in water with vinegar and cypress and spike, and apply it to the intestine until the swelling is gone; and sometimes do this with restraining wine, and use mild heat to reduce the swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling subside, moisten the intestine with water or let malves be cooked in water, for by doing so it eases its entry a little; and if nothing can enter, then make a small incision in the wound with an instrument used to remove hemorrhoids; and the first treatment is to use caution when cutting, as one should not cut unless there is great necessity; and this is the instrument to do it: make a cut inside along the curvature and outside, and see here its shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines have been ruptured, remount it there according to its natural form in its own proper place, if you are able, for this must be done.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is wide, and it is in the lower part of the belly, you must make the patient lie on their back, placing their legs higher than their head; if it is in the upper part of the belly, then place the head and chest higher than the lower parts; and also, if there is a rupture in one of the two halves [of the belly], consider that the affected part should be placed higher than the other; thus you must apply what I say for large and medium-sized wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds use what is provided for you, then take between your hands a soft and gentle instrument that can hold the entire rupture in its grasp; gather together the lips of the wound; this is how to commonly sew [wounds] -- it's when you take a needle or multiple needles depending on the width of the wound, leaving one finger-width at the front of the wound where you insert a strong thread with a single needle. Pierce through both pieces of skin and through what lies beneath the skin; do this until that part is pierced entirely by the other side, then gather together the two ends of the siphac [?] four times. Then twist a double piece of string around the needle in two parts; assemble the two sides of the wound evenly, leaving one finger-width and insert another needle; tie the thread as you did with the first needle, continuing this process according to what is required for multiple needles until the entire wound is closed off; the needles must be medium size -- between fine ones that cut all the flesh and thick ones which are too big to properly enter. For this reason they should be of a middle thickness and do not insert them beyond the flesh and skin so as not to tear open the wound before it has healed, then trim down the ends of each needle so that they don't cause any pain when you sleep; place some linen or strips of cloth at the tip of these needles for protection. Leave this in until the wound is fully sealed shut. This method using needles is more appropriate for small wounds as only one or two needles are necessary, while another common method uses a second type of sewing that gathers together both sides of skin and siphac with one needle having a strong middle-size thread; once you've pierced through all four pieces simultaneously, return the needle to the starting point in a way similar to how cloth is sewn; leave two finger widths between each stitch. This method can be used on humans -- I stitched up a man who had a wound inflicted by a blade on his belly which was more than one palm wide and opened up intestines that were well over two palms in width, the wound being right through the middle of his stomach.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I repositioned his intestines after they had been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound was sutured fifteen days later; I treated him, and he healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the doctors had judged him to be a lost cause and die, but it was a miracle; I did not treat him with any ointment as there were none to be found in that place nor any medicines either; instead, twice daily I placed old cotton on his wound, soaked in honey water until he was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will explain to you the two proper ways of suturing: take your needle and pass it from outside through to inside; when its eye emerges on the other side, leave the tip of the needle or stylet where it came out, then pierce again from within outwards so that both ends emerge externally; this type of suture is performed like how a furrier sews furs together, you leave one end of the suture material from one side and pick it up on the other, repeating until all suturing has been completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of suturing, as Galen describes it properly, is such that some do, who naturally bring the two parts together and apply one head of the wound to the other, in this manner: insert a needle into one head of the incision nearby, and pierce only that place; leave both heads of the wound. Then turn the needle, and make it go through from outside to inside, at the two heads of the wound; then pierce each with another point from outside to inside, in the other two heads of the wound on the opposite side. And this is the ordinary method of suturing and the most common one.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen says this word, and some bear witness that one must suture the belly with two needles, each having thread; and you should insert one needle from one side, and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew leather straps; and know that when the tear is in the middle of the belly, then it is more difficult to suture than the other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds: and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, rather than let it air, clean the intestine, and sew; then apply a powder on suppurating flesh, and if the wound has moved, apply any present ointment until the wound heals; and caustic the thread, and unite the edges, and the gape; then treat the wound as with others, until it is healed; and if you don't have medicines, apply right away when it begins to suppurate old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you don't need other medicines in many cases when the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound will affect the main limbs, it is necessary that you moisten light linen with temperate warm oil or rose oil, and place it around the armpits and under the arms; and if there is pain or putrefaction in the bowels, which often happens, then perform a clister of tepid black wine, especially if the putrefaction reaches the intestine; pierce it inside, and know that when it's the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called 'jeun' cannot be healed when it is injured, and this is due to the delicacy of its veins, and for the subtlety of the entire body, and its proximity to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the abscess jumps out of the wound, reset it backwards like the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and turned green or black, you must tie up the dark part so that no blood runs from it, for there are veins and arteries inside; then cut away what is between the ties, and place both ends hanging down below the wound until outside to ease its extraction when the abscess falls out, and the wound bows.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the rupture of the mouth
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is round and the wound small, it can be restored in some people, for I saw a man wounded in the belly by a lance; and the wound was on the right of the stomach, and became inflamed and turned into a fistula, from which issued waste matter and flatulence. I treated him according to my ability, and did not cease until he was healed and his skin joined together.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him healed, I doubted that the patient would have pain in his belly; and there was no pain, but he remained in better condition, eating and drinking; and some experts said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in this manner: take large-headed thorns, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the thorn has opened its mouth, place it on both lips so that it constricts its opening above; then cut off the head of the thorn, and this will hold such that it cannot become unbound, then apply another thorn in the same way as before, until the wound is completely held together; seal the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, and ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, 
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it heals, is universally called a "fistula", especially when it is covered and closed.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is truly an indurated and white nodulation, where there is no pain felt, and it is also covered like the feather of a bird; sometimes, the wound discharges clear pus, while other times, it is thick; some are small, others sufficient in size; I have already spoken about this in the division of wounds, that any wound that has not healed and lacks tissue is due to only one of nine causes: namely, lack of blood or matter; its malice; having hard tissue inside and on its lips which prevent new tissue from forming; too much pus; putrefied tissues and poor quality matter; inadequate treatment; the nature of corruption in a pestilence; slow digestion characteristic of a region that delays healing; or the presence of veins or bones; I have previously demonstrated all these causes, their signs, and medicinal treatments in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now you must let me tell you about the treatment of fistula, which is done by manual operation.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Fistula occurs in any part of the body; for there are fistulas that come to large veins, arteries, nerves, or at the anus, intestine, bladder, some ribs, spinal cord, or any joint of hands and feet; and so on to the principal member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	All the fistulas that are of this nature are difficult to treat, and there is only work and ignorance involved; if there is any fistula that does not reach the place I mentioned, and you have faith in its cure, and can identify it, then take a probe made of bronze or iron, whether the fistula is straight, so probe it; but if the fistula is twisted, seek with a subtle thin probe of tin, for tin bends following tortuosity; if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot fully explore it with probes, then clean it by enema through one opening, because moisture passes from one hole to another, cleaning it up; then probe carefully as best you can, so that you may know whether there is bone or nerve present, also whether pus flows out perfectly, and ask the patient thoroughly about pain they feel when you press with your hand, and where they feel this pain; once you truly understand the location of the fistula, if it is far from a joint, nerve, artery or vein, or any place that I have mentioned to you, then treat it as described above, removing all corruption and decaying flesh inside; after which cure so that it is healed, and if the fistula is deep at its proper site, cut down upon it thoroughly as much as possible, followed by immersing probes in hot water medicine and inserting them up to the head of the fistula, until the redundant matter remaining at the bottom has been eroded away; then apply stimulating ointments that heal healthy flesh, until it heals; if it does not heal with this treatment, cauterize as we have said, and if bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut it out.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If wound or abscess does not trouble your principal limbs as we have said; and if the bone is uncovered with signs of decay and blackening, wait until all rot has been removed, then treat the surrounding tissue by cutting away any infected material until it is clean; and if it is not healed, and swelling returns like before, know that you did not go deep enough: uncover and probe again so as to be at the bottom, remove all corruption, restore the place; and if it is thus healed, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the rot is too deep for you to reach it; there are other tools provided by nature; and if some small bone has decayed, and you can remove it with pincers, extract it using suitable instruments for such a task, but if many bones have been affected, take them all out at once, leaving none behind; and if moisture obstructs your work, yet presents no problem or fear, cut through both flesh and bone until the bones are free.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, apply something that causes festering to the wound, and let it rot away the flesh around the bones; then they will more easily reset the bones; and if this is a large bone, such as in the leg or thigh, scrape only the corruption until all blackness is removed, then restore the wound; but if a great part of the tissue is corrupted and goes down to the marrow of the bone, you must care for it and cut away all that is corrupt, then cure it so that it may heal; I will tell you about a fistula which befell one man in his leg, from whom you can take example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man about thirty years old who had pain in his leg from an internal cause, so that the matter came to the leg and it swelled with a large abscess which had no outward opening; but the doctors in their foolishness worked on it so much that they opened up the abscesses, and a great deal of pus ran out, and became fistulas, and there were many holes which all discharged foul and moist matter from his body; and many physicians put cures around it for two years, and among them was no wise man in this art, until I was called upon, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was treated, and that which flowed out of the holes in great quantity; and the young man's flesh became red and took on a yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set up a tent in one of these holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that one came against the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hastened and cut into one of the holes until I exposed a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and perforated, with the corruption reaching deep into the bone; I cleaned what appeared to be the corrupted bone, hoping there was no other corruption beyond what I removed; and I began to restore the wound with soothing medicines over a long period, but it would not heal; so again I started anew, exposing the bone as before, and found the corruption had spread further into the bone, which I then cleaned, removing it, and endeavored to heal the site; yet I could do no more than cut around one palm of the bone, finding it all too soft, then restoring it with medicines; and it healed swiftly, mending quickly, requiring no further treatment except for the weakness of the patient who couldn't endure more, and my fear of his death.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For he bled often during the evacuation, but he was entirely cured, and in place of the bone, a hard flesh grew, which had good properties and caused no harm or opposition at all, neither before nor after.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated this way: take a linen thread, and strain it over the head of the exposed bone, and have someone pull it upwards; and place another larger thread of linen on top of the flesh that covers the bone, stretching the head so you may push away the corrupted flesh, exposing the site where you wish to operate without cutting or harming the flesh; and place a red-hot iron or board underneath the bone in order to cauterize the corrupted flesh; it is necessary to treat as much as one can see and feel of the corruption, treating again if needed.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, uncover all the flesh; then place a hot iron underneath, and with the help of silk thread remove the corruption from one side to the other, and let the suture be made as long as the length of the corruption has been measured out, just like we said before. And if the corruption is in the joint, cut off the corrupted joint and attach the bone on the other part; and if the corruption is in the continuation between two joints, there's no other way but to remove it by cutting; and if the corruption is located at the wrist of the hand or the ankle of the foot, this thing will be very difficult for you. Nevertheless, you have to investigate the said corruption and how it opens up before your eyes, and then cleanse it in every possible manner without harming the vein or nerve. Know that there are many kinds of cutters and silk threads to remove these bones according to their position, appearance, size, subtleness, length, shortness, hardness; therefore, each type of work must be fitted with its tool. Know also that your work will show you which instrument you need by the knowledge acquired from this art and by considering the kind of sicknesses; so think about what tools you need according to their use.
dou feu	From fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The head spoils either from within or from without; and when you have treated that corrosion with medicinal cures, and it does not improve, then you must cut off that limb up to the place where the corrosion originates, so that the patient escapes through this means of death, or by evil, which is greater, because of the loss of a limb; and there are signs such as the limb becoming black, so that it seems burnt from fire, and after blackening, for that corrosion moves from member to member, and seizes the whole body; you must hasten to cut [it off], and if this is due to the sting of some venomous beast, like a sea scorpion or snake and similar creatures, if the corruption is at the head of the finger, then cut it off, and do not give space for it to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	Et si décolement de sang vient quand tu ouvres, cautérise le lieu sans délai, ou applique certaines poudres coagulantes; puis reviens à ta médecine jusqu'à ce qu'elle soit achevée, ensuite attache le membre avec un bandage adéquat, et soigne-le jusqu'à ce qu'il guérisse; je vais te raconter quelque chose qui est arrivé à un homme au pied: il avait une tache noire ressemblant à une brûlure de feu, et cette corrosion apparut d'abord sur son orteil, s'étendant jusqu'à tout le pied; quand l'homme vit la corrosion, il se hâta de couper le pied, et fut guéri; longtemps après, la corrosion revint sur le doigt de sa main, et il vint me voir, je lui appliquai des agents répercussifs après avoir purifié son corps, mais les corrosions ne pouvaient cesser; il voulut que je lui coupe la main, ce que je refusais, car j'avais espoir de faire reculer le mal; je craignis aussi qu'en lui coupant la main, il ne meure, sa constitution étant faible; l'homme se désespéra, retourna chez lui et se hâta de couper sa main, et fut guéri; je n'ai relaté cette histoire que pour que l'on fasse autrement à l'avenir si le besoin s'en fait sentir.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Some times an abscess forms in the flesh and stays for so long that it makes a large gathering of pus; and then swells up and bursts open, releasing its contents like a vase would do; while leaving behind an empty space as thin as fabric, not reaching bone or nerve; this kind of illness is called "sain", and not "fistule"; but if the hole reaches down to the bone itself, it becomes known as "fistule"; with such skin you must remove all that tissue around it, especially when delicate like a piece of cloth; it should be done quickly before corruption sets in.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you fear the skin will rot and corruption is not deep-rooted, but rather thick with flesh, then cure it thus: first check whether the breast is large, and the pus inside has a foul smell; in that case clean it out as follows using Egyptian medicine made this way: take equal parts resin, oil, and litharge; put them in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and thick like honey; then take as much of it as you need, mix with water and honey, fill the breast with it through a small hole, and hold it there for two hours before emptying out its contents by squeezing gently; repeat this process several times till the breast is thoroughly cleaned and all pus has been drained off; alternatively use ash water if Egyptian medicine is unavailable: simply burn grapevine wood into ash, pour some water over them to form a mixture, then clean out with it as long as you are certain the breast is well cleansed; if patient cannot bear either treatment for any reason, resort instead to honey and water mixed together or slightly thickened with ground litharge - honey possesses both cleansing and purifying properties while wine helps dry out pus quickly; once you have done this several times over and the wound is clean enough in your estimation, it's time to apply an ointment that encourages flesh regeneration: for this take diafinit emplaster, mix it together with rose oil or even better, wine; or apply ointments whose properties I will describe in detail under Ointment section below. If the hole left by incision is too small and catheter cannot pass through easily then slightly enlarge its opening using a thin iron rod first before applying Egyptian ointment (or Basilicon). And if wound happens to be very wide open instead, simply stitch it up leaving just enough space for catheter insertion - if discharge comes out from above, remove any material blocking access below so that catheter can go deeper inside.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bowels are intact, no flesh is allowed to be entangled; and if you cannot cut under the sinew as you wish, arrange it in such a way that the bowel moves to the lowest point it can reach, for when the bowel is complete, no meat is caught in its folds and if you cannot cut under the sinew as you desire, make sure: that the bowel runs lightly downward; and leave none of the bowel behind. And take binding medicines to place on the wound, spread over a linen cloth which covers the whole wound then cut with force at the right side of the sinue A hole wider than the first, extend soft ointment onto another piece of fabric according to the amount of space in the hole and put it on the wound to ease the bowel do not remove the large outer cloth for many days afterwards; and that which is placed over the breastbone, often removes a bowel, and know what comes out of the bowel whether it be poison or little or much or digested or undigested. And note if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess present, when your medicine has spread in this manner and you see nature rising above the wound, then know that the breastbone has healed already; move the patient from bed to chair the next day, or on the third day, and once you undo the bandages around the wound, change into another piece of cloth and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast vomits undigested food after many days, know that the breast is not healing.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons take long to cure, do not despair of healing, for health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are people whose wounds heal slowly with charring, and those who do the opposite; and if undigested food vomits from the breast after many days, know that the breast is not healing; and if the breast takes time to dry up, and it is distant, then apply drying medicines moist in substance and dry in virtue, such as a definitive ointment, for there is a large part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine; take definitive ointment, and make it with rose oil, and mix it with equal amounts of old wine; then cook it and use it; and the same can be made better when cooked thickened, if a definitive ointment is not available, or you can take myrrh and aloes and incense, grind them, and powder them over honey while it is on the fire; then glue a cloth to it, spread it over the breast, and sometimes they administer long aristologist roots, and celestial lily roots, which are like barley flour and centaury; and use either simple or composite remedies: grind them, make a powder, and put it on the honey I mentioned, and apply it; and if the cure is prolonged, and it is not healed by this treatment, then know that corruption has reached perfection, and made an impression on the bone, or hard parts, or the ligaments; so treat the fistula cure as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of the abscess under the nail.
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that forms beneath the nail of the thumb, or the big toe, or it may occur in other places; and when it becomes old and untreated, it turns into a warm abscess, suppurating and spreading until it reaches the root of the nail, and even tears off the entire nail; causing corrosion down to the bone, resulting in foul-smelling pain, and the finger or toe becomes swollen, with discoloured flesh.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we said in the previous section, and the treatment doesn't work, then you must cut away all the redundant matter that remains beneath the nail, and then cauterise the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauterizations are a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is sound; and if the nail presses into the flesh, beginning to prick and wound it, then you must place the point of a needle underneath the nail that pricks the flesh, push it upwards, and cut away this flesh subtly and lightly, and apply onto the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove all; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	If the corrosion is in the bone, cut it away, and treat with fire, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal; and if you see the finger corrupting, cut it off from us as it is said before, then treat until it is healed; and if it is wounded, and pierced, and there is great pain felt, you must first dress the wound; then trim the nail with a sharp spatula by cutting across from above, taking care not to reach the flesh underneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and should this happen, apply something soothing.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of the wrist of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	Some people are born with very fleshy index fingers, sometimes there is one with a claw-like shape or it has bones and occasionally it comes out with a nail, some appear in the base of the knuckle while others come out near the root of the finger joints.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	The one that is born in the base of the knuckle rarely moves while the fleshy ones do move, cut off the claw-like with a sharp knife at its root
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those that grow near the knuckles can be treated by trimming them, take care when doing so.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	With those that appear at the back of your hand, start by cutting the flesh all around it down to bone and then carefully remove the bone with an appropriate tool, clean well until the wound is dry.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The swellings that come to the fingers together arise from birth, or from sudden wounding, or from burning with fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	You must cut this suture so that the edges may be brought together according to their natural forms; then place between them two tents or oily rose-colored cloths moistened, lest they should unite; you may also put in between two pieces of soft lead until the parts are united as they ought to be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If there is any swelling on the palm of his hand, cut this suture as it ought to be done.
des vils	swellings
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Swellings are large open wounds full of melancholy superfluities that occur in various body parts; and they more often happen in the legs of those who walk and work and carry burdens than elsewhere.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	You must therefore administer a purgative of bile to him at times, and then treat it with basil juice.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment with iron is done in two ways: one is when you cauterize it and draw out the black blood; and the other way is that you open a vein, and drain all of its blood.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The incision is done in this manner: first bathe the leg in very hot water until the flesh becomes softened, then remove the patient's leg from above the thigh down to below the knee; then make an incision at one place or another with a wide cutting instrument, then draw out and drain the black blood by hand from one end to the other, for as long as the patient can tolerate it; and then bind it up, and instruct him to abstain from eating food that produces black bile; and repeat both the evacuation and treatment when the veins are full, unless it is harmful to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: raise the patient's leg, even if it has a lot of hair, then place it in the bath, and pour warm water over the leg until it turns red and the veins swell; and if you have no bath, heat it by the fire, then cut along the vein from the knee to the ankle, or below the calf; next remove the skin with an onion, and peel back the vein on either side until it is exposed when pressed; and one will see it as red and black, and where it enters the skin like a white cord; then push the wire underneath until it is raised from the skin, and cut it lightly with an onion, then cut in another place three fingers above; next peel back the skin over the vein until it is exposed, then lift it up with the wire as before, and cut at another uncine, as you did first; then make a further incision or more if necessary, and lift it again, and cut near the toe joint, and draw and lift to the second incision; next extract from one incision to the other until all is removed, then cut away the rest; and if you cannot pull and lift it, push a needle with double thread underneath, tie and pull it through, and insert a wire beneath it, and turn your hand from side to side until it comes out; take care not to cut it because if you do you will not be able to draw it or lift it without harming the patient; and when all has been drawn, place wet wool soaked in wine and rose oil on the wound site; treat him until healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is constricted and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must split it crookedly but do not cut it; and draw it out as we have mentioned before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of the iron with which we cut the vein is curved and does not slice, so that it does not cut the vein; and it has a thick curve because if it were slender, it would cut through the vein. But let it be thick as we have said, and here is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is entangled in the legs, in warm parts where there are no plants or trees, and on land with little moisture; and perhaps it occurs elsewhere other than in the legs, like the rottenness that arises from beneath the skin, as worms and insects arise within the body, bred between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the sign of the beginning of this vein is that a great inflammation comes into the leg, then the color changes, and the vein begins to protrude outwardly, just like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the vein opens, you must wrap it with a piece of lead that is three and a half to two inches long, tie it, and leave the lead hanging on the leg. Whenever it exudes again, rewrap it with the lead, and if it is too long, cut off a part and rewrap the remainder; but do not cut it at its root until it is completely exposed, for if you cut it, it retracts into the flesh, causing abscesses and putrefaction where it was, as well as severe illness. Therefore, it must be treated gradually from beginning to end without leaving any part inside the body. Sometimes this vein, when treated, measures five palms or ten in length, and a man came to me twenty years ago whose [vein] extended for ten palms; when you cut it, it produced one ray or channel, and pierce through until all of it comes out; empty the contents within it, and introduce antiseptic medicines against putrefaction there for several days, then treat it like abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes this wound is minor, especially when it appears in the ankle joint or foot area and there are many perforations from which pus flows, therefore one must heal it as we have explained before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Maggots that breed between flesh and skin.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called "ox sickness" in our land because it often affects cattle and is caused by tiny worms that breed between flesh and skin, moving throughout the body up and down, causing a sensation as they move from one limb to another until they break through the skin where they began, then die; these are spawned by the decay of some bodily fluids, just as flies, serpents, worms, and roundworms come from the belly; its maliciousness is feared because when it moves throughout the body, if it reaches the head and gets into an eye, perhaps entering it, it can destroy the eye; this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being cured and drained, one cannot be rid of it until it is ready: therefore, you must bind the area above and below with a strong tight bond, then cut above and drain it forcefully, and if the poison has gone deep into the flesh, and you cannot find it, cauterize it with fire until it dies; and its greatest harm is that it runs to the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming towards the head near the eye, firmly tighten the eyebrow above it, then cut above, and drain it forcefully; and the patient must use bodily cleansing medicines of soluble purgatives for harmful humours, and avoid foods that cause decay.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from windiness.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called "vakirir" in our land and it's a pain that appears in some body parts, then moving from one body part to another and I've seen what I'm telling you about.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to see a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, revealing a small swelling in the vein of the arm; then I saw it move up towards the shoulder like a worm, more than anything else, like quicksilver when it flows from one place to another; the pain departed from that spot and fixed itself at the shoulder, then ran all over the body so that it reached the other arm. Then she told me how it was now traveling around her body as I saw with my own eyes.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly surprised at how it moved from limb to limb because I had never seen this illness behave in such a way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Toutevoie, I had wished many that they would want to move the pain from one place to another, but I never wanted it myself, just as I saw it in the woman; and I thought it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins were exposed, which is why this compelled air appeared; and it does not appear according to this reason for those who are delicate, and have moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see this disease being treated, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, then wrap around above and below until the compelled air is gone; cauterize the area; and if you do not see it with your eyes, treat it with what removes the winds, such as fetid pills, serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	from arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and the parts of the body they hit.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of arrows lies in the fact that there are those with large points, small ones, and some that are feathered or welded; there are also arrows with two angles, those with long shafts, and those made up of pieces. When an arrow hits a body part, it can do so in two ways: it can penetrate a vital organ such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When an arrow strikes one of these vital organs, and you notice the signs of death that I will mention later, you must be cautious about extracting this arrow, as many patients die in such situations; but if these fatal signs are not evident, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then withdraw it and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when an arrow falls into it and pierces the bone, and breaks the membrane that is above the brain, is when you see a coma, stiffness, and swelling in the eyes, redness and inflammation of the tongue, spasms and mental confusion, and vomiting bile; perhaps blood flows from the nostrils or ears; maybe they lose speech and voice; and there also comes out of the wound white moisture resembling pus, as well as something like charred flesh. If you see these signs, then abstain from treatment, and draw out the arrow if it is still inside.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The signs of the arrow when it strikes the heart are that it is close to the left nipple, and one feels as if it were fixed in a hard object, not empty; perhaps the pulse changes like the beating of an arrow, and black blood flows out, coldness and cold sweat appear, and syncope: then know without doubt that death is imminent.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that has not pierced the lung is that the wound is full of foam, and the throat swells up, and the patient changes colour, breathing heavily and seeking cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow falls onto the chest covering, it is near the small ribs; and it causes great pain and great distress, and all the shoulder muscles move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow falls on the stomach, perhaps something undigested comes out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow falls on the belly, and no faeces come out through the lower intestine, there is no hope in treating it or extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and flows away, and the patient feels intense pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, like the cheek and neck and throat and shoulder and armpit and spine of the back and ribs and hips and thighs and legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to various positions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man that an arrow fell on his collarbone in the root of the neck: I took hold of it, and drew it out from under the ear on the other side, and he was healed without incident.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And thrust into the eye socket beneath the paper beneath is an arrowhead which struck the fatty tissue of the eye and was lodged within it. The arrow had no barb, but its head measured as long as a Turkish bow, entirely made of iron, light without being thin; the wound healed and there were no ill effects.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	Thrust an arrow from the throat of a Christian and it was an Arabic arrow with barbs; I extracted the barbs and drew out the arrow gently until I removed it completely, then the Christian healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	Thrust an arrow into a man which struck him in the belly and I thought he would die; after thirty days had passed without any change to his condition I incised above the arrowhead and drew it out, but there were no ill effects.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a man with an arrow in his back or side, and the wound has healed over while the arrow remains inside him; yet he experiences no change to his natural functions nor finds hindrance in any of his natural activities.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And you see another man with an arrow in his face, and the wound has healed but he remains without suffering great pain or any other similar issues.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I drew an arrow from the king's man, which had lodged in his nose and was slightly tilted to the right; the arrow was completely bent, and I was called upon to treat him three days after it happened.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I sought it thoroughly with my finger, but did not feel anything; he felt pricking and pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of the arrowhead. I applied an attractive digestive poultice to that spot so the flesh would not swell; and there appeared the flesh of the arrowhead.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I left the poultice on for several days, and the wound healed initially, but the patient remained ill for a long time, feeling the arrowhead inside his nose every day; he told me so himself.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied a strong corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it opened up, and I probed with my finger, feeling the arrowhead's tip at the spot; then I inserted into the wound's opening some of that same corrosive medicine until the arrowhead's head became clearly visible; after several months the end finally emerged, and once the wound had expanded sufficiently I was able to insert pincers and pull it out from one side and the other, but could not remove it; so I kept on probing and contriving various instruments until eventually with a well-made pair of pincers, as described in this chapter's conclusion, I grasped hold of it and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	The mirror judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	You have been told the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you may focus your care on what I do not mention, for books cannot cover everything; but wise masters compare well little to much, and for what is present and lacking, they find new work, and new instruments, in the discovery of strange occurrences within this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not exit the body from where they enter but according to two methods: either by their point of entry or by another part; and one which exits by its entry point is an arrow entering fleshy tissue, and this may occur sometimes now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not come out now, let it stay until the flesh is completely rotten around it, and the exit is widened; likewise, if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it there for a few days, moving it every day; then it will come out, and if it does not, pierce all around with a very fine drill, so that the surrounding tissue is enlarged, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and goes up to one of the brain's ventricles, and any of the accidents that I have mentioned appear in the patient: do not pull it out, but leave it until it becomes even after a few days, for if the arrow reaches the pia mater, it will cause death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not stuck solely in the bone, and does not come out through the skin, and the patient remains a few days without any bad incident, devise its extraction.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot come out on its own, apply cups around the wound as I have told you; then treat the wound until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is buried inside the body and cannot be seen, search for it throughout the wound; and if you can feel it, extract it with a suitable instrument; and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound, and the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves or veins involved, open up the wound until it is large enough. Extract the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs that keep it in place, remove the flesh that is attached on two sides as far as possible without damaging any muscles; then break or bend the barbs of the arrow so you may extract it; do this carefully to avoid breaking the arrow which would make extraction more difficult.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it all at once, leave it until the surrounding flesh is rotten, then pull it out, for the extraction will be eased.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the loss of blood opposes you, then manage this as we have said about the treatment in its chapter; and be wary of incising the nerve and the vein, and use whatever means you can to extract the arrow without danger, either quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to how they were positioned when the arrow struck them, for it is the greatest aid there is, and if you cannot, then do as the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	If the arrow has come from elsewhere or if there is nothing apparent of it, or if the skin is swollen in that area where you can see or feel it plainly: cut above until the tongs can grasp it, and then pull it out: do this now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand roundly until it enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then draw it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	If it cannot come out, leave it there again, and then restart the extraction until it comes out completely; if it was an arrow stuck in the bone, push along the whole shaft; if it is blunt, and you want to administer a thrusting motion, use an instrument with a pointed end so that the tip of the arrow enters the hole of the instrument; then push forcefully, and if the arrow is embedded, insert the instrument with its point entering first in order to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	If the arrow is poisoned, you must cut away all the flesh around where the venom has entered, if you can, then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow falls on the foot or thigh or belly or bladder or flank, and it is near the surface, and you can cut above it, then cut; be careful not to cut a vein or nerve, then extract [the arrow], and close the wound if necessary; treat until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows is similar to a bird's beak, and here is its form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	There are many types of forceps: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the wedge is like a bird's feather, to push against the tip of the arrow, as shown here:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the tongs for pushing and extracting is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are thirty-one veins in the body that can be used for bloodletting, sixteen of which are in the head: two jugulars behind the ears known as "herbech," two arteries visible at the temples, two veins at the corners of each eye called "aspires," one vein across the forehead, a vein at the top of the nose, two subclavians in the neck, two veins above the mouth known as "augeherich," and two veins beneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	There are five veins commonly used for bloodletting in each arm: the cephalic vein is on the left side and lay people call it the "vein of the head;" the median vein is called the "fast" by the common folk and consists of the cephalic and basilic veins; the basilic vein is found on the right side, which the commoners name the "belly vein," and appears on the forearm.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: 
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The bleeding of veins that are located behind the ears is beneficial for chronic colds and headaches; and the qualities of the bleeding, as I tell you, are that you raise the patient's head, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a cord so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two places dependent on the head: look for them with your finger, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, there let the blood flow out; then take the lancet, and insert it under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand across the entire length of the vein, and cut both the skin and the vein thoroughly with two fingers' width, making the blood come out as much as you wish; then release and bind (it) until it is healed; and I have already mentioned incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The bleeding of the two arteries that are in the two temples is beneficial for chronic migraine, severe headache, and habitual ophthalmia, as well as for the body of acute tears from the eyes; and the qualities of bleeding are as I say: it is necessary for the patient to stretch their neck so that the two veins open clearly; then you feel the pulse beneath your thumb, and proceed to bleed afterwards; next lift the heart above the vein with your index finger, insert the lancet underneath, raise up the vein, and strip it just as you did in the other two veins, and let out blood according to your need; then release the patient, put your finger on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton; after that bind it firmly and leave it until healed; we have already spoken of their stripping and extraction at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bleeding of the vein in the forehead is as valuable as the bleeding of the cephalic vein for ancient facial diseases, and for migraines, and redness; and its quality is such that the patient strains their neck by twisting, so much that the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called 'fosseur', whose form is this:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Place the tip of the instrument over the vein and press it with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow out according to the amount you desire; then untie the patient's neck and bind the wound until it is healed, but never use a wide flame for this.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, the flame should not be too sharp; and do not bleed across the bone, for it is close by, and may break the instrument if it is delicate.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The draining of the two veins that are in the armpits helps with eye ailments, scurvy, redness, swelling in the eye, and facial diseases; and its quality is such that the patient must keep their neck immobile using a cloth tied around it, as mentioned before; then drain the vein, making the incision slightly oblique to the length of the arm, a little long, and broad, for there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	If the veins are delicate, they might break; then let the blood flow until you need it to stop, and then bind it with cotton, tying it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The vein in the nose is drained for fevers, sudden madness, and facial diseases like migraine and redness on the face, especially when it's an old ailment; and its quality is such that the patient must keep their neck immobile, then pinch their nose with your left hand, take a delicate, long vein, and insert it between the lips in the space between the two nostrils, as the vein does not open very well there, and the blood will begin to flow now; do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then bind it for one night, as it heals quickly; this is the form of the incision:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The bleeding of the two veins helps with narrowing the shoulder joint, starting a broken bone, many diseases, gout, corrosion, herpes, and tumors; the qualities of this bleeding are that the patient tightens their neck underneath either one as we have said before; and the masters should be standing above the head of the patient, while the patient is sitting on a chair, then open the vein for an inch or so widely, then draw out blood temperately until it's necessary to do so; then start again in another vein, then unbind the ligature, and close all veins moderately, so that the patient doesn't suffocate; and let them be until morning, when the wound has healed.
de la sainie des leivres	The bleeding of the lips
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The draining of veins above the lips aids in healing sores within the mouth, and treats gum inflammation, cracked lips, and surrounding areas.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Make the patient sit before you and hold their neck as I have described; then turn up their lip, and look at the two veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left side, and they can be recognized by their black color and small dark vessels surrounding them: thus cut each of these, if you do not know which to choose or are in doubt, cut the larger one on either side; proceed similarly with the two veins above and below, as it is all done in the same way.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Draining below the tongue.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The bleeding of veins below the tongue is beneficial after the bleeding of the cephalic vein, and it is done at the narrowing of the throat, for diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the bleed should be such that the patient sits between your hands facing the sun, with their tongue raised, and look beneath each side for a black vein: bleed one or both, but do not go too deep, as beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the neck that are commonly bled are bled in two ways: either by incising with a wide flame-heated iron or an olivewood stylet as sharp blades, and it is called 'anesil'; they are broad and thin according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of Martin's flame is very renowned, and it is broad as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the swollen veins full of thick blood, and those that contain thick and troubled blood; this is Martin's flame form:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more pointed and sharp, and this is for bleeding thin veins or where there is thin yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	Bleeding from the basilica, which is one of these veins, aids illnesses located below the throat, and under the neck, and at the chest, and in the belly; and the bleeder must take care to avoid the artery that lies beneath it.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he cuts the artery and blood flows out, it must be stanched as I have said; and the flame should not be held still but moved like a knife.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilic vein does not open clearly, you must extract it and change to another one; or take a part of it, or treat in its place the vein within the arm: it opens clearly; and cauterize with flame as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you wish to know the place of the incision, it is necessary that you first extend the arm so you can feel for the pulse; then mark the spot and bind the arm firmly, cauterize the vein with a flame, and take care not to cut into the artery when you see swelling, for this is the artery: avoid it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it spurt upwards like a child's urine, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is from an artery: be quick then, and apply pressure with your finger for a long time; remove your finger if the bleeding stops, which often happens; bind the arm tightly, leave it thus, do not let the patient move his arm; have fear and doubt, but make sure he does not move until healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the bleeding is not stopped and it overpowers you, cut the artery if it is exposed, for this will hinder the blood flow; staunch the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take a piece of fustic bark, split it, and take one half, binding it tightly until the next day; if the bleeding has stopped, that is well; but if not, treat as we have said with hemostatic powders; and be aware that staunching blood may be less effective in certain circumstances due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm's muscles.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	Bleeding from the median vein helps by drawing blood away from the head above and the body below, as it is composed of both the basilica and cephalic veins, as we have said; and the one bleeding must take care to avoid the nerve beneath, and if they cut too deep and find the nerve, and it swells and their incision becomes serious, and perhaps cannot heal; this nerve often appears, and if it does not appear in some people due to its subtlety, then you must incise it with a fine instrument; remove the nerve as best you can.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	Et if has a vein between the two nerves, then open it lengthwise.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The bleeding of the cephalic vein is beneficial as it draws blood from the head and aids the eyes; and one must bleed with a prick near the olive-shaped flame or the myrtle-shaped flame, for this is the safest of all veins as there are no nerves or arteries beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, one must seek the lighter spot and cause no harm if they miss the first time, and start again; perhaps for some men, the veins swell when pricked the first time, but it causes no great harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of bleeding depends on your opinion.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about bleeding is that it is not done except to maintain health and prevent future illnesses; and let the bleeding be performed in one of the three veins which are as follows: namely, cephalic, basilic, and median cubital; and it must be done at the beginning of spring, in autumn, and in winter after eating when signs of fullness appear; and you should bleed on the first or third day, two to three hours after the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	Bleeding for illnesses has no determined time, but rather when the need arises during the day or night, at any hour and in all seasons; and one should not bleed children until they are fourteen years old, nor a pregnant woman from the fourth month until the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	They must not bleed old men who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when anyone wants to bleed themselves, in any manner, it is necessary that they cleanse their intestines with a light clyster if they have too much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw out from the intestines harmful superfluities damaging to vital organs; and one must not bleed those who are overly full of meat, or drunk, until such time as he is sober again, nor those suffering from dropsy; and take care not to bleed someone following a fit of colic, vomiting, diarrhoea, sexual intercourse with women, or hard labour involving watching or fasting, or any other thing causing great weakness in the body's strength (whether caused by weapons, or some other bodily accident); then purify the humours if the blood is thick through meats and drinks and medicines as you have power to do; then enter into a bath if nothing prevents this, to thin out the blood, and bleed yourself from the vein of the arm around two-thirds up (as we've said) ; and be aware that day of work, or pain, or lust, and all other like things; and rest and cheerfulness must attend you, and let the bleeder be higher than him who is bled, then rub his arm twice or three times, and tighten the ligature moderately, for if it's too tight or little, blood will not flow; and then rub around the place with your hands until the veins swell up, and can be felt; then moisten the bleeder's palm with a little old oil, next put his left hand to that vein below where he is to bleed himself some little distance so as not to let the vein fall or fail in wounding.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flow like cords to the blood-letting cup, and among them are those filled with windiness, so that when one applies flame, it withdraws from the flame, and cannot open the vein; thus it is for these [veins]; if one opens the vein, the wound becomes too narrow, therefore medical practitioners must take heed of such things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens on the first attempt, it is good; but if not, one should begin again a little below that place or above, unless the location is swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	If the location is swollen and the patient panics, leave it for one or two days, do not bind the arm: perhaps hot abscesses will form; do not immerse in a bath, then begin blood-letting again if you wish; and if the opening is small, the blood may flow quickly and you doubt that enough blood has come out as intended, apply all the flame directly to this same opening; perform the procedure slightly above rather than below so that the vein is not swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the place swollen, do not reopen the wound, and apply a poultice of oil, as it eases the body from blood, and the oil is beneficial in this location for the poultice; and thus administer the poultice of oil in every dressing that you dress wounds to staunch the flow of blood; also triacle and bowels of them, when applied on the place, very subtly the blood diminishes and parts itself as it becomes too great.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a large abscess occurs there often, especially when it is not dressed except for that time or the opening of the wound is small, then hasten and apply to the place a sponge moistened with warm water and salt, and bind it tightly for an hour; and you must do this after the flow of blood from the wound has ceased, and if there remains on the place after some days any blackness or greenness, it will not harm them; and if you see it, apply something made of aloe or myrrh infused in galbanum juice, or something similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there is an abscess and appearance in the wound of the basilica: so place your hand on it, and if you find the spot soft under pressure from the hand, then this appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid applying anything we have mentioned here, for perhaps the artery is nearby; instead apply a dry poultice to harden the spot, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	Treat each of the blood types according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see it as thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for someone who is full and healthy but needs bloodletting to have a wider wound created; the flames should be broad as well. For those who are weak, do the opposite: let them bleed less often, but frequently; they must be bled by cutting across the vein, not pricking it. This method of bleeding is safer from excess loss of blood and damage to nerves, and it is better than a long or wide cut.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for someone who requires bloodletting due to bodily ailments, it is appropriate to give them bread soaked in pomegranate juice; if they are warm-blooded, draw three or four times the amount of blood. If their complexion is cold, let them eat moistened bread in muscatel syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, along with a well-scented syrup beforehand.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints during the operation, after the loss of a great deal of blood, it is necessary that he sniff broth from meat, and subtle perfumed syrup, and use other things we have mentioned in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to open his arm and bleed it again, when he is weakened by great bloodletting, it is necessary that he bleed little by little, according to the quantity of his continuous strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if someone wishes to open his arm after the first bleeding, and he has strong constitution, he should bleed seven hours after the first bleeding or after nine hours.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if someone wishes to bleed from another part of the body, he should be bled on the second day or third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For it has an excess of blood within the body that is already heated up and causes fever; thus we must draw out a large quantity and widen the wound until it heals slightly; then you should fulfil all conditions for healing, and place your hand on their pulse as they heal so death does not come in this spot of partial healing, and this happens many times when surgeons are neglectful; and one should never press strongly down if wanting to release an arm from a tourniquet for the second time after blood has been drawn out once before and the wound is closed; nor should you extend their arm forcibly if it is curved, as that would be bad; but rather leave them until they heal again for a second time; or make a small cut at the tip of the flame, so that any congealed blood escapes from this opening in the vein, and apply some wool soaked in water to this area, and press down lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the wound is swollen, leave it alone and do not constrict it until the abscess subsides.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it becomes necessary to draw blood a second time, then do so from the same place, or from another vein, or from the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein between the arms is used for bleeding instead of the one on the head because it is composed [in a different way].
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	The method of bleeding is as follows: the patient immerses their hand in warm water until the nails turn red; then they are tied loosely so that the vein can be seen clearly, and it is bled across its width rather than length; the incision should be wide, and the bloodletting must occur close to where the fingers join the hand; if the bleeding stops, return the hand to warm water and allow the blood to flow into the water until you have drawn enough out; and for those who are ill with fevers [and need bleeding], do not immerse their hands in warm water again since it is more commonly done during winter than summer; bleeding from this vein is safer than any other, as there are neither arteries nor nerves present.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The bloodletting from the little finger of the right hand is beneficial for all liver ailments and here is how to do it: remove the hand, and immerse in warm water until the vein swells up so you can see it; if the bleeding occurs transversely, and you cut through completely, there will be no harm done; don't go too deep though as the nerves are all bare underneath, without flesh covering them. And then return the hand to warm water, if blood has congealed in the wound and cannot flow out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And once you have drawn out the required amount of blood, apply oil and salt to the vein to weld it together, and do this for each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	Bloodletting from the little finger of the left hand is beneficial for ailments of the spleen, and do everything just as I told you regarding the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The draining of the spleen is effective for all ailments that are below the body, such as diseases of the uterus, retention of urine, kidney disease, and similar illnesses in the thighs and lower legs.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its drainage is such that the patient immerses their foot in hot water and rubs it over the vein until it ruptures, then bind it above the ankle joint; this vein is located at the ankle, and many run up along the leg towards the kidneys; drain whichever kidney is wider, or at the ankle where it moves better.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you drain it at the foot, be careful not to injure the nerves that lie underneath, and treat it as you would a wound by cutting into it; let the flame of the cautery be gentle.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot escape, return the foot to water, and let it drain thoroughly from the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the incisions fail on the first attempt, begin a second time slightly above, for the skin is salty; do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and proceed in this way with the other foot likewise.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The skin of the sciatic vein is near the ankle bone, and its incision aids in relieving hip pain when the blood is hot.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	The quality of this incision is such that the patient should enter the bath, and press above the ankle for four days by twisting, as otherwise the vein will not open; if it does open, then cauterize in all ways you can, crossing at various points; take care that you do not cut too deep, because the skin here is salty, and this area is quite sensitive to many men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you cannot find it, press any vein that appears on the back of the foot, towards the little toe, and be careful not to hit the nerves; make sure blood flows from where you wish, then untie the bandage, apply cotton and hold [it]; she is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	Cupping sessions.
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cups are made of horn, brass or glass; cupping is done in two ways: either by drawing blood and creating a bruise, or without bruising.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this non-bruising cupping is also performed in two ways: either using hot cups or cold ones; the bruising and bloodletting method of cupping is done on fourteen body parts: primarily the head; then the neck; twice on both sides of the neck; under the chin; twice over the shoulders; over the hips; twice over both arms; twice over both legs; twice over both ankles; this type of cupping draws only small amounts of blood from many tiny veins scattered throughout the body, and therefore doesn't weaken it as much as vein-opening does; neither hot nor cold cups should be administered to any illness caused by an excess in the body until it has been emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if it is necessary due to illness or for treatment purposes that cupping must be done, we administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or towards the end, and throughout; because there are some who, when they need cupping, suffer from a heavy head; and there are others who experience fullness and redness in their face, neck, and head, as well as darkness around the eyes; and there are those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, have an inflamed tongue, and vomit blood; and some feel dizzy, seeing blood, wounds, death, and similar things during sleep.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially when it is the middle of the month, we instruct them to undergo cupping after three hours during the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The bleeding of the nose helps with the inflammation of the head ... that reaches the eyes, and it should not be done after the evacuation of all body fluids; this venesection takes the place of the bleeding from the temporal artery, and it is not suitable for those who have a cold constitution or who suffer from catarrh, as it does them great harm; and therefore it is not appropriate for the elderly to use it, nor for those who have cold diseases in their head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often bleed in this way become forgetful, and so it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little further down due to the fear of oblivion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The venesection in the middle of the neck takes the place of bleeding from the head and from the temple, and because of this it is useful for narrowing of the chest, splitting of the lung canal, cough, and fullness; and it should not be pushed too hard, for if it holds too tightly, it causes oblivion or stomach and heart problems.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The windings of the two ribs of the neck are useful for pains in the head, and ophthalmia, migraine, strangulation, pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is located where the basilic vein passes; and you must instruct the surgeon to apply pressure with their hand to occlude the artery, without compressing it too much so that blood does not escape.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The windings under the chin are useful for mouth diseases, and gum inflammation, as well as similar ailments that occur in the mouth; and it is located where the two labial veins pass.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windings of the shoulders are useful for illnesses that arise from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The windings of the axillae are just as effective as those of the three veins of the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins; and instruct the surgeon not to apply them too vigorously, because the area is devoid of flesh, and there are nerves and arteries underneath.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup that is placed on the buttocks is effective for hemorrhoids and ailments below, and it must be large and made of bronze to have a strong pull; perhaps if it were more delicate, it would break, and it causes big wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups on the legs are beneficial as they draw blood from all over the body and help with chronic pain in the kidneys, bladder, and uterus; they can be placed on two knees and two ankles, but prolonged use weakens the body and causes dizziness in many cases.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the suction cup is by first placing it empty and then sucking gently, putting pressure on it, and moving evenly without stopping until you see redness and swelling in the area and the appearance of blood; stop and remove the cups, being careful with different body types since some have thick skin while others are more delicate: one should strike only once, creating wide and somewhat deep wounds, and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to loosen the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we wish to draw out little by little, we are content with just one blow.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we wish to draw a lot of blood, we begin again often; and if the blood is thick, strike hard thoroughly, and in such a way that the heart is pierced suddenly, and it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, and whose pores are narrow, that you anoint the cups of the ventouse with apertif and dissolutive oil: if it is in summer, violet oil, or almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is in winter, cress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the surplus is large and cold, take oil of amaranth, or balsamite oil, or oil of anise, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one being healed has tender flesh and large pores, it is not advisable to use oil, but rather wash it after ventilation with rose water, or cold water, or morelle water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And for those with excess moisture, they should rise with myrtle water, or sumac water, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those with large surplus should rise with old wine, or garlic water, or anise decoction, or chamomile, or others similar; and they must not be bled with cupping before the bath nor during the bath, but after the bath by one or two hours; and they must not sleep after the ventilation, it is necessary that they wash when they need to be cupped and when they are being cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And beware if the person being treated is choleric, and if their blood is too acrid and inflamed; they should take cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuce with ease, and similar things; and eat little pork, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And for those with a cold constitution, they should take syrup of honey and moderately fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and eat little pork, and moist meats, as well as small birds and pigeons; on the day they are cupped, they must drink more than they eat; and sometimes it is necessary to give some men treacle or nutmeg before or after cupping, to strengthen their principal members; and let the blood be subtle, but those who are hot should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The cups that are applied without wounding are those placed over the liver, and on the breast, podagra, and on the belly, buttocks, kidneys, and hip, because these members cannot endure wounding at all; rather they cause blood to be drawn from member to member, just as we place them on the breasts when there is a nursing child. To remove the viscosity that has accumulated in a member, we put cups on the belly or buttocks to reduce the size of the member; and it removes pain where there are stones or concretions - perhaps by its attractive power it draws out the concretion, or shifts the stone from its position; and thus it acts when placed on the liver if there is windiness retained therein, and these cups are administered empty for only sucking up; sometimes they are administered together with fire, and at other times filled with warm water - as in diseases of the pleurisy. And in this manner we fill a cup with hot water alone, or some water in which appropriate herbs have been cooked
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The method of applying the fire cautery is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And let it be two inches wide and half a palm in length, with a small hole on its side near the middle, just large enough to insert a needle, and made of brass, soft enough so as not to injure the patient when applied to the limb; and in the center there should be a transverse bar of brass or iron, upon which to place a lighted candle, and these should vary in size, some being larger and others smaller according to the disease and the age of those who use them; for the cups for children are different from those used on old persons, and those employed on lean people differ from those applied to fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	One should thus place this cup upon the limb in the following manner: Take a wax candle or the lint previously mentioned, and insert it across the bar which is within the cup so that the flame shall be at the bottom of the latter without burning the patient; then apply the cup to the limb, with your two fingers over the hole we have spoken of, so that when you wish to allow the vapour to escape, you may raise the cup and take it away; and take the lint as before, and repeat this operation frequently if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the cupping procedure applied to pleurisy, being entirely aqueous, it has no handle nor any aperture, and is only used when full of water, placed solely on the affected limb; its shape is thus:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	They are not used except for members where cupping cannot be applied due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; also on denuded flesh like the tongue or nails, and others of a like nature; and in regard to their quality, whenever you find leeches that have been kept in clear fresh water without any rotting, take them; keep them one night in sweet water until they are familiar with it, and have nothing inside their bodies; then bleed from both vein and cup, rub the member red, and apply the leeches; when they are full and drop off, if this is a place where cupping can be done, do so as it follows later.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If this doesn't work, lift the wound easily, and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it; and if the wound heals too much after the flesh closes, moisten a linen cloth in cold water, and apply it until the blood is stanched; and if the blood is multiplied, apply ground vitriol or gallstones, and similar things, until it is staunched; or you can put half of a peeled pea on the wound, leaving them there until they dry on the wound, this will now staunch [the bleeding]; if more is needed, take other compresses.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the compresses are not available for use, rub the wound with fresh blood, or stick a needle in it until blood flows out, and then apply them, as soon as they feel the blood, they will dry; when you see that they fall off, sprinkle some powdered aloe and ground salt, or ash, now they will staunch [the bleeding].
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with setting fractures and resetting dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that the foolish surgeon who neglects this chapter will never see any of the ancient books, nor read a letter from them; and for this reason science is lost in our land, for I have never found any good [surgeons]; and I know nothing but through the science of these ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have mastered their knowledge, and through experience, and through the practice of my life; and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained herein, and I have abridged it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I did in these two previous chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is necessary then that we say in the prologue of this book the main points and chapters where the sage puts his understanding, and dwells on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	When fracture or dislocation or torsion or breakage occurs to anyone, you must hasten to bleed the patient on both sides if nothing hinders you, such as bodily weakness, childhood, or old age; or if the weather is not very hot, or too cold; and avoid eating cold foods, that is, cold dishes, goat meat, and beef, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not overeat flesh-based foods which fill the veins with blood until you have no doubt about a warm abscess, or the spreading of matter in the limb; then may the patient return to his first diet that he used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with meats that produce rich nourishment, or something viscous, such as boiled wheat in water, and rice, and testicles, and feet, and calf's stomach, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with too rich nourishment, the healing is impeded and the fracture heals more slowly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the broken bone of the elderly and decrepit cannot heal or fuse well according to their nature due to the dryness of their limbs; nor can those who are too young, such as small children; but you must take care and apply thick splints above the broken bone which bind and join the limb together, ensuring it is as strong as before; do not cease this work, and for that reason, they should be nourished with rich meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from that of the spine or leg, and I shall tell you in this chapter all the types of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	As there is fracture that heals by callus formation, and another through sharpening, like the cut of a quill to write with.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is fracture with a wound, or fracture with only a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And for each type of fracture there is its own method and proper instrument for restoration, according to how the memory returns to its place; and the fracture of the bone is known by the fact that the line is twisted, and it appears clearly on the outside, and it sounds hollow when pressed with the hand; and when there is no twisting or sounding upon touch, and the patient feels little pain, then there is no fracture; but there may be a twist, crack, or small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You shouldn't move it with your hand, but apply medicine as follows, then hold the joint firmly yet delicately.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that a bone fracture where the two parts are separated requires immediate realignment to avoid abscesses developing at the wound site; if hot abscesses do develop then it should be left for one day until the abscess subsides; then reset as gently as possible without causing further injury, knowing this type of break is easier to treat than those with pieces missing; and hold it as described below.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if the bone is broken into pieces you must extend it with two splints, be it an arm or leg, use one splint for a small limb or finger and hold it in place with string, set the limb according to its natural shape so that when the broken ends of the bone are brought together they should be realigned as closely as possible without causing further injury, ensuring no harm comes to the patient; align the two ends of the bone in their best form.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And you will feel it with your hand if it seems to you that it is not well; so handle it gently, and do not hold or press too much as they often cause hot abscesses and contractions in the limb due to their actions, just as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is in place, admonish the patient well not to move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor when turning over, or in any other way; and ensure that the limb is so secure that they feel no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when they feel no pain, it is not yet in place, and you must put it into such a position that they feel no pain; and be careful that it is set straight, so that no crookedness comes about once restored; and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme. 
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For the small members, such as arms and fingers and similar: one must wrap soft and fine linen bandages; and for those that are large, like thighs and legs: one must wrap with a wide and hard bandage, because wide bandages embrace the entire large member, and constrict it evenly from all sides, so there is no strain. Then bind light pads around [the limb], three or four turns according to the size of the member, and tighten your hand slightly on the whole bandage, then move above the fracture and tighten less, so that the fracture can move away a little; and loosen the bandage a bit at a time, until you take up most of the healthy part, then add another bandage, and turn it back around onto the broken place. Then return to the lower part of the break, and constrict moderately - not too hard or too soft - as we have said above in the first binding; then put linen or cloth pads between the bandages, so that they are all even, then bind everything with a strip on top, and then put your splints well-made on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or abscess, apply a soothing poultice to the abscess, hot and draining, for a few days; then strain out some oil from your stars [astrolabe?], and let it be half of a length of cane resin, or from wood that makes clogs, or palm fibers, and make them into this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	but the star [astrolabe?] that is placed on the fracture should be slightly thicker and wider than the others; it should also be as long as required for the limb, small or large; then tighten them onto the stars like you did with the first binding, then bind a thread over them appropriately, just like in the first binding of the fracture; make sure that it is tighter on top and looser at the bottom; the thread should be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft flax; for if the thread is too thick, as I have seen with the work of fools who bind their wounds with twisted linen threads, this is a great error, because the binding cannot be even if it is too fine, and there should not be less than one finger-width between each star.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the bones of the vertebrae after a compression injury to their spine, place pads made from linen or wool below them so they do not become bruised.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by a broken heart, I will describe its treatment afterwards.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And remember, it is not advisable to manipulate the vertebrae right away when all limbs are broken.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limb is large, one should not insert any vertebrae for at least five or seven days, or more depending on how severe your abscess appears; and here is the method of ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and sprains: you take some flour that sticks to the walls of the mill, mix it with plenty of egg, apply this preparation, neither too runny nor too thick, as needed for various types of fracture, especially in women and children, because it is neither too hot nor cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another type of plaster to treat broken bones, dislocations, and twists: Take three ounces of beech mast, ladanum, nettle, asafetida, and gum arabic; mugwort, also three ounces; nine ounces of alchiloe; make them into a powder, and mix with egg white. If the patient's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it has good composition, restores broken bones quickly, and works well on many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another type of plaster useful for twists: Take mugwort and marshmallow root, each three ounces; myrrh and aloe, nine ounces; six ounces of acacia; ten ounces of Armenian bole, grind well, and mix with water or egg white until it forms a paste, then apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another plaster application method for dislocated joints and broken bones out of place, to ease the pain that arises, and reduce swelling or bone fractures: take new linen, soak it in warm water and oil, and apply it onto the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore [the joint or bone], but it is good to ease hot abscesses, and properly remove pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another plaster application method that resets broken bones: take dry fig leaves and earth-pavement leaves [possibly 'ivy' or 'ground ivy'], grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another plaster application method for resetting broken bones and reducing remaining abscesses [or swelling].
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of marsh mallow, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, one part each; grind and mix with wine, if the limb is hot treat it with moist coriander water or plain water mixed together, apply as needed.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another plaster method stronger than the first, when a severe abscess develops during limb restoration.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take root of marsh mallow, flax seed, pomegranate, honey plant, sanicle, violet and chamomile flowers, one part each; grind and mix with salty water or fresh water or wine according to the warmth of the limb and its state.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates writes in his book not to put anything on the broken limb for restoration except wax and oil, nothing else at all, and says it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen [a famous physician] suggests placing drying substances which are slightly warm on the broken member, to repair it, like myrrh, aloe and frankincense, and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another type of plaster useful for injury and pain: take mugwort and chopped human hair or bird feathers, and viscum, and an equal amount of flax [or: and combine them equally], grind these into a powder, make it into a poultice, and bind it in place.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then you loosen it a little after that [time], and pay attention if the patient feels no pain or hasn't moved the bone from its place - don't remove by hand for two days. And if pain appears in that place, or itching or restlessness or swelling occurs, then hurry to take off the bandage and plaster; and get a light cloth and moist sponge of sea [or: fresh] water, dip it in liquid, and lift up this area until the irritation stops, and the pain is eased. Then let them rest for one hour, and put on dry woollen fabric, soaked in water or rose oil, bind onto this overnight so that you are sure about warm abscess; and calm down inflammation of the limb, remove their pain, then start a gentle bandaging again, with some plaster and do not tie it too tightly as before. Do gently until they heal.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess has become cold and red, causing pain and swelling despite its removal, then you must apply an ointment and bandage, so restart it as you did initially equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	If none of the methods we have mentioned work on the limb, do not release it until after three or four or five or seven days; sometimes leave it for twenty days as needed, so that the fracture heals and the flesh aligns properly. Then restrain it more firmly than before to thicken its meat, as I said earlier. If you see the place becoming too dry, know that nourishment cannot reach there; therefore wash it with warm water each time you release it, every three days, and loosen the bandage a little. By this method, then, nourish the limb, and correct what foolish doctors do when they restore the limb crookedly: this is bad and dangerous work, and I see no other option but to leave it alone and treat it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of the various types of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many types of fractures and diverse forms, and their causes are distinct; for there are fractures caused by the blow of a sword, and the point removes all the bone up to the marrow beneath the bone, just as an axe or stick does; and thus this type of fracture is called 'axe-fracture'.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Where the sword chops the bone without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called 'chop-fracture'; and the wound from these two types of fractures can be large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded blow, or splintering, or from the point of a stone, or from falling onto stones, or similar.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating fracture, which reaches up to the membrane beneath the bone, or it is on top of the bone, and this wound can be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound that pierces the bone as subtly as hair, and it has a small crack, therefore this fracture is called "capillary"; and if the wound is caused by striking with a stone or falling from a height or similar things, and the fragment of the bone enters inwardly, causing the scalp to be pushed outward like what happens when coppersmiths strike upon copper kettles; then the stone goes within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this occurs more often in those who have moist and soft bones like children's heads, so all these types of fractures involve small fragments being detached as stars, I will discuss them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of fractures through their dislocation, and the inquiry at touch, and by the corrupted flesh that is upon them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of the hair is known for this: when the bone is exposed, and one rubs upon it, the black fracture opens up.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In treating the fracture, take care of the patient's accidents and if you see no ill accident, such as vomiting bile, loss of understanding, extension [?], faintness, acute fever, eyes issuing forth fire and reddening, and other similar things in different conditions, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see no terrifying accident but hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wound first comes to you, and it is in winter, you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day so that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the summer, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest the membrane beneath the bone become corrupted, and the accidents we have mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the bone fracture extends to the membrane covering the brain, you must split the affected part in this way: take the wounded person's head and uncover the bone thoroughly, especially over the wound area as much as you can. If there is any bleeding when uncovering the bone or abscess formation, treat it accordingly; fill the space with soft cloths moistened in rose oil until the hot abscess subsides and no more bleeding occurs. Then begin to work around the bone, employing two methods of treatment: one method involves cutting a narrow opening in front, shaped like this
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then he makes another cut even greater than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	The second method is to have several different cutters, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed and made of soft iron; operate with care so as not to injure the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and strong, you must bore around it rather than using cutters with trepans, which are not perfect as they do not penetrate beyond the skull bone, and they should have a margin or circle on the tip to prevent it from passing through the bone; several of these are needed so that each fits its place according to the type of bone, thus providing trepans for all parts of the skull; this is how three types of trepans are formed:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities to pierce around the broken bone are that you place I tarere (a drilling tool) on the bone, and turn it with your hands until you know the bone is pierced; then move the tarere elsewhere a little later, and do this all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone between the holes, and do this more delicately than you can, and lightly, as we have said, so that you draw out the bone by hand or any instrument like tongs, pincers; be careful not to touch the brain or the marrow.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and extracted the bone, it is necessary that you use an implement to scrape off whatever remains of the bone with any other instrument similar to an incisor, but it must be sharper and more delicate than the other incisors; if there are still small bones or scales remaining, remove them lightly with one of the instruments; then treat the wound with tents and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of treatment is that which Galen describes, which is more safe; and he praised it strongly, and these are his words.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	You must first uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture is visible, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place under the head of this lens-shaped cutter, which is formed like this:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side only, as the cutting edge has two sides, so that the blades are facing towards the bone; then strike gently with a small mallet above it, so that you lightly chip away at the bone all around, and be mindful of the membrane that lies beneath; if it is stuck to the bone, remove it gently, for it can be removed without harm or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	Et if the bone fracture does not pierce through to the marrow, and the bone is merely cut above it, and there are small pieces, then one must remove this roughness, and scrape off the scales with a delicate rasp that you ought to have in various sizes, to apply to each place the most suitable tool, according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Use large rasps first before smaller, more delicate ones, and do not stop until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	For each of the other delicate fractures and hairline cracks, one must apply an appropriate remedy according to its direction; this is something that cannot be answered by someone who has merely studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the ulcer is uncovered, then one must take a piece of linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, placing it upon the wound; next, take another cloth folded in two or three layers, moistening it in wine and rose oil, and place this on top of the first cloth; do this as gently as possible so as not to harm the ulcer, then apply another bandage without tying too tightly, only enough to keep the wound covered; leave it like this for one or two days until the hot abscess is healed, then remove it and apply healing medicines such as lily roots, wheat flour, incense powder, aristologist's remedies, and similar things; make a powder from these things, placing it on the wound, and apply non-biting medicine afterwards; watch that the wound remains clean, never leaving ointment nor allowing pus to gather, for when pus gathers above the brain tissue, it corrupts and endangers the patient; when biting medicines are applied, they corrupt further.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take heed therefore, if any adverse incident occurs to the patient, as we have said, it is undoubtedly doubtful.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if redness does not appear due to the medicine applied, which has such properties, you must take a portion of honey and three parts rose oil, mix them together with one piece of cloth, and place it on the affected area; then treat it according to the manner of treatments necessary until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes both parts of the collarbone are broken or just one of them, as there are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous and does not break but only becomes swollen or twisted, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, you must insert your little finger into the collarbone's hole and place this broken part within it so that your index finger holds an equal amount to your middle finger outside; until the collarbone returns to its natural shape; do this gently, taking care not to cause pain during treatment.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part above the nose and it cannot be returned to its place, you should set it equal to the head of a slightly thicker pin.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in two parts, remake it similarly, and hasten to restore the first on that day if you can; otherwise after the seventh or tenth day, when the hot abscess has cooled, then cover the head of the nose with strips of linen cloth, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Where you put the other one on another side if there is a break there; and let the strips be so thick that they fill the openings of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some restorers say that one should wet the strips with butter, changing them each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It seems not good to me, but they should be moistened with a concoction of egg white and mill powder; then leave the tent until the bone is set and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	Sometimes goose feathers are used instead of tents, and if so wrap soft cloth around them, and have the patient blow through it to hold the break in place; do as you wish.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess appears at the nose while you are working, apply a mix of red oil and wax, or place some moist cotton in rosewater, or use dew of aquilon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If an abscess does not appear, apply plaster externally made of bran flour and incense powder mixed with egg white, then place light tow over it, but do not tie the nose; and if the bone is broken in small pieces, extract them with suitable instruments for this, then cut open the wound and treat it with appropriate things like charring and cauterizing, or plasters and ointments as needed; and if there is no wound inside the nose, treat it with tents and place splints of lead until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	For the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is fractured from below, and there is no external wound, and the break is only outside, not inside, it can be discerned easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the break is on the right side, you should insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; if the fracture is on the left jawbone, use the index finger of your right hand and gently push the broken part inside, then align it with the other hand from outside, making sure it is even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jawbone fracture is divided into two parts, you must apply traction to both sides until they are aligned.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if movement of the teeth occurs or fracture happens, bind them with a gold, silver, or silk thread, then apply a broken jaw cerate on top and cover it with double linen cloth; put over that cloth a large well-made starched pad or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the mandible; secure it as firmly as you can, and instruct the patient to rest and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the shape changes, loosen it on the third day and then reset what has changed; apply an ointment of mill powder with sufficient egg or sesame flour after removing the cerate; cover the ointment with a light woolen cloth, and if the plaster hardens and the patient's condition does not change, let it be until healed; often this heals in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if a hot abscess comes about, bring about what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture with an accompanying wound, remove no part of the bone; do so delicately with instruments suited to this task.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and none remain, clean the wound, if it is wide, apply suitable dressings to promote flesh growth until it heals.
de la forcele	Of forceful things.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	Forceful impacts break many times in front, toward the shoulder, and this fracture occurs in three ways: either it is broken and split into two, with pieces, and is the easiest to reset; or there is a fracture with an accompanying wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is such when there is a fracture without an open wound, you should have two assistants: one to hold the shoulder that feels the broken force; and the other extends the neck towards the affected part; then align the fracture with your hands so that its form is as it should be, and leave neither protrusion nor unevenness.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend it further, place under the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or wool, according to your needs; and stretch and lift the broken force with one hand while holding the sphere tightly in another so that you align the fracture as needed.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the broken bone out, because it is embedded too deep, then the patient must often lie on their back and place a medium-sized pillow under the shoulder; have assistants push the shoulder down until the bones of the fracture are lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then turn your attention to the broken bone with both hands, and if you find it splintered, you must cut above it; and pull apart the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot be joined by any manipulation, insert one of the incision knives underneath it; but place this instrument below the fracture to protect the wound:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	be like a spoon, and is not sharp-edged, and be as broad as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the strength required; and have two handles, as you see, one being wide, and the other narrow, like the route of the wound which was made when you pulled apart the bones; and when you are assured that there is a hot abscess, sew up the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt a hot abscess, fill the wound with lint and dressings according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if a hot abscess comes about, soak a cloth in rose oil, olive oil, and wine, then apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Bind the bone when it is fractured and uncut, by applying an emollient of mill dust and egg white to the bone, then place light tampons over it, and use a pole if needed beneath the armpit; next take a very wide bandage one palm in width, then put on doubled cloth over the tampons, and the emollient; then take a thin splint three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that its head hangs down; place the splint on the fracture, and wrap the bandage around the neck, under both armpits, and tighten from each side, until you see the splint hold the fracture well, and confirm clearly that the splint is not moving over the broken bone, then rewrap it daily, and retighten when loosened; have the patient lie on their back, and put a small pillow under the armpit to elevate the shoulder during sleep, which lightens the fracture by aligning the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck, without untying unless an ill accident comes about, for twenty days; then reapply the emollient if needed, and tighten it, leaving it so until restored; in most cases this takes twenty-eight days, but some recover sooner.
de la brisure de l’espaule	For the shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Before it occurs that the shoulder breaks in or out of place, and is not put back by force through touch; arrange it according to the shape of the fracture, and reset it following its natural form, in every way you can; then apply flour powder with an abundance of egg, light tampons, and place a double cloth on top; then add a broad thin canvas slightly wider than the shoulder, and if there are incisions at any point of the shoulder, fill those openings with linen tampon swabs so that the canvas lies evenly; and finally secure it all firmly with a large bandage, ensuring the canvas does not move from its place, and check the binding each day; every time it loosens, tighten again, and level out the canvas if it has moved away from its position, and have the patient lie on their side; in twenty or twenty-five days, the shoulder will be restored. Once this duration is complete, you may release the bandages, but remain vigilant because the bones are not yet fully set.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a bone fragment juts out before the chest and pierces below the heart, open it up above, remove it, and do as we have said for treating an abscess after breaking the humerus.
de la brisure dou pis	Of the rib fracture
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The rib is sometimes broken in two, but this occurs rarely; however, it often breaks at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in two, it moves downwards and the patient feels great pain, suffers from shortness of breath, coughs, and may even vomit blood; the ends of the bone can be seen protruding through the skin, which is very evident.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	The method of restoration is as follows: let the patient lie frequently on their back and place a cushion between their shoulder blades, then press on the shoulders and use your hands to bring together the sides of the two broken ribs; adjust carefully so that the bone regains its proper shape; then apply plasters and lay over them fine cloth soaked in salt or other light substance, wrap it all in a linen cloth, tied securely to the broken bone so that there is no movement; make the bandage go around the back, binding tightly but not too tight, and relieve the pressure every hour; if the plaster becomes loose, bind more firmly; if you need to remove it due to decay or itching at the site, pain or abscess, then do so quickly, and remove the plasters, clean what is there with proper treatment methods; then reapply the plaster, binding tightly until healing occurs.
de la brisure des costes	Of rib fractures
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that rib fractures only occur in the upper back and near the head, due to their fragile nature; this can be confirmed through examination of the patient's ribs.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	The treatment involves resetting the fracture so that it is aligned correctly, as required.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply a plaster cast and bind it with a bandage if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	If the rib fracture is towards the inside of the body, the patient will experience severe pain and pricking sensations, as well as coughing up blood due to the bone piercing the lung; they will also suffer shortness of breath, constant pain, and significant loss of blood, requiring immediate treatment and often extensive medical intervention for older patients.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And some say it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, to push the hernia out.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, unless hot abscesses have already come about.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have, then heal them.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some of you say that we should apply cupping glasses to the site, to extract strongly, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt that the cup will not draw the excess to the site due to weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some of you say that we should cover the site with moist wool in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to level the skin around it, then be cured by treatment for pleurisy, diet, and medication.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear due to the bone pressing on the flesh, and there is doubt about the condition, it is necessary to make an incision over the site of the broken rib, and one must place an instrument underneath to protect the internal organs; then one should cut into the bone, and extract it gently, and afterwards sew together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with ointments until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hot abscess appears, place on it moistened rags soaked in rose oil, and put it over the site; treat the area with what is necessary for an abscess, and let it lie frequently on its side where it should, until it heals.
de la brisure dou col	From the broken neck.
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes there is breakage of bones at the neck, and sometimes it bends; also at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will recover or not, observe: if their hands are softened, swollen, and numb; they cannot move them or extend them; and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is deadly in many cases, and if they feel better when you move them and press upon them, know that the bone's joint is saved, and the patient will recover with proper treatment.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will recover or not: observe if their feet are softened, and there is an accident involving their hands; and on their back, watch for windiness and involuntary defecation; and when they are laid down onto their stomach, look for involuntary defecation.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is reminded of it on his back and he wishes to mount, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that they are mortal; so do not labor excessively in their treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if these accidents do not befall him, then the matter is more slight.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is such that you reward him if there is hot abscess, so apply on it red poppy or oil of quicken egg, until it subsides; then place upon it one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is severed, you must cut above the heart; and remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then treat it with ointment promoting flesh growth until it heals; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow", put your fist from your left hand into it, and align it to your other hand, then apply plaster and splint on top, should you need them; then hold it tight, and if there are any severed bones, do this, and remove them, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the broken hip bone.
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Before the hip bone is broken, and if it is, there will only be a little thinning at the head; and it bends downward, and declines towards the back, and the patient experiences pain in that place, and tenderness, and swelling of what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is such that you extend your hand over it, so that you are above the broken part; and understand which is the break and its shape; and if the break is only at the head, then make this break even, so that it is in natural alignment.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is in the lengthwise direction, or where it declines inwardly, then make the patient lie on their stomach, so that you can see the restoration of this break.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have aligned it evenly, apply the plaster, then place a wooden or heartwood splint on top, and secure the fracture, so that it does not move; use padding under the armpit to ensure evenness.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess forms there, do not touch it until the hot abscess has cooled down, then apply what we have previously mentioned; afterwards return to the restoration process and secure it appropriately, provided that no complications arise; this is the procedure.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	On the fracture of the shoulder.
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The adjutoires is what lies between the cut and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, you must restore it according to one of two methods: the first involves taking a piece of wood of medium thickness, in this shape:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And bind the two ends of the wood to the two bones, and hang them up, and place the patient on a seat; then cast their broken arm onto the piece of wood so that it reaches the axilla, and put in a curved piece of wood underneath, then suspend some heavy object or weight which your assistants should pull down upon; then have the physicians align the fracture evenly with both hands together until the break is restored as it ought to be.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	The other method is to have the patient lie down on their back, and bind their hand to their neck, then instruct two assistants to hold either end of what has been broken in their hands, and for each assistant to pull at their respective ends.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more powerful, tighten the cord below the fracture and above it too, stretching each of the assistants to their respective sides.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder joint, then you should place a cord halfway below the acromial edge and the other towards the scapula, beneath the fracture; similarly, if the fracture is towards the scapula, it must be gently tied with little effort such that both ends are level on the scapula and on the side; then align the break equally as required, tightening it so abscesses do not form.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if abscesses form, do not tighten it for seven days, placing moist wool smeared in rose oil on it until the abscess is relieved; then you may proceed to tie it up, and the way of doing so is as follows: place a plaster on the fracture, then reunite the arm with the support device, and put your hand over their shoulder or chest; wrap a cloth around it, tightening both onto the support and the arm such that the arm is immobilized at the armpit, unless something else prevents this, or if the bone has moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and place on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have two inches of space between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it extends three inches beyond the break on either side; then stretch upon the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter concerning the fracture, more firmly and less distantly.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the placement of the splints and the binding, as we have said, when you restore the broken limb, and you doubt that the abscess is hot, leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have mentioned; then examine every three days to ensure no itching or swelling occurs in this place, nor any numbness comes upon the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the address, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if none of these accidents occur, do not loosen it before three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back with their hands on their stomach; place a wool-filled cushion evenly under the shoulder joint, and check every hour during the day or night that the broken limb does not move nor the bandage become loose; if it heals by the virtue of medicine, feed them the diet we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the food is first delicate; and when they start to recover, let their food be more substantial.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder bandage and leg should be removed after forty days in total; then you must loosen them, give a bath, and apply ointments as medicine to correct their position.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the dislocation is bad and stuck, it takes one day or two months to heal.
de la brisure du bras	From a broken arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "humerus", where one is small, and it follows the wrist; and the other is large, and it is below, towards the little finger; perhaps only the large humerus breaks, or the small one, and maybe both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small humerus is broken, restoration is easy, as are cures; when the large one is broken, treatment is bad, and more severe than when they are both broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only a small bone that is broken, you should stretch it gently and set it evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bone that is broken, you should pull it more forcefully and stretch it on a cushion, holding the wrist of the hand higher than the other one, with the small fingers lower than the others, and have the patient cross their legs over themselves, with the cushion in front of them at an elevated height so they do not suffer any strain; then have your assistants extend their arms to the part below the patient's hand or ligament, while another assistant holds the other arm above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	Then place the mirror flatly in line with its original form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, put each piece back in its place and grasp the one that is torn from the heart but cannot be restored to its proper position firmly; then cut off what you have done before as we mentioned earlier.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the breaking of skin and wound, I have spoken about it in the singular chapter, then take its care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of restoration sore abscesses arise, then glue with soft cloth made of rose oil and white wax, that is neither too hard nor too soft; bind the cloth subtly above, so that the hot abscess may be eased.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	Then remove the wax, and apply the plaster made with mill powder and an abundance of egg, then place the splints, and let the splint for the broken bone be closest and slightly wider than the others; know that there must be six splints or arms in various arrangements: whether the fracture is in one bone, or two; bind tighter over the fracture rather than elsewhere, and always less so as you move away, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter; let the cloths which are upon the fracture be soft and moist, not hard nor rough; and let the thread with which it is bound be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And bind the member and the joint after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident befalls the member, such as an itch that arises in the member, you must bathe the member with warm water until the itching is soothed; and let the member rest freely without restriction.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then resume the binding, and if the ligature is softened and the bone dislodged, or a similar thing happens, address it accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you take note that nourishment cannot reach the member because it is too constricted, you must soften it a little, and leave it thus for a few days until nourishment flows to it, then bind it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said come to pass for the patient, do not release them until 20 days have passed.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Around this place, then paint their hands to his neck, and let their necks be even, and beware of movement and disturbance, and sleep on their back; know that this fracture is healed in 30 days or 35, perhaps in 20 days, depending on the compounds and the constitutions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	On the fracture of the hand.
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and the knuckles there are few fractures, but rather dislocations occur many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is fractured or dislocated, it is necessary that the patient should sit cross-legged, and sit upright directly in front of them evenly; then place their hand on a stretched cloth, and have the ministers straighten the broken bones, and make them equal to the model, so they are well aligned; apply the plaster and bandages, unless an abscess appears, then put in a peg according to the size of the place; it should be wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is around the front of the shinbone, make a pad of linen cloth and instruct the patient to bind it tightly to their broken leg; then take a long strip of linen, and let the heart-shaped splint be as large as the palm of the hand, and tie it just so.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is on the outside, you must place a splint above and another below the leg so that the hand is open and straight, then bind everything around the hand with a bandage, securing it between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture occurs in any of our fingers, except for the thumb, make it even as required and bind it with the leg; if you see fit to place a small straight splint to elevate the break without moving it, do so; if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the index or one of the others, make them equal and tie it with the healthy finger next to it; or you can tie all the fingers together into an "I" shape, whichever works best, or place a splint above like for the thumb; take care during restoration and in dealing with hot abscesses, provide treatment as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The thigh bone is often broken, and one can easily see this when it turns forward or backward; the restoration involves binding a ligature above and another below the break.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	The patient lies on their face, then each assistant extends their ligature to an equal part; this is when the break occurs in the middle of the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the thigh, let one ligature be towards the armpit, and the other ligatures below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	Also, if it is near the knee, let the ligatures be around the knee, and their extension be downwards; then have the assistants hold the bone equal with their two hands, so that it aligns with its natural shape, and then apply a plaster cast and bind it, unless an abscess appears.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside before returning to your work and treatment; the dressing is made in such a manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You must wrap the fracture with a hard bandage doubled over twice or three times, leaving excess, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the thigh, and pass the thread between the thigh and leg, below the knee, and bring the end of the thread above; then go back up the leg and thigh with the bandage, then place splints over the fracture, and put a splint on top of the bone in the leg; then fill the empty space between the leg and thigh with soft cloth to equalize pressure, then start tying firmly three or four turns over the fracture; as you go up above the fracture, lessen the tension; take hold of both ends of the thread that you passed between the leg and thigh, and tie three splints that are above, then return below to the end of the thread until you reach near the foot; tighten it so that there is no movement from its place, then leave it like this for abscesses, swellings or other similar conditions to go away.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, you must undo it and address the issue at hand, as we have said many times before; if there are bone fragments caught in the joint, they should be removed if possible; if not, then one must split open the area and pull out those fragments; treat the wound as we have explained until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thigh is broken and fixed with rods like in the shoulder or arm, however, despite this restoration being done correctly, the patient still suffers pain.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And note that the thigh is restored in 20 days or slightly less or more depending on the patient's constitution.
de la ruelle dou genoil	From the tendon of the knee.
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that there is little breakage in the kneecap region, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is but a crack or a hole, and this occurs in all wounds, both felt and unseen, and one feels well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	The restoration is such that one places what is equal to its two sides until it is assembled as close as possible; then apply the plaster, and add a round stick if needed, and hold it tight as required, then follow all the procedures we have mentioned for other fractures, like hot abscesses and similar conditions; assign each accident what it needs, until it heals.
de la brisure de la jambe	On the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, one rightfully called "mustelz," and the other is named "foscile"; they both have similar fractures as seen in the arm, hence the restoration process is equal to that of the arm, and all procedures are the same. If the two bones are broken together, the leg will turn or twist from all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the subtle bone is broken, it twists forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is well seen; it twists downward.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore, apply traction and make it equal, bind the bone ends equally; however, if the fracture is bad and there are multiple fragments, let the traction be lesser and lighter; adjust according to your strength.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, and le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, and ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, and proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.
de la brisure des os dou piet	From the breaking of bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no breaking, but in the bones of the foot comes breaking and two bumps, with only fractures occurring in multiple places.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is breaking in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones rising above one another, let the patient place their foot on the ground, as though they want to walk, then put your foot on theirs, where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their places; then apply a plaster cast and wrap it up, and place under the belly of the foot a small board with two feet long, then strap it to the foot properly, once you have wrapped it with bandages, and other things as needed.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, untie the bandage, for you will find the bones equalized, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	If there are any of the fingers broken, restore them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place in the broken finger a peg according to its length and slightly wider, then put underneath the foot that board I mentioned and strain it appropriately; if there are two or three, or more, broken, then place on each finger a peg according to its measure, wrapped in a piece of linen cloth, and tighten the board beneath the foot; let this be attached above the head of the board outside the bottom side so that it holds firmly.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, as we have mentioned before; attend to each accident as is fitting.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Of the fracture of the wrist bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's nature is fractured, make her sit with an enlarged opening, then incline her to her back part and hold her from behind; then fill the fracture with cotton, using as much as it holds; stand the woman up, lift her back little by little, and when the cotton comes out at the entrance of the nature, the bone will return with the stool; when she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton, and once she has urinated, replace it; do this for seven days or so: the fracture will be restored, and if you wish, take a goat's bladder, tie a cane to its opening, then push the entire bladder into the nature; blow through the cane forcefully until the bladder is inflated inside; the nature will heal the fracture; fill it with cotton again, and leave it for some days until it heals.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the wrist of a man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said for the hip bone; and these breaks are not hidden from one who applies his study and practice to them, and reads my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break indicates in many positions the correct way of restoration: understand this, then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's windpipe and insert the penis into it; then wrap it with fine cloth, and leave it there for three days, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	De fracture cum ulcere.
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	One who has a fracture with an open wound, especially if it is large, like the bones of the thigh or shoulder, should be quickly treated, so that the treatments we have described will testify to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, apply a vitriol compress, if you have nothing else; then start to treat the fracture again that same hour or day, before hot abscesses form.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	If hot abscesses do form, leave the treatment until the ninth day, until the abscess is appeased; do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause harm to occur.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible on an uncovered heart, you must gently put it back into place with your hands using slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if extension with your hands is not possible to align the bone, then realign it with this instrument of iron which has seven or eight fingers in length and its width depends on the size of the wound; and for this, the surgeon needs to grip it with three or four [fingers], depending on what is needed in each treatment of a fracture; and let it be round and slightly thick so that it does not bend when compressed against the limb during your work, and let it be sharp at the tip, and thick towards the middle, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche", for this reason the curved head must be placed on top of the visible bone; push it once until it returns and becomes even with the other one.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle, and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must cut off the head of the bone until the instrument has a hold on it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then cut it off with an appropriate instrument, either a saw or a knife, according to your ability; remove what remains in the bone of roughness and small shreds.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	Si make sure it is in its place, then moisten a cloth with black styptic wine, and properly so if it is injured; and do not put any cerote or other oily substance on the wound, as it would cause festering and corruption; then apply stars once you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut away the covering all around according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not constricted with the fracture; and many times these foolish doctors have done this, and caused the patient or death or corrosion at times; and be the constriction softer and gentler than other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that bad accidents might occur as we have said, and you find pain in the area, then it is not suitable to apply stars; but wrap around, instead of stars, hard cloths, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound has started to heal, remove what you have placed on it entirely, and apply healing ointment such as tetrafarmacoun and similar remedies.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	It is necessary that you stretch the limb twice daily, in the morning and at night, until it is mended and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is fitting that the limb be immobilized in such a way that the bowels flow easily downwards.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it remains open for many days, and does not heal but repeatedly dislocates again, know that there are small bone fragments present, which is why you must carefully explore the wound with a probe, and remove all these troublesome pieces causing this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula forms or any other kind of corruption occurs in its place, you must treat it according to what he said in this chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, such as the thighbone or the humerus, and other similar large bones, do not extract it, for often death occurs, but leave it until it rots; perhaps it will fall off by itself after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, just leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Scabs that form over the healing process.
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often see the recovery from a fracture, especially when it is close to a joint, and the deformed appearance of the limb is an unpleasant sight; and perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care therefore if the wound is fresh: administer styptic medicines such as aloe, incense, and myrrh, as well as gum Arabic, galbanum, and similar others; mix any of these substances with either wine, egg whites, or honey; wrap them in gauze compresses; keep it tight and don't change it for several days. Then remove the poultice and apply another one until the swelling has reduced, or use a piece of well-made lead instead since this material also reduces swellings on the body. If the accumulation is already hardened like stone, you should scrape away at its surface to expose the excess; or have someone shave it with a razor so that it can be removed and cured properly until it heals completely.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	Of the limb which is weak after recovery
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is healed, and afterward the limb remains weak and delicate, it happens for many reasons: one being that it was bound too tightly, and not as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, preventing nourishment from reaching the limb; or due to excessive bleeding; or through large movements made at the wrong time; or because there is little blood in their body, thus making them weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat and soften their body so blood multiplies within them; administer a bath to them, give joy and leisure; then place pitch on the limb, so that the pitch attracts great nourishment, and often rinse with warm water until nourishment flows into the limb; returning it to its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	Of the twisted limb after healthiness
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration and the broken bone is clearly visible, and the form of the limb is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish ones who say that the limb should be rebroken entirely, and many a fool has done this in our land; these procedures are criticized and cause great harm and, perhaps, death; however, if the knots and swelling are fresh, they should be soaked in warm water or with cooked softening herbs such as mullein leaves, roots, and fenugreek, and similar things; and make a softening poultice, like well-made diachylon, and take the mucilage of mullein, mix it with chicken fat or sesame oil and apply as a poultice; or take fatty figs, grind them with bran flour, and similar medicines that reduce inflammation.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the adhesion is removed by continuous and lengthy rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	Let gentle movement be given to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is hardened like stone and must be removed with an iron tool, it should be cut down to the bone using a subtle light incision; then apply stitches and focus on healing.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs in someone, it should be promptly reset without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the flesh swells, and it may be put back in with difficulty; therefore, it must not be moved when swollen: many times this causes spasms and other pains; nevertheless, when this happens, have the patient bled, then leave them alone until all the abscesses are healed; afterwards bathe the limb with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each limb as its cure presents itself.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from head to toe.
des mandibules	of jaws.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the jaws become dislocated on both sides, and their dislocations occur in two ways: either they are slightly out of place and softened; or they become completely dislocated, hanging downwards, and saliva falls from the mouth which it cannot hold, nor can it close its mouth, and it wraps around its tongue when speaking.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it can return through various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete and finished, you must reduce it promptly without delay; in such a way that the assistant holds the patient's head, and insert your fingers from one of your hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is in two parts; while the other hand provides counter-pressure to balance; instruct the patient to relax their jaws and move them around.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And you should adjust it evenly until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if reducing it is difficult, especially when both jaws are dislocated together, bathe them in hot water and oil until they can be gently reduced; do not delay the reduction as we have said before.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are realigned evenly, and the patient's wound is well-closed without softening it, apply moist compresses made of rose oil and wax onto the affected area, then lightly bind it with soft bandages; have the patient lie on their back while keeping their shoulders apart using two cushions, ensuring that neither side nor front movement occurs, and don't let them strain to chew; instead feed them a light diet until pain subsides, jaw motion is restricted. Then they may slowly eat what they want, but never force themselves to open wide for eating or drinking until the mandible heals completely.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	If the two jaws cannot be reset to their proper position within an hour and do not return to their place, feverish chills will occur along with persistent diarrhea, and vomiting clear mucus may also happen.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, know that it is destruction; and many times the one who experiences it dies within nine days.
de la forcelle	Of the fork.
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The collarbone cannot dislocate from the inside along its length or from below, and it rarely dislocates outwardly, which is easily felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is such that the patient often lies on their back and extends their arms; then press the place firmly with your palm, and it will return; then apply a plaster and bandage, and hold it tight; and the head which is towards the neck cannot dislocate; if not, and if it dislocates at all, reset it to its place as we have said; then put on the plaster and bandage, and hold it tight, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed; likewise, the shoulder head is reset when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	You know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: first, it dislocates at the part of the socket underneath; secondly, it dislocates at the part of the back; and perhaps it dislocates above, which happens rarely; it does not dislocate behind because of the shoulder, nor does it dislocate inside because of the nerves; often it dislocates beneath towards the socket, especially in those with little flesh, for it easily dislocates in them; in those with enough flesh, it dislocates with difficulty and enters with difficulty.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And perhaps it happens to some men that there is an injury or fracture, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, and they believe it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	You must therefore test it until you are certain; then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	It is known that the dislocation occurs when it moves downward toward the armpit, and creates a difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, with an obvious disparity between them; you will find at the head of the shoulder a depression, and underneath the armpit touching the head of the shoulder, as if it were an egg; the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose or move in any way; also, if it is dislocated upward, it is not hidden, for you will clearly feel it upon touch; this kind of dislocation is not difficult to reset when it is recent, or if the child is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the minister lifts the patient's hand upwards, then places your palms underneath the shoulder blade, and lifts the joint forcefully upward to its place; the minister lifts the hand and extends it upwards, then puts it underneath; thus it will come to pass quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not happen as we have said with bare hands afterward, then the patient must be bathed in warm water; and the administrator gently applies a softening and soothing ointment, such as a decoction of altee, fenugreek, and mellilot in water, and let it be administered; then remember to place the patient on their back, and put underneath the shoulder blade a cushion of wool that is even, neither too soft nor too hard, then place the afflicted's heel onto the cushion, and lift the head of the shoulder virtuously, and pull the patient's hand; and another administrator holds the patient's head so it does not move downward; this shoulder returns all at once now, and if you wish to reset it in this manner: and ensure that there is present a man who is larger than the patient; and be standing upright next to their side, then push their shoulder underneath the afflicted's shoulder blade, and lift the blade upwards so the patient hangs in mid-air; another administrator pulls the patient's hand downward towards their belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, attach something heavy to them, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	One also resets it in another way: insert a long peg into the ground so that the shoulder joint is just as wide as the barrel and neither too thick nor too slender; then place [the patient] underneath with soft cloths above them and have the patient stretch out along the length of the pole; then extend their arm to the other side forcefully, and the joint will pop back into its socket immediately. If it won't go back in after all these things we've said, proceed as follows: take a pole two arms long and four fingers wide with a rounded head for insertion through perfectly aligned holes underneath the armpit, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then place a soft cloth on top of the head of the board to protect the patient from injury, then remove the patient's weight from under the shoulder; and stretch his arm out along the long side of the board, and bind the limb to the board, and secure the arm at the head of the bed, then put the other arm across a stool on one side with its hand hanging down, and let the body dangle off the edge on the opposite side: the joint will come back into place now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	Once it is in place, no matter the manner, you must put beneath the shoulder a pad of even woolen cloth, then apply an ointment prepared with flour powder, frankincense and egg white, all over the shoulder and around it; then bandage beneath the shoulder appropriately, re-tightening the tourniquet above the ointment, embracing the hand to his neck, and let the hands stay in that position.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he eat little for a while so the limb is strengthened, for then it will heal sooner; and then let him eat more after five or seven days, and move [the limb]; and if it stays firm and is not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has gone out of place due to moisture or another reason, you must apply cauterization at three openings, as described before in the chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this and it dislocates again after seven days, and the joint is not held in place, and cannot lift their arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is either cut, stretched or weakened; and know that the joint will never be put back into its proper position.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that affects the hip and breasts or the area behind them is caused by a push or pull of the hands and can be treated in another place; treat it until it heals.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing process, there is cracking in the limb and delayed movement, the patient should frequently take baths until this cracking eases and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	On the dislocation of the neck...
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the neck joint is repeatedly dislocated and returns to its place; if it is completely dislocated from all sides, especially front and back, then the dislocation must be corrected because it can easily be seen and felt; this will vary according to each person's anatomy.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick man's wound with healthy flesh, you can clearly see it.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is swollen, and he cannot bend his arm nor reach his shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must reset it before any abscesses form, for if an abscess forms, it would be difficult to reset; and perhaps it cannot be fully reset, especially when it is at the back; thus this dislocation is worse than others, causing greater pain, and death may occur.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is done when it can be reset; you extend his arm with both your hands; his arms are spread out, and the hands of the mirror according to the cut around, above and below, and push the joint towards its shoulders or at the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it happens when he bends his hand towards his hand, and press at the root of the palm to fix the dislocated joint.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	If it does not want to return to its place, perform a strong extension; with two people assisting, extend the arm and bend it so that it cannot move during the extension; then rotate the arm in all directions while wrapped tightly in a long and wide cloth; when you have manipulated the joint back into alignment, apply some oil to soften the joint, then press the joint firmly until it returns; once in place, apply a dry poultice with egg white on top, secure it tightly, and attach the arm to the patient's neck using a bandage, leaving it for several days before removing it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in place, untie the bandage and leave it alone; but if you see that the joint is not properly immobilized, replace the poultice and bandage, leaving it there for a few days until it is securely set, then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels soreness after the joint is reset and it swells up again, bathe and massage it gently, pressing until it is soothed; or apply to the joint a poultice of fatty sheep's wool, leaving this on for a day and a night before removing it, then place him in a bath, and when he perspires, rub his joints with moderation. After which reapply the poultice, repeat the process two or three times until healed; if you see fit, apply moist cow dung heated with butter to draw out any remaining inflammation; this will restore its proper condition.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joints of the hand dislocate easily and return lightly more than other joints However, it must be reset immediately when dislocated, unless the area is swollen or a hot abscess develops.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the method of resetting is that you place the affected hand on a table and the assistants stretch out the hand, aligning it so its palm appears above the joint Then push until it returns However, ensure it is correctly aligned; then have the patient lay their back of the hand flat on the table for extension and reset.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, have the patient lay their back of the hand flat on the table and place your hand over the affected joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it comes back now, that's good If not, apply a strain of soothing emollients for hot abscesses, and leave it like this without starting over.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after several days, the joint remains deformed; and it causes no harm to the patient as long as the hand is weakened, and unable to grip anything at all: then know that the nerves are severed, or the artery; there is no other mechanism left except cauterization near the wound, and perhaps nothing else will help.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, apply the emollient we mentioned, then strain it and leave it for five days, then undo the strain and leave it like this.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is any tear, then bathe it with warm water, and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	On the dislocations of the fingers of the hand:
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on each side, sometimes at the back of the palm or on the palm itself; then stretch the finger and push the dislocation with your fingers until it returns to its place, then hold the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is disjointed; leave it like that for two days, and then make it equal that day; at night bind it as we have said, and during the day untie it, move it, and rebind it at night; do this often until it becomes narrow, and also do likewise if it is dislocated on the palm of the hand, act just as you did before until it is healed; and do all the same when it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Of the dislocation of the spine of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no treatment, as death comes quickly to the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that urine escapes uncontrollably, and they cannot hold it back, and often parts of the body become weak, such as both thighs or arms, or one side may twist into four parts; this twisting at the rear is called 'gilbositez': the treatment is to turn if the 'gilbositez' came from childhood: there is no cure or total recovery.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from a fall or blow or similar events, the ancient methods of treatment say there is little benefit in all this talk; but I have shortened it according to my understanding, and designed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the hunchback condition which comes to the base of the neck, neither a physician nor any expert knows its cure; and likewise for the one that directly affects both sides, but it is possible to heal only those that manifest on the back as I said; and so the patient should be stretched out face down onto an equal surface, with something beneath them so they do not injure themselves; then stick a spit at their head firmly in the ground, and another at their feet, and tie one bandage above the shoulders of the sick person, and another across the hips, knees, and ankles; and two servants should hold the bandages taut, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two spits; and these must be secured properly, both the spit as I said earlier, and the patient's spine with hands placed firmly onto it until it is straightened.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this cure, take a plank three arms long and place it under the wall, let the patient be on their side, push the head of the plank underneath the wall, then put the middle of the plank on the spine; have the examiners place their feet on the other end of the plank, press well until it returns to its place; if you wish, do it with a wrench that turns in the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	Stick two stakes one arm's length apart at the patient's head and another two toward their feet with about a palm span between each stake; have a hole in each stake through which the wrench passes, secure the stakes firmly in the ground so they do not move; between each pair of stakes place a turning stake over which pass the ropes whose ends are attached to a smaller stake one palm long for winding the rope onto it; then tie one end of the rope that passes around the armpits to the wrench near the patient's head, and attach the other end to another wrench at the feet, have each assistant wind their respective rope onto its corresponding turning stake while the master makes sure the spine remains aligned as previously described.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, apply a drying poultice with an abundance of egg, then pack with lint, and insert a rod made from three fingers' length of wood to support the place of curvature and the healthy part of the spine, then bind with a bandage as we have said, and the patient should use subtle nourishment until he is healed; but if anything comes up towards the end of healing, then one must administer softening and soothing medicines along with the rod that we mentioned earlier; sometimes one administers instead a piece of lead, and occasionally the protruding part shows itself behind the last vertebra in the spine, which people think to be dislocation; but it is just bone showing through, so there should not be any presumption: perhaps it could cause death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of hip dislocations.
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	The joints of the hip and shoulder only cause dislocations, unlike other joints, and there are four types of dislocations of the hip joint: inside and outside, front and back, mostly deep inside, and sometimes in the front or rear.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the recognition of an internal dislocation is as follows: when you bring together the afflicted leg with the healthy one, it appears longer, and the knee of the patient seems larger than that of a healthy person; furthermore, they cannot bend their knee fully to the front; there is also swelling on the affected side from heat caused by an abscess because the head of the thigh bone has come out.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes to dislodge is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him who encounters it in advance are that he stretches his leg according to the accomplishment; nevertheless, the knee does not bend without pain, and if one tries to make him walk, he cannot go forward, and retains urine, and the vein swells up, and when he defecates, he steps on his heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who encounters it behind are that he cannot spread his knee, or bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the vein is softened, and the head of the thigh bone is in place under the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The resetting of this similar dislocation is that you must support it if the dislocation is old and remains according to its position, for there is no treatment; and one should not have any assumption about it.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for someone with a fresh dislocation, which has four types, you should act quickly and return the joint to its place, stretching it both inwardly and outwardly, and moving it right and left; perhaps it will go back into position, and no further treatment is required.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	If it does not return with this method, then you must prepare one strong assistant, and have them grasp the leg firmly with both hands, or use a strap tied above the knee; another assistant should put their hand underneath his armpit, then pull him tight with a soft strap around the thigh; while another holds the head of the strap; all assistants should extend upwards and downwards at once, raising the patient from the ground in one motion, leaving them suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, you must treat it accordingly. When the dislocation is on the outside, you should have the patient lie on their healthy side, then place the bandage on the root of the thigh, and the part below the groin, then stretch the bandage upwards towards the groin and towards the hip; then have another minister take their arms, embrace the thick part of the diseased thigh, and extend it outward forcefully: it will return to its place now; and this type of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot secure it in the manner we have described, you must bind the patient's two feet together with a strong soft bandage over their two heels and knees, with the diseased leg extended twice as much as the other; then hang them from a post so that they are two arms' lengths above the ground; command one minister to embrace the head of the thigh, and have another minister hanging with the patient, embracing the thigh tightly, for the joint will return quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocations are external, the patient lies down as we have said in the case of one with curvature, and bind tightly above the affected leg, also on the foot; then place two red-hot irons, one on the head and another on the feet, then insert an iron rod between the patient's thighs into the dislocated joint; and let moist cloths be placed around it so that it does not burn the patient, then have each attendant stand at his side, and a mirror is held even with his hand near the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place him on the operating table, and press as we have said for curvature, and let the patient lie on his sound side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the affected leg slowly, as I have said; and have the patient put their weight on the healthy side, then press with the other hand, and extend it downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	If the dislocation is outward, it should not be stretched downwards nor lifted upwards, but rather, it should be positioned as if the hip were dislocated outwards, similar to what we have said about lying on two hips; let them lie face down, and extend the bindings as I have mentioned earlier, then press at the joint with a board; it will be sufficient when the patient can stretch their legs evenly, and they are of equal length. Then bring the thighs together, apply the plaster, and bind with a bandage so that the hip does not move; let them rest for three or four days, then untie the binding and reapply the plaster; if you see that they remain even in length, bind as before and leave it for three days; then undo it, and have them walk gently until the limb is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	For the knee's dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inwardly and outwardly, and behind; and it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the sign of this is that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the thigh, and if it does not reach the thigh, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration for all such cases is that you make the patient sit upright, and stretch out their leg if they can, and put your back on their face, and place their foot on your feet; then take their knee in your palms, and pull it between your two hands, then bend both sides of the knee sharply; and another assistant stretches their foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that the leg touches the thigh lightly; then apply a plaster cast over it, and make the leg rest against the thigh, and bind them tightly together for three or four days, then untie them; and do not allow the patient to walk, until their limbs are strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not broken, apply strong stretching, as we have mentioned in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	Of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels sometimes become bruised, and other times fully dislocated, internally and externally.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen and tends to swell more where it has dislocated; the reset must be gentle, and when only bruised one should stretch it gently by hand.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	When it is completely dislocated, you must make the patient sit upright and have an assistant support them except for their leg above the ankle; then pull the foot towards yourself with your right hand, and then twice to the left side, stretch upwards, and push the foot up strongly; do this twice as we have said, by pushing and pulling on the foot; if it returns, that is good; but if not, begin the work again because it will return; and if it cannot be returned thus, make the patient lie down on their back on the ground, firmly fix a pole in the ground between their thighs, and wrap cloth around it to avoid hurting the patient; then have an assistant hold the thigh, while another stretches the foot by hand or with rope tied above the ankle; each assistant must stretch evenly, and the pole should be positioned next to the patient's thighs for support during stretching; finally, place your hands equally over the dislocation and have another assistant hold their healthy leg underneath it; then as you pull from below on the healthy leg an assistant will return the dislocation swiftly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is ready, apply the plaster and pads on top, bind it tightly, tie the foot to the leg, and keep the nerves above the ankle in the back free, making sure the binding isn't too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the binding loosens, rebind it; afterward, release the binding on the third or fourth day, but prevent the patient from walking for four days; and if they walk before this term is over, there's no guarantee that it won't dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if hot abscesses appear there, you must soothe them until they heal as we have mentioned elsewhere.
des dois	twice
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the wrist is dislocated, it should be gently stretched without exertion; this is a simple matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any joint of the foot or back, you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a straight table, and place your foot on what appears to be the joints, then press hard with your foot until it returns; when it is even, and nothing appears out of place, put a two-legged table under the sole of their foot, then strain it strongly, and leave it for three days, then release them; and let them rest until they are healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wounds and dislocations altogether.
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation and one wants to restore it, often the patient dies: do not be presumptuous in your treatment if you are not wise in this art and have not practiced it long, and if you lack compassion, mercy, and courage; use at first soothing medicines for hot abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of recovery; but when you see hope, then reset the limb now, even though a hot abscess comes with this; once the limb is back in place, administer soothing medicines for the hot abscess, and treat the wound as required, using drying ointments; if there are small bone fragments along with dislocation, remove them, and do what we have said before about simple illnesses; take care not to become afraid of your work, as I explained earlier, since it is worth pleasing God according to his creation, and for the safety of your hands and body.
Amen	Amen
