O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, most dear sons, I have completed this book for you which is the last of the medical sciences together with its fulfilment, and I have made an end by explanations and by its statements.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I complete it for you with this treatise which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and is foreign to all in all, so its knowledge is lost and destroyed, and nothing remains from the former times except brief descriptions in books which have been passed down by word of mouth.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes error and vanity, and intentions are closed off, and knowledge is removed.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Now I believe that I will revive it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the method of exposition and explanation and abbreviation; and I shall go on to the forms of instruments for cauterization, and other surgical instruments with their adjustments, explanation, and preparation as may be necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And due to the reason that there are no good master craftsmen found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And one who embarks on it must surpass others in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he may know the judgment of limbs, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and number of holes (in the skull), and movement, and moving and unmoving veins, and where they emerge.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this, Hippocrates says that knowledge with knowledge is a lot, and with practice it becomes little; especially in the art of medicine.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that those who are not knowledgeable about the aforementioned things, beware lest they fall into error and harm people; thus I have often seen many of those who indulge in this discipline without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish doctor who cut an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman and he severed her carotid arteries; thus so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another doctor who treated a stone in the bladder of an elderly man and he carried away with him part of his bladder; thus within three days this old man was dead.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and even if they cut it out he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another surgeon who took care of the duke of our land, who had a broken leg with an open wound; and due to their ignorance, the surgeons set the break on top of the wound with strong ligatures, leaving no room for drainage, and left it like that for some time; they commanded him not to untie it; and he stayed like that until his leg became completely swollen and his foot was lost.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and untie his leg; and when I undid it, he found peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But nonetheless, corruption was already established in the limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the limb was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And as I saw another wound that was worsening, and then it became inflamed due to the toxicity of its nature.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For cancer, when it is caused by a buildup of melancholic humor, it is not advisable to touch it with iron unless it is in such a position that all corrupt matter can be entirely removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, my dear son, it is necessary for you to know that manual work is divided into two categories: one where there are dangers in various situations, and I will show in each of these places within this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For this reason, it is necessary that you be cautious, so that the foolish physician cannot speak ill of you. Take up your arms in repentance, and approach your patients gently yet firmly, and use the best method so that by God's grace you may come to their salvation and be praised; leave behind dreadful diseases with severe suffering; remove from yourself what causes doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can pass from this world to the next with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in some of his admonishments: "Do not take on a severe illness as a cure unless you want to be called a foolish physician.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauterization and medical cautery, and the chapter is organized from head to toe; it covers instrument shapes, cauterization tools, and everything else necessary for the procedure.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and cupping, wounds, arrow extractions, and similar procedures; this chapter deals with the order of treatment and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions, and similar matters; it deals with the head to foot, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Before we recall the work, it is necessary for me to speak of the quality of help and harm in each temperament.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of help and harm is the longest speech and subtlest science and the secret response; many sages have spoken on this, agreeing with each other; I will suffice myself with their words, for I fear lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery aids universally all complexions where there is matter, be it two complexions: namely hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions with matter, some argued that cautery is a great aid; while others said the opposite: that cautery is not beneficial for illnesses caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to treat illnesses caused by heat or dryness; those who argue otherwise state that cautery provides great relief for hot and dry ailments in the human body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	When you compare the body of man to its moisture in relation to fire's nature, you find that the former is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in any case, let no one interfere except those who have proven it themselves and understand the chapter of cauterization well through long practice, comprehending the diversity of human constitutions, their dispositions, the causes of their illnesses, the circumstances, and the passing of time; we need not fear other constitutions, especially concerning cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the physicians assembled and agreed upon the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my son, that the cautery with fire is one of the secrets of healing and has even greater efficacy than the burning medicinal cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and it does not come forth except on the member that is cooked, and it harms no other member unless touched.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Burning medicines spread from member to another, causing ailments with slow healing; and sometimes kill the patient Fire, due to its height and the goodness of its substance, does not do this unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	This I have found through experimentation and the length of my service and study in this art, and it is based on the truth of things; and for this reason, I excuse myself for the length of speech, as I do not wish to take away from you the secret that is hidden in fire, and the quality of its work, how it drives out bodily ailments, just as the philosopher says in demonstration; now receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, my son, they agreed upon the time when the cauterizations should be performed, and chose an opportune moment.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	I say that cauterization is suitable for all times, because it quickly alleviates the harm that may occur; especially if the cauterizations are necessary to alleviate pain or prevent imminent and urgent damage from coming to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think of it, dear son, as the foolish doctor does; for the illness that is healed by cauterization has no relapse; and they say thus: but it is not so as they believe, because cauterization is a medicine that changes the complexion, drying out the humors that are the cause of pain, and is superior to other medicines due to its swift action, and for the power of its work and dominance.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is a significant factor that the disease may arise sometimes according to the patient's constitution and the location of the illness and its nature; and superfluities are gathered in him through the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as dental cauterization for pain, and similar things, and that kind of pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last resort of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cauterization is worth more than medicine, however their intentions are false, and it is cauterization that is the last resort of medicine because when we administer various treatments for any illness and they are ineffective, then we apply cauterization, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterization with a golden instrument is better than with iron, and they said this due to the quality of gold and the nobility of its substance; and they claimed that the wound from cautery does not cause infection, but this is not true as I have proven it, and found that it indeed happens in some people; and cauterization with gold is better than with iron, just as they stated.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet when you heat a golden instrument, you do not know when it is hot by the color of gold, and it cools down so quickly; and if one heats it too much, they burn themselves on fire; thus there are enough obstacles to this method.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use fire cautery which we have adapted to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have arranged this chapter from head to foot so that the material is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is useful for moisture and coldness in the brain, and it is applied due to two reasons: because of a disease called 'soda', and because of the excess humours which descend from the head into the eyes, ears, causing numerous dreams, toothache, sore throat, and all diseases stemming from cold such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by medicine three or four nights in a row, according to their health and tolerance for purgatives; then have them fast on the fifth night.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, 
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on an ink-stained surface, and move your hand in a downward and squeezing motion repeatedly while twisting; then lift your hand slightly, and reexamine the area if you see the bone protruding even slightly; if you don't see it, repeat the cauterization process until you do see the bone as I instructed you; afterward take some softened wax, and place moistened cotton within it, and put it on the site; leave it there for three days; then apply butter-soaked cotton; keep it in place until the scalding has subsided; finally treat the wound with a healing ointment known as "tetrafarmacum" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients say that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges itself; thus aiding healing.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some said that one must let the cautery burn until a part of the bone is charred, then remove what has been burnt from the bone and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one must let the cautery remain in place, pressing down so hard that it pierces the bone like a needle that women use in their sewing, allowing the humors to escape; and they should leave the wound open for some time before cleaning and suturing it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	These two methods of cauterization do not seem good to me at all, except in certain individuals where there is fear; and I believe it should be left up to the doctor as each case may vary depending on the condition of the patient's body; for the bone has been weakened by continuous natural processes, just like we see in other limbs; even if the patient's bone is weak by nature, and the first method seems safer and more useful to me, thus I use it when I practice medicine.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	Of the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the entire head is afflicted with chronic pain that persists for a long time, the patient must use herbs and pills called "cochie", and purgatives for the head, as well as oils and plasters; if one performs on them the cauterisation we previously mentioned, it will be of no avail.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take heed if the patient's shoulder is of a strong constitution and not too cold; then cauterise it below that cautery we mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	Afterwards, perform the cauterisation on each corner of the head up to the bone, as we previously stated, and also cauterise it in the place called "vasselz"; these are the places where cups for cupping therapy are placed; be gentle with your hand so that you do not reach the bone: the patient will feel much greater pain in this cauterisation than in the others, but I shall speak of that later; and make sure that the cauteries on the corners are more subtle than those used to cauterise the middle part of the head, and here is how:
dou cautere dou chief	For the cauterization of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in one part of the head and extends to the eye, and the scalp is cleansed with softening medicines, and other treatments I mentioned in the section on diseases have been applied, but none are effective: then you should use cauterization in two ways, that is, with hot iron and medicine.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauterization with medicine is done as follows: take a piece of alder wood, remove the bark and cut it into two pieces, then make an incision in the temple where the pain resides in such a way that you can place the alder wood underneath the skin; when it is placed, bind and hold it firmly for twelve hours; then release and treat with strong garlic, leaving the wound open for two or three days; afterward, apply cotton soaked in butter until it heals.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment, let it heal completely; and if you wish to do so, use some of the burning medications that I have written about in the twelfth chapter on burning medications.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done according to this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery with which you have this shape:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	It is called a "key" because its head is made in the shape of a key with a slight curvature, and in the middle there is a small protuberance; place it on the painful area, and hold your hand while slightly turning the iron so that half of the heart-shaped edge is scorched; lift your hand so as not to burn the artery, which lies above it, from where a lot of blood will flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After put cotton in the eye of silk, and put it over for III days; then apply moist cotton with butter, and then treat the area of ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this migraine using the cautery called "cultellare", take care not to cut the artery during this ancient practice.
de emigraine	Of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine as we have previously mentioned in the division of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauteries described before by medicine or iron do not suffice, then you must heat up the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; mark a line with half a finger's length on the spot, withdraw your hand once, and be careful not to cut the artery nor reach the bone; beware of affecting the mandible that moves when we chew food, or else spasms may arise in the patient, and take care against profuse bleeding from the artery if it is severed, which carries great peril especially for those who are inexperienced and unpracticed; leave the work halfway. I will tell you how to staunch blood flow when an artery is cut, and I shall show you where this is described in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauterizations are not sufficient for the illness, and the patient is still suffering, cauterize him on his head as we have said before, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you observe this, administer the cautery which we mentioned in the chapter about arterial extraction, with the double-bladed cautery; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of ear pain due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When ear pain arises from the cold, and you have applied softening medicines and other treatments as we mentioned before, but the pain persists, heat up this cautery called a "pin," which is shaped like this:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pricking all around the affected ear, or around both if the pain is in both ears, and move away a little above the root of the ear from where you have marked the spot for cauterization; and make ten pin-pricks around each ear; then treat the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	From the mouth's torment.
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be treated by cauterization is limited to those caused by flux, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not apply cautery to similar conditions arising from dryness and nerve spasms.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this similar condition of torture caused by flux from ulcers and purging of the head, as well as gargling, and it does not improve, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, another slightly outside the temple, and the third where the two lips meet; place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and apply the cautery towards the head, just above the ear's tip, and another on the temple about as long as a thumb; leave the cauterization until half of the heart has been burned; this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is similar to the instrument we described before, but it is slightly more subtle, and the blade should be a little thicker; after treating the site as I mentioned earlier, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is chronic and you treat it as we have described, but there is no improvement, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauterizations: two on the two corners of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one at the location called "vessels" as mentioned before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; they should be treated as described earlier.
de litargie	Of lethargy:
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, give the patient large herbs and pills that purify the brain; afterwards wash his head thoroughly, and apply to the occiput a sinapi cataplasm which is described in the treatise on cataplasms; and this is how you perform the cautery: do as I said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healed in this way, it is good; and if not, apply three fire cauterizations from the middle of the head down to the neck, leaving a two-finger space between each one; treat them like the others, and if you see fit to adjust it, and the patient can tolerate it, apply one cautery in the center; and if necessary, apply two more on the two corners, treating until it is healed; and let these cauterizations be called 'olive-like', as I said before.
de la froidor dou chief	Of the coldness of the head.
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	The head must be cleansed of hairs and according to what we have said before; after, grasp the patient's head, then apply a cautery in the middle of the head and on each corner, and one behind, and three along the spine of the neck; if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient can tolerate it, and the illness is severe, apply four cauterizations along the spine of the back; let them burn until the greatest part of the heart is burnt, then lift your hand; treat until it is healed, and let these cauterizations be called 'olive-like' as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptic should not undergo fire cautery unless they are phlegmatic; one must first modify the brain with herbs and other treatments as we have mentioned in previous chapters when the patient is large and suffers from difficulty taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot endure it, perform gargling and chewing often with herbs to modify the brain; after, raise their head in the middle [of the room], and perform a cauterisation as we have mentioned before on the crown of the head, and cauterise each corner; and if the patient is strong and suffers, perform cautery as I said for one who has paralysis and softening of the body, along the spine of the back and neck, and let the cautery be olive-sized according to the manner I have mentioned.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, perform this subtle cautery as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause of melancholy is due to excess or corrupted moisture and thick phlegm, then cauterize with multiple cauteries as we have said for one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause of melancholy is due to excess declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink so that the brain may be cleansed, as was said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, wipe the patient's head; then make a well-formed linen pad, like a ring, and place it in the middle of the head; have the patient sit with crossed legs, and hold them steady from all sides; apply the liniment, which is preferably old sheep butter; heat it to a warm temperature so that the skin can tolerate it when applied; after emptying the circle inside the head, let it cool down; do this once a week for the patient along with other good treatments until they are cured.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you are cauterizing with fire, make multiple punctures all over the cautery site.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of fire cautery softens the brain considerably; then apply moistened cotton with butter and chicken fat on top.
de l’awe des eulz	The eyelid.
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the swelling first appears on the eyelids through signs I mentioned before in this section, then start and give the patient something purifying for the head, protect him from all moisture, and make him sweat with multiple baths while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	Afterwards, instruct him to lower his head and cauterize between the temples with two cauteries if the swelling descends into both eyes together or one if it is in only one; make sure you avoid all veins and arteries located under the heart and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; beware of blood loss, and should you see too much blood coming out, then stop the bleeding as far as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will instruct you in the extraction of arteries and the incision, cautioning how to stem it; sometimes one makes a cautery or hot iron below the two rear bones.
dou cors des larmes	The body's tears.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed to being on the veins, or near the arteries that appear outside the head; and one sees that they are cold, phlegmatic excesses, then apply the cautery as I said at the beginning, descending towards the eyes: one cauterization in the middle of the head, two cauterizations above the temples, and two cauterizations with a hot iron below the two rear bones; if more is needed, cautiously cauterize just above the eyebrows using small cauterizations.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Through the body of tears from within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat him according to what we have said in the division, and he does not benefit from it, then give the patient to drink three nights with cock's grease; afterwards, raise his head, and cauterize him in the middle of the olive [bone]; and make two cauterizations of the "clavicle" cautery above the two wrists, a little below the hairline; and be wary of the artery so that you do not cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the "clavicle" cautery:
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the papilla of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery which is called "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	Of which this is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that do two cauterizations on the two eyebrows as long as the eyelashes are; and do not leave your hand there unless until a third part of the paper is burnt, according to the manner I said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the eyelashes turn inward, and prick the eye, so one makes cauterizations according to two methods: namely with fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are even, then place the patient in your care; afterwards draw on the paper of the eyes a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be next to the hairs; then put moist cotton with egg white and parsley poultice on the eye, then heat up the cautery for which this is the shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterize on the figure that you have marked little by little many times, until the heart of the area is burnt; and the sign of the success of the work is that you see the paper retracting, and the hairs rise to the level of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for three days, then put moist cotton in butter until the scald is gone; afterwards treat with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterward the hairs grow and the skin softens again, then resume the cautery on that same spot as you did before; but if the hair has fallen out, cauterize until the skin is raised to its natural level, and is even, without pricking the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cauteries of medicine are what you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow large and evenly, then make parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf; take French soap and quicklime, each one third, and grind them together well; do this quickly so it does not cool, then spread it on the form you made like the myrtle leaf, and place it on the skin around the eyes; if the disease is in only one eye, operate on that one, but if both are affected as well; place underneath the eye cotton moistened with egg white; the patient's head should be in your lap and put your finger pointing toward the medicine, press his chest and move the eyeball whenever the patient feels a stinging sensation from the medicine because he will feel it like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for some time, remove the medicine with your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the wound has healed, lift up the place of water, and observe if you see the skin raised just as it was raised by the effect of fire or due to an incision; and if this is so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, apply medicine again to the place where it has opened, until your treatments are even and your eyes focused; then put moist cotton soaked in butter until the burnt flesh is removed, after heal the place of ointment which is called 'diaphenis' or another, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you must, be very careful with your work to ensure that none of the medicine reaches the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft later on, and hairs grow in the eye, repeat the medicine on that spot where the paper has softened properly, just as you did before; after healing it so it is cured; and this is the shape of the myrtle leaf:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this be your restrictions; and do not abandon the right path for one who is studying this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	on the treatment of fistula by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head on your hand; hold their head with both hands firmly so it cannot move or twist; then apply moistened cotton soaked in egg white or parsley juice onto the eye; afterwards heat this cautery, which is shaped like a vaulted feather, combined together as one piece; if you wish, point it from one end to another, and if you wish, make it tent-shaped; but nevertheless, this vaulted shape is better for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Afterwards press the fistula if it is open, and remove any pus, then dry it; but if it is closed, operate on it, and push outwards from the brow; afterwards place a hot cautery like this nearby, hold your hand over the cautery at the part above the nail towards the eye, so your hand does not move; apply the cautery to the fatty tissue of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you go all the way to the bone with the cauterization, it would be beneficial.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, repeat the cauterization again and use as much as needed, leaving it for three days; afterwards, apply moist cotton wool soaked in butter, and treat with a drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass without healing, then apply corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and treat according to what comes up in this chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	There is also a type of cauterization for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	For fistula, cut into the site, then insert in the incision one fine catgut of such quality as to fit its shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	et they make it to the quantity of one .З. of lead; and hold your hand or hammer firmly, and do not move the patient at all, so that the molten lead does not run into his eye; and you must place on the patient's eye moist cotton soaked in egg white or water: the lead thus fills the place of the fistula, and heals with wonderful health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, you must administer an aperture with a knife, and return the fistula to the body of the knife according to what is necessary in its proper place.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks occur on lips which are called "chaps," especially in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as mentioned before in various ways, and the treatment is ineffective, then heat a small knifepoint cautery according to this method:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	Place it on the cracks until it reaches the bottom; then treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	for an abscess in the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess forms at the root of the throat or in the tonsil, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it causes pain and becomes swollen; it turns into a fistula and is treated as mentioned before, but if this treatment does not work, then you must use a cautery according to the size of the fistula. Then open the fistula's pore, hold your hand so that the hot iron reaches the bottom or back, do this once or twice; afterwards treat it like we said in treatments until it is healed. If it heals well, great! If not, then you must uncover the area and remove any rotten bone as per what you find specified in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	By the movement of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it doesn't work, then place the patient's head on your lap; afterward, heat the cauterization tool that will be described below in such a way that you put a cane over the tooth; and insert the hot cautery inside quickly, holding your hand so the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth; after lift your hand and repeat the cauterization according to your desire; afterward, have the patient fill their mouth with salty water, and hold it for an hour then rinse thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	In this way, the moving tooth becomes confirmed in place, and the softened gum restrained, with the moisture corrupting it drying up.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain arises due to coldness, whether it is cold or hot, and medical treatments are ineffective, then cauterization is necessary according to two methods: butter cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Butter cautery is performed as follows: take cow's butter and place a small amount in an iron or brass spoon; then wrap cotton around the tip of a stick and dip it into the melted butter, applying it to the aching tooth until it cools down; repeat this frequently so that its properties reach the root of the tooth. To do this, you can also soak wool and cotton in cold butter and place it on the painful tooth while placing hot iron on top until heat reaches the base of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cauterizations with fire are such that you should take a cane of iron or copper, and make it thick enough so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth; afterward heat the cauterization tool, from which its form will come later, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand there until the cauterization is cooled; do this often, because the pain will be removed that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And the patient should fill their mouth with good butter during the urgency of the cauterization, and then cool it off afterward; and this is the form of the cauterization tool:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make the cauterization tool for any part of the head that you wish, and according to your ability; and this is the form of the cane:
des scrophules	Some scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is of phlegm and cold moisture, and does not obey digestion with medicines, then heat the cautery with a chimney from which smoke comes out afterwards through two openings in the other part; place the hot cautery on the abscess once or as many times as necessary until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; if the abscess is small put the cautery according to the size of the abscess and leave it for three days; then apply moist cotton with butter until the burn is removed; afterwards treat the area with ointments and dressings until it heals.
Li forme de la cainne:	The chimney's shape:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture overwhelms the channels of the lung, especially when it originates from cold constitution, then the patient should be cleansed first with dissolving medicines; afterwards perform cautery at the root of the throat, and take care not to reach the throat, and burn no more than a small portion of the heart.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards perform another cautery at the joint where the neck meets the skull along the spine, and let the cauterization be of the type called 'clavile' as described before; treat the site as mentioned earlier until it is healed.
de la toust	Of coughing.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all lung ailments are caused by cold moisture, and the patient lacks fever or dryness, especially with an old illness, perform two cauterizations over the muscles in the armpits; another one between the breasts closer to the chest; and let these cauterizations be of the type called 'clavile' according to the form described before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see fit, perform the fire cautery by puncturing throughout all of the cauterization points called 'points' which are formed as such in ear diseases; and let these points be up to thirty, or around that number.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the location according to what has been previously stated, let the cauterization be in three rows following this pattern:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because these cauterizations are lighter, for you will do three at a time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the heart until it pierces through to the ribs, and the shape of the cautery would comprise four cauteries; and for this reason, the cautery is made with three irons, thus forming six cauterizations; and these nerves are arranged according to a subtle pattern, and this is the form of the cautery with three irons.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	and sometimes it is arranged above this single nerve, for which there would be eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Then place the cautery on top, crush the bell with oil; afterwards make the patient rest and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well fortified.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated upwards, then something happens quickly; therefore make a clavicle cautery on the thick part or apply many small cauteries by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joints are closed, and moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When cold and excessive moisture enter the stomach to such an extent that it disrupts their natural balance, and catarrh increases within them, and customary treatments do not provide relief, then the patient must be reminded to sit upright on their back, extending their legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	Thereafter you should perform three cautery treatments underneath the armpit with a tablespoon size for each treatment, and two cautery procedures outside both sides of the chest to form a triangle shape, leaving enough space between them so that they do not join together when pouring out pus; and ensure the cauterization is thorough, reaching both parts of the heart, and make the cautery figure according to this form without adjustment: [diagram].
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	Et si tu veux cautériser avec un grand cautère dans l'estomac selon cette forme ; et celui qui aura peur de ce cautère, cautérise en piquant et saignant sur l'estomac à ce point selon la quantité que tu veux prendre ensuite ; cautérise le tout avec le cautère appelé « poinçonnement ».
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Après le traitement du traitement que nous avons eu précédemment, jusqu'à ce qu'il soit guéri.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver is in pain due to cold and moisture and has a large gaseous distension, it has been thrown out of its natural balance by excesses ; and the patient is treated as we have said previously, but it does not benefit him, so the patient must be reminded of his condition; apply three cauterizations according to this form and figure and this quantity on the liver, outside the hypochondria, where the man's coat comes from ; and leave a space between each cautery equal to the thickness of a finger ; and let the cauteries be as long as the body, and do not press your hand too much throughout the cautery ; and only burn half of the heart, and have the patient standing upright on his feet ; and if he cannot stand, then let him lie down, and stretch out his legs, and lift up his arms ; and this is the form :
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your intention is to cauterize these knife cautery marks, then do so carefully if you are skilled and wise in the art, and take care not to burn the entire heart, as it would dry out the whole body; and don't go near the mouth, for the heart is very delicate there, and know this well.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you wish to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient will feel pain but not too intense; if it is in the membrane, they will experience excruciating pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And so, when this treatment is required, the patient must be reminded to keep their head still; then lance the site where the abscess is located, and afterward cauterize with a tool similar in shape to a ray, which will form like this:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize the fire cautery until the heart is burnt, and it reaches as far as the syphac, so that the pores are all closed; afterwards treat it according to the cure for boils until it is healed; and no one should use this cautery other than a doctor who has studied medicine long enough, by whose hands some of these illnesses have been cured.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he may operate boldly, yet it seems to me that one would be better letting him alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	Wax cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that for wax cautery one should make cauteries from the roots of aristolochia, and in this way: take a root of aristolochia, long, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, also as thick and as long as your two fingers; soak it in oil, then put it to fire, and cauterize with the cautery between the armpit and the neck, and two small cauteries a little downwards on the part that is below the beard; two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, sloping backwards a little; one cautery in the middle of the breast, another above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on either side of the breast outside the cautery that is between the two shoulders; do not press your hand hard, but apply it gently as if perfuming.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And some ancient scholars said that men should use a cauterizing fire similar to a barber's razor, heating it and placing it between the ribs until it reaches this abscess; and if it causes pain, as we have mentioned in the case of liver abscesses.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear that the patient may die now, or a fistula may form which cannot be healed.
de la mice	Of the mouse.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the section on treatments, and it does not improve, then there are three types of cauterization, all of which are beneficial.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	One method involves making three or four cauterizations in a line following the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cautery we described earlier; do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and have the patient lay prone on their back; another cauterization method is to heat the cautery with two nerves, as we showed for shoulder dislocation; lift up the heart which is towards the mouse, or where the pain of the patient originates from the left side, and make the elevation you use to lift the heart according to its core, following the length of the body, and let the cauterizations be made along the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After inflating the two bladders so that the heart is pierced on the other side, then draw out the cautery, and thus there will be four of them. If you wish, cauterize the entire cautery with three bladders.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when there has been long-standing putrefaction, this is worth more than the other treatments mentioned above.
de ydropisie	Of hydropsy.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not beneficial for dropsy, except in the case of ascites.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods we have mentioned in the division and your treatment does not benefit them, then you must make four cauterizations around the navel, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back over the spine, and one at the bottom; and let the cauterizations be close to the heart's point.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leave the cautery open to drain pus over a long time, and do not neglect the patient's care after the cautery; healing will be hastened, and the two intentions shall be together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the abdomen should be as we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what has been stated above.
de l’enfleure des piez	The swelling of the feet.
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet of one who is dropsical are swollen and filled with yellow water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and ring finger; raise your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, otherwise you will injure the surrounding yellow tissue, and let the caustic be according to this form.
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After, make two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the shinbone; and let the caustics be in length, one below the knee in front and the other outside, in the middle of the leg; leave the cauterized area uncovered for a long time without cleaning, until the yellow tissue appears; after treating the other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the house
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the purging of the belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestine are weakened, and cannot be treated by ordinary means; and you see the patient suffering greatly with strong constitution, then make one large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before regarding the stomach cautery or circular cautery; four subtle cauteries around the navel each as thick as a small nail, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffers, apply a fire cautery to the wrist, one cautery on each elbow, and two small cauteries near the large intestine, for treatment is beneficial when there is proper assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	For the treatment of hemorrhoids.
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are found in the anus, either one or more, and they are old and consist of cold, moist, corrupted humors, and treatment as previously mentioned has not worked, perform cauterization: three cauteries on the back spine, one each outside the armpits in a triangular pattern, and one cautery below the buttocks two fingers away; if you suspect their stomach is cooled and food is not being digested properly, and you observe swelling of the face, apply one large cautery to the stomach as previously mentioned, another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all cauteries clamped open for a long duration.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, let the site heal until it is fully recovered.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Of fleshiness which is named "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you treat thethelul, heat the cautery until it resembles a razor, and then place it fully heated onto the treated thethelul; leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the edge of the wound, from which blood will flow; do this once or twice, and if there is much thethelul, cauterize each one as we have said; afterwards treat with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on alchatim, it will be of greater help.
de plaie mal curee	Of a wound poorly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, as we will describe in its place, such a sickness comes that can only be healed through cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When anyone develops a fistula and it emits purulent and corrupted moisture, you must test it thoroughly with a subtle probe, and be mindful of the entire extent of the abscess.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	Heat the cautery until it seems like a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to how far the probe went in, and repeat the cauterization as many times as needed for the corrupted tissue to burn away; once, twice or thrice depending on the extent of the need; take care not to burn any nerves nor major veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	if the fistula goes into the body of the bladder and intestine, then be careful to protect those areas, and do not cauterize unless it is on fleshy ground, considering that this is a dangerous condition; after healing make sure you check if the wound has healed properly, and if the wound is salty or dry, and the matter has been removed for a long time, understand that the wound has completely healed; but if there remains some discharge, know that the wound is leaking and that the bone in the depths of its cavity is destroyed; this will be explained further later on.
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease: if it has not yet been pierced by an arrow, you should evacuate the urine in order to empty them entirely; but if they have been pierced already and discharge blood or pus, then treat as previously described for wounds caused by arrows.
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from coldness comes to the kidneys, along with severe flatulence and no sign of pregnancy, then you must perform a fire cautery on one side of the kidney, as well as the clavicle cauterization we previously described; and if instead, we cauterize in the middle point between both kidneys, there will be three cauterizations in line, which will provide greater benefit.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak due to cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then cauterize in the area outside above the bladder, where the arm hair begins, on both right and left sides, each cautery should be as long as the width of a thumb; make one cautery outside the back, or two if necessary; the cauteries should be clamped according to the form previously described.
de la marris	Of the womb.
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the womb is cold and moist, preventing conception, and its flowers are corrupted with delayed termination; and when they come, she experiences great pain: then it must be done that three cauteries are made around the belly, as we have said for the bladder cautery, and two cauteries outside the back; the cauteries should be clamped, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends to the hip joint, and due to this it moves from its place, the sign is that one thigh appears longer than the other when measured together; and you will find the region of the pubic bone below, so you must cauterize the patient on the hip joint with I cautery similar to a circle, incising in front of the joint around the bone as it turns, ensuring the bone remains within the circle; and let the cauteries be like those used for stomach cautery.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not available to you, make three large olive-sized cauteries, and let the cauteries be as perfect as all hearts; treat until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain in the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the socket of the hip, caused by cold and moisture, and the patient is treated according to what we have said in the division but it does not heal, and the illness is chronic: then you must purge the patient of gross humors with foul-smelling pills or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After that, apply cautery; and the manner of cauterization is of two kinds: namely, together with burning medicines, or cautery by fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Cautery by fire has many methods, one of which is as follows: you cauterize over the socket of the hip with three triangular cauteries in this shape, making them deep and large, leaving between each cautery a space equal to the width of your thumb; make sure the cauteries are olive-shaped. Sometimes a cautery is made in the middle on top of the head of the hip, which means there will be four according to this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see fit, cauterize with the circular cautery that we mentioned before for the dislocation of the hip; but do so in such a way that the circles enclose the entire hip joint, and all the muscle tissue around the heart should be burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	This is how we proceed in cases of sciatica when the pain is localized to the hip and does not extend down into the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it extends down to the thigh and leg, apply two cauteries where the patient indicates the pain is located, and a third cautery above the ankle, slightly towards the left side. Let these be cup-shaped cauteries, burning through the muscle tissue around the heart; and should the patient feel that the pain reaches down to the sole of the foot or nearby, then cauterize where they indicate it hurts with three or four points using a sharp instrument known as a "point".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is necessary, do more; and if you know that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then perform a cutellar or circular cauterization, and be careful in all your cauterizations not to leave the cautery for too long so as not to burn the nerves and large arteries, and not cause further harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who were cauterized on the ankle of their foot, and it was left for so long that their leg became entirely swollen, as well as their foot, and all their feet were pierced and corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an abdominal operation which led to his death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two connected parts, cauterize both of them in this way.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise men said regarding the cauterization of the hip joint, this is how it should be done: make such an iron tool and let its head be as big as a large navel orange or slightly smaller, and let there be slots between them with the width of one thumb each; and let these slots run through two sides, and also have notches like knots, and in the middle of it is a well-made piece of iron; and this is its shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Heated until it is all red and glowing, then place it on the sick hip joint, turning it over to the healthy side; cauterize once with this iron tool and leave for three days; afterwards apply a plaster of butter, and let the wound remain open for a long time; after curing with ointment until it has healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use this cautery rarely due to the fear of its appearance, and few see it being used; yet, it is one of the good cauterizations, which can be endured by those who have it, and left where it hardens.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The medicine cautery that burns is made with an instrument of interlaced rods where the edge of the door descends, and it should be made of brass or iron with one long side, and at a height of two inches; there should be a distance between each equal to the thickness of a finger; they are open from above and below, and join together in this shape:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	Then place the wooden box of the hip on the patient lying on their healthy side, and quickly press your hand hard over the hip box; after that pour between the two circles some hot oil which has been heated a little by the fire, and leave it for an hour's time, enduring the heat and burning with the patient.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is found there to be cauterization, as well as fire; and when the cauterization has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and gently raise the hip, and let it remain like this for three days, and apply butter until that which is black from the scald is removed; then leave it for another three days so that putrefaction is extracted; and this would be the last aid after the cure of ointments as long as it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or down to the leg, apply an instrument with gentle heat as you have done for the hip similarly; and this is the method of warm application, which I have written about in the treatise on medical corrections.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, equal parts of each, grind them together, and place them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	where there is a small opening so that the tip of a razor can enter; place over it one pot or another well-plumbed pot, and put on alkali and heat and pour warm water above, until there are two fingers' depth above the powders when you have properly grasped it in your hand; leave it thus until cool water and liquid descend into the plumbed pot, then take all that liquid and pour it over heat and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	and it will be very watery and administered in many medical practices and in cauterizing other members; for it does the same work as fire, and there are other medicines with which one can cauterize well the hip like these: theriac, honey of Anacardium, hot with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a cure where a man was healed from the pain in his hip and sciatic vein, and he praises it greatly, saying that no other treatment was needed, and that he was cured instantly when this cure was performed, and he bathed as he instructs hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	He says in this way that you should take fresh and dry green litharge, and grind it very well with one pound of grease, and apply it to the hip, thigh, and leg where the pain is located, and bind it; let it sit for three hours or however long it takes until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then have him enter the bath until his body is slightly moistened, and then put him to bed, and the pain will leave entirely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such medicinal cauterization unless after evacuation from the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat droppings, it greatly helps; and the cautery must be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen and smear it with old oil, and place it on the hollow area between the thumb of the foot and the other one called the fossa.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After that, take dry goat droppings and ignite them until they become charcoal, then place it on the linen and leave it until it extinguishes; repeat this process again, and keep doing so without ceasing until you perceive through sensation that it has reached up to the hip, and that the pain has ceased; and this type of cautery is called "goat cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether due to falling or impact, excessive bleeding, cold matter spreading, in none of these cases are cauterizations effective except for those caused by the influx of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	He must then be purged with foul-smelling pills or other similar remedies applied to the back where the pain is felt. Three lines of ink should be drawn there and in each line apply five cauterizations, varying according to his strength and endurance; and perform these cauterizations as follows for the type known as "points". If you wish, make three or four at the middle clavicle following this pattern:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This illness often occurs in small children and the signs of its onset are narrow shoulders when they rise up and fear. You will find on the last vertebra of their back an appearance that spreads to the other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this one and wish to cure it, cauterize it with a hot iron according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery touches each part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you wish to do so, cauterize around the spine with a sharp cautery in two or three lines, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Afterward treat the place until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not bring a cautery on top of nerves in spasm.
de la dolor des jointes	On joint pain:
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pains are due to moist humors that spread throughout the body, and when it comes in feet, which doctors call "gout" properly, and when it is of cold nature and cannot be cured by medicine, then it should be treated with cautery in this way: make a lot of cauterizations around the ankle joint, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a need for you to grasp onto the face of the foot, let it be cauterized completely with what we call "the point" cautery.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	If the pains extend to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, apply three or four cauterizations on each knee, using the "olive" cautery; if more is needed, do more but do not hold your hand over the area for longer than it takes for the heartwood of the stake to burn.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, administer the cautery as we have described in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	If the pains are in the hands, make two lines of points around the knuckles; if there is any remaining pain in the fingers, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; if the pains extend to the wrists or shoulders, cauterize each affected area, and ensure proper care for the patient and provide medications.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give him good treatment and purge his phlegm, he will recover with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the fracture of the thighbone.
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When fracture occurs in the thigh and the balls descend into the testicles, if it is recent, you should ensure that he does not eat on that day; and have him use things that empty the stomach so that feces leave his belly; afterward make him lie on his back between your hands, tell him to hold his breath until the balls return to their place, then bring them back with your two hands and cauterize below the fracture over the hip bone, and wherever there is a sign like half a circle above the body; then heat up this type of cautery:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as they are white and emit no odor.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Pull the balls back to their place; and let your assistant hold his hand there so that it does not return backwards; and work well on the patient's thighs, placing a pillow beneath him with another one under the thighs, along with another holding the hands; then put the cautery onto the sign for as long as you have control over your own hand, and hold it straight and keep it in place until you reach the bone, if you do not reach that point on the first time, try again another time until you reach the bone. Be careful to avoid letting the balls move when performing the cautery, or burn them; lest the patient dies, or some other bad thing happens.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that if you do not reach the bone with your cautery, then your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And the cauterization for children should be done with subtlety according to their size, and for adults it should also be proportionate to their size; after three days treat the area with butter until the burning sensation is gone; after that apply other ointments until it is healed, and have the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is fully closed; and make sure their nourishment is sufficient so that their mouth doesn't dry out when they try to get up and walk.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	After forty days, when he wishes to get up, provide him with a well-made bandage, and let him wear it for another forty days; ensure he gets good rest, that he doesn't overwork himself, and guards against excessive fullness from drinking and eating, and against too much shouting; once he follows this guidance, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will now describe the treatment for amputation in this chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Of abdominal rupture.
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other abdomens and are evident, and you see that they no longer grow, if it requires a caustic treatment according to its quantity, and the third part of the heart is burnt; after this treatment as we have said; and some ancients say it must be cauterized with a three-angled cautery in this shape:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But first mark the place of the wound and draw a line across the width above the rupture, then another outside it, and hold your hand steady throughout while using the cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizations are lighter and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain arises in any limb, whether from falling or injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and medical treatment is ineffective, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called 'point', and the cauterization should be according to the length of the limb, its thickness, weakness, strength, location of torsion, and the intensity of the pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the first cauterization is effective, that's good; if not, apply another cautery over the previous one, as it is customary for it to affect the adjacent limb, therefore you must perform cauterizations until the patient is cured.
de meselerie	of surgery
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The months are aided sometimes by cautery with great help, especially for illnesses that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	If you want to see the patient cauterized, be mindful if they are still in the early stages of illness and have been treated according to what we said before about division, and do not descend nor remain there, but you doubt that corruption will affect the whole body, then make five cauterizations on their head: one in the middle of the head at nine centimeters, another towards the front at the end of the hair; two on both corners, and one behind on the nape; leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the bone, and until scabs come out so that the vapors from thick humors can escape; then cauterize over the eye according to what is previously stated.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	Et si la blessure est partout dispersée ; elle perd manifestement, alors il faut que tu le cautérises avec ces cautères que nous avons dit sur le crâne, et un cautère sous le nez, deux cautères sur la colonne vertébrale du cou, six cautères sur la colonne vertébrale du dos, un grand cautère sur la croupe et un autre à côté, deux sur les deux épaules ; deux sur les coudes, deux sur les tendons de l'épaule, un sur chaque articulation des mains et des pieds, et sur les creux des mains ; fais attention aux nerfs qui sont situés derrière le talon, pour ne pas les brûler ; et parfois fait un cautère sur l'os du poignet, un autre sur l'os de l'estomac, et un autre sur le foie.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	Et sache qu'autant tu en fais de plus de cautère, autant tu lui apportes d'aide et plus cela lui profite ; et sache que les malades ne ressentent pas de douleur au cautère comme les sains le ressentent, car leur corps est déjà tout corrompu.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cautery be large and small according to the limbs and joints, depending on what you find suitable in terms of iron instruments.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, dress the wound with flour paste mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, but it does not heal, then make cautery marks on the limb according to its size, slightly penetrating into the flesh; let the cautery be a little closer to the heart; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes cautery is done on the hand, foot, or back, at the exit point of a nerve that moves the limb, and in this way, the swelling is removed; however, no one should intervene unless they are knowledgeable about limbs and the pathways of nerves moving through the body.
de albaras	Of scurvy
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "scurvy" is persistent, and medicinal remedies are ineffective, then cauterize it with a perfect cautery, according to the species of heart, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changes; then treat it with a mixture of flour from vetch and lentils, rose oil, plantain leaves, partridge blood, and pigeon's blood; blend all together, bind it with a piece of cloth, and expose it to air until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of cancer by cautery.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When cancer appears at its beginning, and you wish to halt its progress, cauterize it with a circular-shaped cautery tool, all around the cancerous growth.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And yet the wise say that a cauterization should also be done in the middle of the chancre; and yet this does not seem good to me, for I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen this happen once; and a more proper thing is for it to be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circular", as we have said much about cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has an illness called "adubelati", and it delays death due to its nature or the excessiveness of its symptoms, or because of the patient's condition when he is decrepit (that is, very old) and has little blood, or due to the season; and you see that it hastens his death: then cauterize them around with many small cauteries while pricking; afterwards leave him be.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing through at all the cautery site, then heat up the cautery with what it is formed from here:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this illness called "adubelati" until the cautery site has pierced through the heart, and make sure that the cauterization is such that the patient feels it externally so that the course of putrefaction is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After treatment, wait until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The iron fire treatment
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	There is another kind of illness which is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than the wasting away of limbs, for it eats away at the limbs just as fire consumes dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this illness in a place that can bear the fire cautery, then heat up small and large clavicle-shaped cauteries, according to what is suitable for the location where the illness is; afterwards cauterize it from all sides so much that you eradicate all corruption, and leave nothing of it behind, so that everything that is corrupt is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Leave it for three days, and then apply on the cauterized spots a soft ointment with oil so that the scabs from the fire are removed, along with all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	Afterwards treat the resulting wound with ointments which produce flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that healthy flesh has not grown, it is good; and if it hasn't, then begin the cauterization again on what remains of the corrupted spots.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this treatment was sometimes cured by medication instead of fire cautery; however, fire cautery is still more effective and helpful, and I have already mentioned the cure with medication in the previous section: take it when you need to.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	For corns that come on the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times there is a disease that arises on the feet due to an external cause which we call 'corns', and it is a faulty, swollen thing that wounds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the treatment of this disease is according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say fire cautery, and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Cautery of fire is when you heat a cauterizer shaped like an arrowhead made of good iron to fit the nail tightly and with fine margins; after putting it hot on the nail, turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the bottom; leave it there for three days until it begins to discharge pus; then make a poultice of wild mallows crushed with salt and let the poultice stay overnight, the nail will fall out and be uprooted.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with ointment until it heals properly.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by fire in the body and happen often on hands and feet, you must apply hot water cauterization to them. It is done like this: take a cane of copper or iron, or an arrowhead, and put it on the nail and wart; that is for warts with a nail; and place the cane so it embraces everything around, then pour some hot water onto it, hold your hand steady, and press your hand turning so the margin of the cane reaches the root of the nail, and let the hot water go deep down to the root. Let the patient endure the burning sensation of the hot water for an hour; then leave it be, and all will get uprooted from their roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another until you eradicate all those that are in the body, then treat them with ointments that produce flesh.
li cure dou trembler	The treatment for shaking/trembling.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some shake due to coldness of nerves, or quartan fever or other, you must apply four cauterizations on the spine of the back, one between each vertebra; one cautery on the foot, and one on the stomach using the olive [shaped] cautery; this will stop the shaking and hasten recovery from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	Pustules that stink.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes certain bodies are covered in scabs or stinking pustules that come from gross corrupt matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	so it is fitting in the first instance when they appear that one perform a cautery on each head of the pimple: a subtle cautery with myrtle wood, whose point has been heated over fire, or with the root of long aristoloche, or with a lenticular cauterizer.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And one must cauterize them at the beginning when they appear according to this method, and they cannot grow any further, but rather the excess from which it comes is destroyed, and they are healed; however, it should be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	There are often great outpourings of blood from the artery which is cut in the wound that comes afterwards, or in the incision of the abscess, or to cauterize a limb, and similar things; and it is very difficult to stop this bleeding.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet when this happens to someone, you must hurry to place your index finger on the wound's injury, and press down so that blood is calmed beneath your finger, and no more drops come out; then take many small and large olive oil cauterizers until they are all red hot; then take one, big or small according to the wound and the area where the artery is located, and place the cauterizer on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep it there until the blood is staunched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if blood spurts forth when you lift your finger from the wound, and the first cauterizer is extinguished, then quickly take another one of the cauterizers that are on the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	Do not cease to do this one after the other until the blood is completely staunched; and make sure that you do not burn the nerve nearby, and that no other harm comes upon the patient; and know that when blood pours from an artery, it cannot be properly staunches unless by one of four methods we have mentioned: either by cauterization, or by extraction if it has not been treated already, or by very tight binding with thread, or by medicines placed on it which have the power to staunch blood; and ensure that the patient is bound firmly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever brings restraint with narrow bandages or applies hot compresses of cloth, or other similar things, it is not beneficial if there are no improvements.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and there is neither physician nor medicine present, one must place their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said before, and stretch it until it is constricted over the wound and over the vein; do not move the finger, but moisten it with cold water often so that it is very cold to freeze and swell the blood and constrict it; and make preparations beforehand for what is needed of cauterization and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book on surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all about diseases that require fire cauterization or burning medicines, and the instruments and methods of cauterization; I placed this chapter on the head down to the feet, and I will follow the same path in this chapter so that what one seeks is found more easily.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so when I begin this work, it is necessary, dear son, for you to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first about cauterization, and thus greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to undertake this foolishly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many types of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from such people who are so afraid of their illness that they die quickly due to the frenzy caused by their disease and the severity of their condition, one should have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And there are those who show you their improvement, saying, "Wait, I am cured"; but the illness is malicious.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	You should not consent to those who come to you with such an attitude, but place greater concern for your honor than for your greed, and do not work foolishly but wisely on what you are certain of and can achieve results from; use prognostication and indication in the treatment of your patients towards which healing may be directed; this will help you gain a good reputation, glory, and a memorable legacy.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Tres chier fil, Our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and may he breathe into you the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter to be divided into chapters, according to what is presented before in the chapter on cauterization, which I explained to you from head to toe so that you may find more easily what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness often comes to children during birth when the midwife squeezes too hard on the child's head, and sometimes it has unknown causes.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this illness occur in anyone but children, and death was swift for all those whom I saw afflicted by it, so I think it best to leave aside such treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose shoulder was full of fluid, and the head grew larger each day until he could no longer bear it; the moisture increased so much that he died, and this moisture had gathered beneath the bone on the scapula, between the heart and the bone; if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, then you should make an incision in the head as wide as two fingers; let it be as long as two inches, so that the moisture flows out; here is the form of the spatulum:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscesses are larger, then make two incisions in the form of a cross, according to this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see that the sutures of the head are open on each side, and the fluid gushes out when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not stop, then you must make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all moisture immediately.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After applying compresses and powders, bind it with wine and oil, and leave it thus for five days; then untie it, and treat the wound with dressings and ointments, leaving the head immobilized equally, and feed the patient dry meat without moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is to observe where the swelling of the abscess appears, and the accumulation of pus; for it may be in front, behind, on the right, or on the left side.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore, cut there where the abscess appears, and incise it according to its size and depth; be careful not to sever an artery, and expect blood flow, so that the patient does not die from excessive bleeding and moisture loss.
de reume	Of rheumatism
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When someone has a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or throat, and it is an old illness that does not respond to medical treatment, then the last resort is cauterization along with the cutting of the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	You must therefore, when you cut the veins, have the patient bend their head back; afterward, rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then strap the patient's neck tight with a piece of cloth; then look where the vein beats, and the holes on either side are behind the ears, and they respond quickly; then mark these spots with your finger, then cut both of them with a sharp spatula in two movements, so that the incision reaches down to the bone, and this is done from the wide part of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see it, push the spatula under the artery and cover it above, cutting through as deeply as necessary for length two.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is opened, blood flows continually out of it upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the artery does not open to the touch, you must measure the space of three fingers and then make an incision up to the bone; what needs to be released from blood is six half-fingers, and maybe a little more or less depending on how much the patient can endure and according to the fullness of the artery; then observe the wound: if it remains above the bone without a seal, cauterize so that no abscess comes, then extract the wound and bind it, treating with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	Of migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine comes with acute catarrh due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temples, along with chronic headaches and similar issues, and all medicinal treatments are ineffective; we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extraction is as follows: The patient should shave their hair from the temples and pay attention to the artery that appears in the temple, for it can be easily seen by its pulse, especially if it is close to the surface except in some individuals who are very cold; if it is deep, then the patient should tighten their neck with some cloths, then rub the area with a rough cloth and warm water until the artery becomes clearly visible; then take the spatule which has this shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it upwards with pincers, and separate well the membranes that are beneath each part; and if the artery is delicate, turn it to the tip of the hook, then cut off that part according to the size of II fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut off, blood cannot flow through fully.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out the blood from the six parts down to three, and if the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread, so that gangrene does not come before the wound heals, and bleeding continues; then cut off the superfluity which is between the two ties at that very moment, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a knife down to the bone until the fingers are cut off; this is a dangerous operation, if the patient has no fever and is of warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cauterization is a help to dry out moisture; therefore, it is of great assistance for moisture-related issues.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries, one should fill the space with old cotton and place well-made bandages on top; and when you release them, ensure that they are treated with dry medicinal substances that promote flesh growth, and with bandages, until they are healed; and if there is an accidental cut from the artery while you work, then quickly perform a cauterization or use vitriol and extract it by hand to stop the bleeding; and if you do not have these things present, then put your finger on it until the blood is frozen, and pour cold water over the area until the bleeding stops, and ensure that it is tightly bound as necessary; and what is important and lighter in terms of artery extraction is that you cauterize the vein with this trenchant cautery in two parts, but let the incisions be well spaced to maintain its heat for longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too thin, they hold less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have a gap of about an inch between the two blades, and then when you have struck to enter the two places, place the burning iron upon it until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein into two parts; let them be separated between the two shoulders for they are not completely joined in this cauterization from end to end; and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	tears.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes flow down the veins that are on top of the skull, and no medicine cures it, and you see the patient's face turn red, and feel trembling on their forehead as if from a shiver; and their eyelids become thin and moist so that the hair of the eyelashes falls out, and the eyelashes are scalded by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», and is that you faices a rere au malaide qui has ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, then li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; and soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, and the others II as II costelz par desus les papieres, and te garde de l’incision des arteres that are as II costez par desus les papieres; and aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, and soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; and aies apparillie une piece d’esponge and mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, then boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is above the temple up to the second incision; remove all the skin that is between the two cuts down to the bone, then do likewise from the middle incision to the other second one, and then extract this spatula-like object.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you place into the first cut the instrument which is called a 'cultellair', and it is very sharp on one side, but not sharp on the other, and instead soft; and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the sharp side towards the flesh of the heart, and the soft side towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the middle cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And remove all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as long as the incision is continuous up until it appears near the heart; and then do likewise in the middle cut down to the other end; and then drain the blood evenly, and press the wound for any excess blood; then place into each cut a tent made of old cotton, and put on moist bandages soaked in wine and oil and egg-white, and ensure that hot abscesses do not form; and on the third day untie the binding, and apply plenty of warm water, then treat it with basilicon ointment together with rose oil, and other treatments used for wounds until healing is complete.
dou reume des eulz	Of eye rheum (or rheum of eyes)
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When someone has chronic catarrh and you see their eyes sunken and small, weakened vision, burnt-looking sclera; the hair falls out, there is pain in the head like a headache, and the patient sneezes; then know through these symptoms that this matter and catarrh come from many veins, and the remedy is as follows.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And so you instruct the patient to lift their forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead and another from ear-to-ear.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	Starting from the incision on the left temple to the right one, let it be deep enough to reach the bone; keep your hand away from nerves of the temples that are related to eating; and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then insert old cotton and linen bandages between the two lips of the wound; on top bind wet cloths soaked in wine and oil, but beware of hot abscesses; once it's removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat it with drying substances that promote healing.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In such a manner: take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of colophony to make an ointment; apply it on these wounds to promote flesh generation all over.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of cleaning the ears,
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of four things: either grains, or vermin, or mine stone such as iron; or seeds like nuts, beans, peas; or flowing matter like water and pus and similar substances.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When there is a stone or any other foreign object in the ear that does not fit into it nor grow inside the ear, then expose this ear to sunlight.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, then pour a few drops of violet oil or oil of sisam into it and proceed with its removal; make him sneeze from incense, and stop up his nose when sneezing occurs, and put pieces of flannel or wool around the ear; hold the ear upright.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Mout de fois vient fuer par cete cure; et s'elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it can be extracted with pincers, that is good; if not, perform an extraction with a fine-toothed small forceps; and if it cannot be removed this way, make a pipe of copper and insert the end into the ear canal with great force, then plug up what surrounds the pipe with soft wax so that no air can enter along with the instrument; pull very hard as it often comes out like this, as we have said. If it does not come out in such manner, take some bird lime, put some on a pointed instrument suitable for the purpose and cover with cotton wool; then press the glue onto stone or whatever you are using to push against and extract it.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it cannot be extracted using all the methods we have mentioned, then hasten to split open the ear rather than let an abscess form and cause spasms. The method of incision is that you first bleed the patient with the head in a lower position than the rest of their body; extract blood according to the measure of its virtue (i.e. as much as needed), then seat the patient between your hands, with their ear facing upwards, and make a small cut into the fatty area behind the ear. Let the incision be like that of a half-moon, so you can reach the stone; remove it according to your ability, suck it quickly towards your mouth; treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if this grain is there and it swells, perform an extraction; and if it cannot come out, apply a thin spatula according to this form.
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and apply an incision to that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this if you think the grain is moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many small incisions; then extract it with fine forceps and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is eased.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case of water that falls into the ear, the patient should first sneeze and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let them lie on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If she jumped for this, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, take many pebbles according to the length and thinness of your finger, and warm them slightly in the fire; put one of these into the patient's ear hole, and make him jump upon it with his feet on the other side, and strike from another stone onto the stone that is in the ear; do not stop doing this from pebble to pebble until all the liquid comes out, thus she will jump altogether; if you wish, take a reed, put one end of the joint into the ear, and apply fire to the other tip until most of the reed burns away; then remake it with other reeds until everything comes out, just as we have said about stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	For the extraction of the beast, if it is small in size like a flea or similar, treat it as we have mentioned before for such divisions; but if it has a large body that can be felt, proceed with an extraction using pincers; this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms embedded in the ears, when you treat it as we have mentioned before for such divisions and treatments with distillations, and if the treatment is not effective, then you must examine the ear in the sunlight: if any worms are visible, remove them with fine pincers; but if none appear, take note of this form.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And push the most subtle head into the ear according to the amount of suffering of the patient, then suck it firmly throughout the chain; do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey and come out, stop up the chain with cotton as I have said for stones; and if they do not leap forth as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the extraction of worms, and you will find them in the treatise on distillations; distil your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, this is how it forms just as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And whether it is made of silver or bronze, narrow below with small holes, and above covered for distillation; and to press within the distillation with a brass instrument well-made for this purpose, take a shaver and wrap its point with cotton; then pour in your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you wish into the chain which should be placed inside the ear; then push the shaver with all the cotton inside, and press your hand firmly until the oil is fully distilled through the ear; let the patient feel it within, and keep the distillation pot warm over the fire as one distills in the ear; take care that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the blockage of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without an opening in their ears; and the same occurs with men due to blockage caused by a wound or something born inside the ear, and this blockage sometimes becomes embedded deep within the ear, so it cannot be seen; and sometimes the blockage appears outside of the opening, and can be seen clearly.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which is embedded deep within, and cannot be seen, is quickly treatable in many cases, and for this visible case you must place the patient's ear into the sun; look inside: if you see an apparent opacity, operate with this spatula of wax.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And ensure it is smooth and sharp both at the front and back so that it does not wound the ear; if the opacity is due to flesh growing or a body within the ear, then take subtle pincers, and remove this gently until all of the flesh is gone.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the earwax is impacted in the ear, take a fine and light scraper and warm it slightly over fire before inserting it into the ear canal.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you detect earwax that causes the patient to complain of itching in the ear, gently perforate it and be mindful not to damage the nerves; then insert a tent into the ear canal according to the size of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this every day until the wound is healed or you observe swelling in the ear canal, then replace the tent with another one moistened in a cerate made of rose oil and beeswax to reduce any inflammation; keep treating it like this until it heals completely.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is an outflow of blood, immerse a sponge and cloths in cold water, place them on the ear, and employ other treatments that stop the bleeding as described in the section on distillations.
de la char des papieres	Of the flesh of parchment.
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This ancient remedy which comes from the flesh of parchment, when it is moist and dry, you should stretch it with tongs and pincers, and cut off its roots with a spatula; then place crushed vitriol on top.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if there is no discharge, then cauterize it with a subtle lenticular cautery, and the cauterizer should move after the incision; often repeat this, as something remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, these roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	Of the hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times in papers, there are eyes with things that seem like hail in their form and hardness, and for this reason, the illness is called "grandine," and it is a gathering of thick moisture within paper above and below; its work is such: take care if the grandine changes from one part to another, and it's an easy thing to know; thus do this wide, then peel away lightly each side, then grasp with pincers, and cut.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	if you can't cut it without piercing the paper a little bit, it will not harm the patient; and if the tear is large, assemble it with a stitch, and treat it until it's healed; and if it's small, don't force it at all, for ointments restore it quickly and generate flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the stone is descending into the ear towards the upper part, it turns the paper inside out, and grasp the stone with some pincers, and cut and press it from one side to another; and if the paper is removed by incision, this causes no harm; and when the stone is extracted, rinse the eye with salt water, and treat the area of what produces new flesh until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	from the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinac is a fat which is produced in the eyelids above, and this happens more to children than anyone else, and it greatly harms their eyes, and they have catarrh in the mornings, and cannot bear to look at the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes; and for this reason they lie on their faces afterwards, and sleep lying down, and their eyelids beneath their eyebrows are moistened by what swells up and appears as exinac which reveals itself in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the place with your two fingers and feel an exit of air between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	The method of the operation is as follows: have the patient lay their head in your lap; then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent-like structure shaped like a circle according to the amount of air that exits from each part, placing it on top; press with two fingers from one side to another so that the air is gathered within the circle; make an incision in the middle of the moisture using a sharp spatula, but do not make it wider than the wound you would create when opening a vein; cut through the skin carefully until you reach the air; and in many cases, this air will come out of the slit in the form of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Pull it out then with one piece of cloth wadded between your two fingers from the outside, and turn your hand to right and left so that it is spread; make sure you do not press into the gap, lest you reach the entire width-bone up to the eye, and injure it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the width-bone does not open at first in the gap, slightly enlarge this opening gently until it appears; then extract it as we have said, then moisten the wadded cloth with oil and water, and place on its spot, and restrain [it] with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And for such people who grind salt and put it on to corrupt that moisture which has remained.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it leads to an abscess becoming inflamed, treat it with soothing emollients until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	The hairs of papers.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow on paper-like growths that are not natural and are irritated, they harm the eyes and cause various diseases such as habitual tears and softening of the papers and albumin, leading to eye destruction; treatment involves four methods: cauterization with fire, application of medication according to its nature or as per the chapter on cauterization, incision and suturing, or canes, depending on what I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your lap, then turn the eyelid with your left hand; if it turns, that's good; if not, insert a needle with thread through it; and do so near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs grow next to these hairs, draw the thread over all the eyelid, and turn it on the razor; then cut in the part beneath the eyelid, under the hairs close by, with the spatula cutting from the large hinge down to the small one; then withdraw the thread, and put underneath the eyelid a little tent of cotton and cloth, then sign above the eyelid an anchor figure, like the leaf of myrtle, but it is necessary that this figure be according to the quantity you want to lift up the divided eyelid.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	Et si a teil qui a mestier c'on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; 
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cut out what is above the small muscles evenly according to the shape shown here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the forceps, and the object is not even, take a needle with thread and insert it into the skin; pass one thread near the large muscle, and the other thread near the small one; bring together the threads evenly between your two fingers; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin where you have attached it, as we have described; next, join the two lips of the wound by stitching them together; treat it until it is healed; and if an abscess appears in your incision, apply a soothing ointment to calm it down; sometimes the hair of the flesh turns up: then you must use what we said about incisions; but the suturing on both sides is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of the strings is as follows: you should turn over the paper and cut it inside according to what I said, then make two strings per side, and also two fine ties as long as the width of the spatula; and trim at both ends where you hold the threads; next, assemble one with another finely on top of the paper covering the eyelet, stretch out the two chords from their two respective parts; leave them like this for a few days until the skin that is tightened dies off, darkens and rots away by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes too long, cut it with a forceps, then treat until it is healed; and when the wound is sewn up, lift off the paper, they will no longer pull out hairs; this is how you make two strings according to this shape, and in this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, and you take a fine needle, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; then insert into it soft and fine silk thread; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, and tie the ends together neatly, and soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; so that the length of the threads is a palm's length; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, then arrange in the wound another fine silk thread briefly, et noe les chief dou fil; tie off the ends of the thread; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; and have the patient place their head on your chest; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, let it be near a window so that the work is well lit, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, for this is a delicate and fine procedure, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, then push the needle through the wound into the root of an adjacent hair, and la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; make it pierce the skin quickly so that you pull it over the natural hair; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, then extract the hair up to the wound, and boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; insert into the wound any of these hairs, whether there is 1 or 2 or 3 or more; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil. then withdraw your hand so that the hairs come out with all the threads in the wound along with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the arrow is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you will treat the arrow underneath along all the length that you have determined for it, until the arrow comes out of the orifice above and you see it by sight; then you will extract the arrow and thread, and close the eye leaving it closed for 2 days to 3, so the hair dries in its place and flesh grows over it; if the hairs are small, you will take one long natural hair from a horse's mane or tail, and tie it with that which you leave, until it lengthens then remove it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the rotting of the eye.
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or rotting arises in the eye, there are two ways it happens: one natural and one unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And they occur suddenly due to a wound, or from a cut or a cauterization, and similar such things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of treatment is that you must split this bond, separate its lips, and insert linen tents within it, binding it until it is healed; and one should not use things which dry out or constrict in treating it.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do not, the illness returns worse than before; but use softening substances such as fenugreek; and cook water or other liquids with flax seeds, and ointments of melted diakion in any oils, and wrap a tent around it, treating it thusly.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the secret of your treatment is to take care that it does not heal according to its former shape; and these procedures we have described are only remedies against this illness, so it may not return in its prior form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of flesh that comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease, which is sore and truly called "axacrati", is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from a wound and a crack and cauterization and similar things; and the way of working on it is thus: take a needle with which there are two threads, insert it into the flesh, make it pierce from left to right tear duct so that the thread comes out at both eyes; then stretch the skin over all the needle, and cut it with a spatula one finger wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper comes back as it should, that is good; if not, take a razor and place it in the crack, turn over the paper, and make two cuts along its side inside the paper; let both eyes of these two incisions be at the corners of the incision you have made, and make angles so that when they are put together, the figure will resemble the shape of a letter called "Greek"; then remove this flesh according to how much it exceeds below what follows the paper, then join the two divided parts, and stitch them with a thread of wool; then treat it as we have said about softening medicines and bandages until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the illness comes from a crack or a stitch or cauterization, you must make an incision filled with paper under the hairs of the genitals, and according to what was said before; then separate between the two lips of the vulva as I have explained earlier in this document; and one should perform the operation according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in its shape, and wise master physicians will use all their power to devise a machine that would return the figure to its natural form; and the patient themselves, depending on what kind of treatment and instruments they need in various situations.
dou soudement de la papiere	Immediately after the paper.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this joining occurs in men with such a manner that the paper above is sealed shut using the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must insert the tip of a razor underneath the paper, and lift it upwards; extend it to the pincers so that you cut off whatever has clotted at the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too blunt, such that the patient does not suffer from the spatula being too sharp and hurting their eye; make your incision gently so that the paper returns to its natural shape; seal all of this assembly, and sometimes they put salt water in the eye, and then wash it with clean water and collarbone juice; place a linen cloth between the paper and the eye, and apply wool soaked in egg white over the eye; after three days remove the collarbone treatment and other clotting substances until everything has healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	From the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the nail is of two kinds: it is nervous and similar to hard skin, and another which is not nervous, but resembles white frozen moisture, such that when one touches it with iron and tries to take it off with pincers, they cannot; both kinds begin towards the large tear duct, and grow bit by bit until it covers all vision, light, and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is such that the patient puts their head in your lap, then opens their eyes; lift the eyelid with your hand, then take the nail and coil it with pincers made from small leather, and stretch it upwards; then take a needle, and attach a horsehair, or cow hair, or bull hair, to strong thread; double the tip of the needle slightly and insert it into the nail, piercing through with the entire needle, and tie the nail with a thread and stretch it upwards, then scrape off all the hairs on the side of the nail that touches the eyelid and the socket right up to the head, then cut away the remainder at the root of the tear duct with an extremely sharp spatula and small forceps, leaving the natural flesh around the tear duct intact so that through the incision, the body of tears does not become accustomed; sometimes the nail is stretched only by the hook and thread, as we have said; then you scrape it off completely using a very soft spatula which takes the following form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And ensure that the spatule does not touch and break the fleshy membrane, and that the plumule is not pierced; after the incision, place in the eye a pinch of crushed silk, and some lead oxide collar, leaving it there until the next day; then treat it with what is required until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, and the pincers cannot enter it, this similar appearance of a nail is often treated by medicines; and they grow as I have described in the division, and if you see them being cut, treat the patient's eye, and take a small pointed spatula shaped like this:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Then lift the nail gently and if you see it thinning without reduction, drip from your mouth into the eye some lead oxide collar and red mercury and crushed silk, then swab the eye until the next day; then repeat this work according to this same method until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as a warm abscess, then milk it and first treat the hot abscess until it heals, then resume the work as before until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of flesh near the eyelid harms the eye severely, suspend it with a hook and cut off a portion but not all, so that no body fluid comes out; then pour red colloidal solution made from litharge into the eye.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	Of the flesh that is born on the cornea
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	In some men's eyes red flesh is born and covers the cornea and presses on the iris and turns outward resembling pomegranate seeds; and this work requires that one immerses his head in their urine, then opens up the eyes, and pulls all of that flesh to hooks appropriate for it, and sustains it with force; then cut away the first flesh, continuing to scrape until its end using a razor, taking care not to wound the eye at any point during this work; and let the incision made by the spatula we mentioned previously when discussing nail incisions and small blades of which one removes wax be as shown in the diagram in this chapter; and once the incision is complete and all flesh removed, fill the eye with pounded silkworm cocoons or pour colloidal solution and similar corrosive medicines into it, and place over the eye cotton soaked in egg white so that hot abscesses are assuredly guarded against; and if anything remains, and you see warm blood welling up, should you doubt a hot abscess is present then set aside the eye for later treatment with things soothing to such an abscess until healed before returning to your work on it until also it is healed, thus doing so for however many pieces of flesh are stuck in the eye like this.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nevertheless, it is necessary that you ease the treatment of each weak eye by natural means; and for accidental injuries, through ironwork; and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this limb can bear such treatment.
des voines des eulz	The veins of the eyes.
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Below are the red veins that cover the eye, and they hinder its vision and weaken it every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary then that you first look at the eye to see where the redness is, and ensure there are no other diseases besides this; then bind it in such a way: instruct the patient to place their head upon your lap, then suspend those veins entirely according to your skill, and let these bindings be twice as subtle by this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And there are two ounces by degree in the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then you coil the veins with force and open them subtly, and wipe away the blood hour after another until you see those veins depart from the eye; and take care not to wound the eye with the points of spatulas, and perform this operation at midday in front of the sun, being very fervent in your work so as not to cut more than just those veins; and when you have done this, distill into the eye green and red collyrium to corrupt that which remains of the cataract.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you are unable to gather everything in that hour, make a plaster with eye-soothing substances over the eye and leave it for some days until the pain is eased and there is no hot abscess left, then begin again according to this method which has been described before until it is healed; and this is the form of the coiling:
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the eye fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The surgeon calls this fistula an "arissati": when you treat it with cauterization and burning medicines as I have previously mentioned, and it does not heal, there is a tumor inside that must be cut open above the abscess, where it needs to die, and remove all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then remove all the instrument of what has caused this; it is called an "aspre chief", and must be made of iron with one end sharp like a head, and be pointed like a file according to its present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	Place it on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that corruption has been removed; do this several times, then restore the place with drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	if the flesh is welded together and there's no new growth, and the body of the bowel is also welded together, remaining so for forty days without renewing or becoming abscessed again, and if no ill accidents befall, know that it is healed; but if not, then another remedy is to return the fistula to the navel opening according to this method: you must uncover the bone a second time with iron instruments and caustic medicines, and when it is uncovered take one wooden stick like this which has three angles at its end, and let that be tapered so that it fits just as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then place it over the bone at the edge of the wound, keeping your hand an inch away from the patient's eye, then turn the stick round and round until it pierces through to the other side of the bone and you feel a breeze coming out which the patient can sense by holding their hand over their navel; and you can restore the opening with dry medicines as I have taught you before, and when new flesh grows and hardens around the hole, then what comes out is matter from within; this is less harmful for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	Of the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eye opens fully without any disturbance to the nerve or diminution, you must bind the patient; then treat it, and place cups or leeches without injury to suck out [humours], then apply to the eye a plaster made of aconite, aloes, frankincense, and gum; then strain the eye and cover with plasters on bandages and cloths; and the way of the cloths is that you take soft enough cloths, and double each in four, and place one upon the other according to the quantity needed for the eye; then bind tightly above with a hard bandage, and repeat cups to suck without injury; then remove the cups and leave the eye bound day and night, and if the binding loosens, you must strain it greatly; then remove the binding after the day and night, and if you see the eye healing, it is good; if not, repeat the plaster, cloths, binding, and cups until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	From a tear of dry fabric
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When ruptures occur in dry fabric, it opens up and pushes out the layers like resin grains, appearing dreadful to see; if you witness this, then your work is such that you insert a needle into the root of the affected area from below until reaching above, then insert another needle where there is a double thread from the wound edge; pierce through and leave the first needle according to its position; cut the location of the double thread and tie part of the fabric around it, tightening well, then extract the needle and place moist wool mixed with egg on the eye; let it stay until the threads contract along with the fabric, then treat the eye with comforting substances until the wound is healed; sometimes the wound can be contained by the fabric on each side forming a circle of cloth until it heals.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes appear greatly affected, pierce them with a subtle spatule that comes out through the eye completely, removing the white moisture and lowering the eyes, then enter again immediately; afterward extract it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the eye's socket
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease, called "alcunnati", is not caused by the bowels but rather by an assembly in the eye similar to descending bile, though it is not bile; and the manner of its appearance and treatment should have the patient sitting upright on a prepared seat, then take their head between your two hands, moving it until you see the bowel coming above your eyes; then be careful, and do not let it descend or uncover the light, and let the patient see things as they usually would; if it does not descend beneath, know that it is bile, and if the descent of the bowel is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you seat the patient between your hands, then take the fine spatula and make an incision on the horny membrane one inch along the conjunctiva with the horny membrane and the cornea, until the bowels emerge; and when they do, instill warm water mixed with honey, or water boiled with fenugreek and honey into the eye, then treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	Eye discharges.
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen similar discharges in the wound, and what needs to be punctured; so we treat it according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	Have the patient sit cross-legged between your hands, away from the light to avoid the sun, and tie up their healthy eye tightly; then place the paper of the affected eye in your left hand if it is a left eye, or right hand if it is a right eye; then take into your right hand, if it is a left eye, an instrument called 'almagda', or your left hand if it is a right eye; then place the tip of the instrument near the cornea with the thickness of a hair in that white part of the eye to the end of the conjunctiva, then insert the instrument which is called 'almagda' carefully, and turn your hand so that it pierces into the white part of the eye, and feel that 'almagda' reaches the empty space; and make sure that the depth of the hole made by 'almagda' is equal to the length from the pupil to the end of the iris; and this is the cornea of the eye; you will see bone in that paper due to the clarity of the horny membrane, then place the instrument where the discharge is, and express it through a route after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the water descends now, the patient sees before them and an instrument in their eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After rest briefly, and if the water rises again through another route, insert the tube with the instrument, and once it is fully inserted and does not rise further, slowly remove the plug by turning your hand back and forth; then place a little seal gem in the water and leave it inside the eye.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then cover the eye with wet woollen swabs soaked in rose oil and egg white, binding it to the healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, place crushed cumin mixed with plenty of egg white on it.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the plug cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are such men who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called an "alberit", of which this is the shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And therefore pierce the conjunctiva alone, and do not go too deep, but make it a subtle place, then pour in some "almagda," as we have said; and upon completion of the work, give the patient an agreeable sleeping potion so that they sleep on their back in a dark room; be cautious against all movements, and eat light food, and do not move one's head to either side, and remain bound according to his disposition for three days; then release him from those bindings in that same dark house, and test his vision, make him see some things, and rebind him until the seventh day; this should not be done during or after the incision of cure now, but it is necessary to alleviate this, so that water can quickly drain.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	If an abscess becomes warm, remove the eye before the seventh day and treat it with a remedy for abscesses; once it is soothed, remove the bandage from your vision and apply some ointment on its face for one day, then return to this dark room.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	Then step out of the house quietly and repeat this process as needed; know that no disciple should intervene in such a case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	Also, someone came to us from Iran who said that in his country they make perforated alembics to suck out water, but I have never seen such a thing in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; perhaps this is something new.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the shapes of almagda, so that those who do not recognize them may see them; and they are properly made of bronze.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And the head is made of the same subtle material, while the back has three sharp corners.
de la char sor le neis	on top of the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes there are born or appear various joined limbs that seem like scorpions with too many feet; and some of these have colored claws, while others may have soft pale bodies.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In the case of these soft-bodied creatures that are not armed, you must place the patient between your hands facing the sun; open their nostrils and apply a certain ointment to those limbs, then stretch them out; next cut what you can with the thin sharp spatula until you know this body part is entirely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains anything that cannot be cut off, open it with all the subtle instruments lightly so nothing is left; and if you are overcome, or the abscess becomes hot, treat it as required; and if it is malignant abscesses, hasten to cauterize them until the blood is dried up and all the flesh is removed, then pour on vinegar and sharp wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the wine works and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healed; and if the moisture does not drain properly, know there is new flesh on the bone above which prevents the instruments from cutting: then you must put a piece of linen thread a little thick into the nose with a knot at one end, and have between each knot a space of about an inch or less; and let the patient take hold of the end of the thread in his nostril as far as he can, and pull it out by sniffing until it comes through the nostril into the mouth; and many times children do this at school, and it is easy for those who wish to do so; then hold one end which comes from the nostril with one hand, and the other end that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and know each knot as they are on the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this so that you know that the worms have corrupted this flesh, then draw out the son, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and reinsert it into the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all remaining flesh; and then insert a plank of lead into the nostril for some days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to cleanse the head, for which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it can be made of silver or copper, resembling an open lamp, like a tube and its handle; and if you wish, make a closed tube, and let the instrument be full for cleansing the head; and have one hand holding onto the head to hold it steady when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	From the flesh above the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Often a disease arises on the head of the nose called "telul", and it grows and becomes large until it is an ugly sight; therefore you must cut it out at its beginning, and remove it entirely, then apply a cautery or burning medicine to the place; if one waits too long to cut it when it is large, beware if it is hard, of black colour, with poor feeling: do not touch it with iron for it is an established abscess, because when you cut it once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is soft to the touch, not of black colour, and you see that you can remove it all, then drain the patient and cut it without fear, and treat the place with drying and constricting substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when the treatment of continuing growth comes to one of these cartilaginous works, it benefits little, except in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	You must therefore, when this occurs in any man, look to see if the wound is fresh and full of blood; then join the two lips together with a suture, and treat it until it heals; and if the lips are already torn apart on one side or the other, you must scrape away all the parts of their heart until they bleed, then bring the two lips together with a suture, hold them in place, and sprinkle over them dragon's blood powder and powdered incense; put on top of the powders a piece of strong emplastron or other soldering emplastron, and leave it until it sticks by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way of suturing is such that you bring together the edges: either with needles, as we have said for stitching the abdomen; or with thread, as I made known to you.
des apostemes des levres	Ulcers of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Skilled surgeons find within the lips a hard abscess, similar to wheat grains, smaller and larger; then it is necessary that you turn back the lips, cut open each nodule, grasp it with pincers, and cut it into pieces in every part; afterwards fill the place after incision with ground vitriol until the blood is dried up; and then leave it alone, treating the area with dry things until it heals.
de la char des gencives	On the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; 
des sordens	Of abscesses
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	None are ever joined to the head of the teeth within the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and green as the decay reaches the gum, and they stink; so you must seat the patient with their head in your lap, and shave off all the scabs until nothing remains; do the same for the blackness and greenness, yellowness, and other faults so that they are clean; if you remove what is there due to the first cause it will be good; otherwise start again on the second day and third until you have removed everything; know that teeth need various forms of instrument to scrape, according as work demonstrates, for the scraper used outside the teeth has a different shape from those which are used between them; all these shapes should be at hand.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you delay in extracting it as much as you can, because one must not do this; for it is a very delicate substance until such time as one has no excuse to remove it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is forced to extract it, you must be certain of which tooth is causing pain.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the pain leaves the patient, and they think it is in a healthy tooth, so they extract the good one; however, the pain remains because of this, as the bad tooth still remains, for we have already seen this with other patients; and when you are certain which tooth is causing pain, you must scrape around the tooth with a strong spatula to protect the gums on all sides; then move your fingers or delicate pliers into its first hole and hole, until it is well loosened, then firmly close the pliers; and let the patient's head be in your lap between your knees, hold it steady so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it cannot be done, take one of these instruments and gently insert it on each side, moving it just like you did previously.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is perforated and worn down, you must fill it with small pieces of cloth where the hole is; then gently grasp it with pincers, taking care not to break it while extracting it; one must work very carefully around the gum in order to remove the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	Be careful not to break it and leave a piece behind, as the remaining root can cause even greater pain for the patient later on.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	Beware of not doing what the ignorant surgeons do, who in their haste and boldness sometimes break the jawbone, and fail to manage what we have described; but instead bring about serious diseases due to the roots remaining or the jaw being broken, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is removed, wash the place with wine or oil and silk; if there is bleeding, which often occurs, fill the place with powdered vitriol; and if this does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, with which one pulls out teeth first, should have long points and thick handles, so that they do not bend when you extract the tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should have thick bodies so that they do not bend when pulling, and be well-made iron, and toothed in order to hold firmly.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains after pulling, it is necessary that you place moist cotton soaked in butter over the spot for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the spot softens, you can insert the tongs which are called "algefri", making the head look like a stork's beak; and let them be made inside like a file, and this is their form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pincers, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root, and place the instrument known as 'althali', that is to say, a probe, of which this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	It should be thick and strong so as not to break, and if the root comes out with it, that is good; but if not, you must assist with all of the instruments, which are shown hereafter in their respective forms.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one needs assistance with this instrument that has two prongs, of which this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other iron instruments that are used in the region of the teeth, as well as this instrument resembling large pincers, of which this is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	Et soit cist estrumens fors qu'il ne puisse brisier, 
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And [the head] should be thick and hold well to keep the bone in place, so it does not escape but can be held and removed; then restore its position with appropriate medicine, and if there is any decay in the bone, and it is small, take it away with all these instruments.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not according to their natural form and they are ugly, especially in virgin women, then you must know if the tooth is newly born after another one, and it is not in its right place, nor can be filed or smoothed; therefore, extract it; and if it has air with the other teeth, take this instrument described here, which resembles a small beak, and let it be made of iron, sharp at the top.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And strike it often with a hammer while in open air for the hardness of the tooth, and so you do not move others, and if it is apparent that one can file [the tooth], then smoothen it with such a file as shown here:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is like the file of which needles are made; and with a file one wears down teeth point by point over many days slightly, so that they do not move until they fall out; then completely at the end for any razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and wounds the tongue, it is necessary to file its harshness until it is even, so that it does not wound the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when teeth loosen
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When front teeth loosen due to impact or falling and the patient cannot chew without them dropping out, and you have treated them with constricting medicines, which is ineffective; then they must be restrained by a gold wire, for silver wires turn green and decay but gold never changes; and let the wire be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the space between the teeth; and if you wish to straighten the teeth, take the wire and pass it doubled between two healthy teeth, then place the loose tooth or teeth between them until you arrive safely at a sound tooth on the other side; then repeat the covering until reaching the part where you began, and gently extract your hand carefully so that there is no movement; and make the tie at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cut the shoulder's head with a thread using pliers, and assemble them, and reattach it between the healthy teeth, putting it in place so that it does not injure the tongue; then leave it tight as much as it can stay like this, and if it loosens or the thread breaks, tighten it with another thread; thus it will remain and serve for its entire time, and here is the model of teeth and the image of the alignment of two healthy teeth and two displaced ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, one puts it back in its place, fresh for fresh, as we have said; and do not let anyone who is not wise and patient intervene, and sometimes a tooth model made of cow bone is used, placing it where there is a lack, and they are tightened like we've mentioned before, remaining thus serving for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cut the tongue's tie
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	For this kind of tongue-tie is natural and present from birth, or it may result from an injury that has healed; the procedure for such a condition requires you to open the mouth of the patient with their head in your lap, then lift the tongue and cut the nerve tie, ensuring the tongue is released from its enclosure. If there is any scar tissue or swelling due to sudden injury, insert a hook and cut across this bond broadly. Be careful not to cut too deeply through the incision for fear of damaging the artery beneath; once complete, rinse with rosewater and oil, or cold water only, then place a linen tent under the tongue as protection from the wound. The patient should keep their mouth open each night so that the wounds do not heal over quickly.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bleeding occurs, apply crushed vitriol to the spot; and should the blood beat strongly, cauterize it with the lenticular cautery, which is good for this; then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	if you see it change color to white or black or become hard, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a cancerous ulcer; and if it begins to turn pale and moist, cut away the edges with an uncine, and open it with a fine spatule, and remove it from both sides; and if the blood beats strongly towards your work, apply crushed vitriol until it subsides, then return to your work until everything is treated; then lift the wound with lint and silk, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	From abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes boils appear inside the throat called 'godath', properly known as the two tonsils, and when you treat them, as we have said in our classification, and they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard abscess with little sensation and false colour, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is swollen, do not touch it with iron, also due to the loss of blood; but leave it until it ripens, and then you will remove it, or it will rupture on its own; and if it is white in colour, soft, and the root is subtle, prepare your instrument for cutting, but first ensure the abscess has cooled and is calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, 
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	When you press the tongue with all these instruments, and you see the abscess, take the hook and insert it into the almond, then pull upward as hard as you can; draw out anything from the cloth along with it, then cut around the instrument which looks like a forceps; however, the tip is curved, and one part meets another, they are very sharp, and made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this instrument available, use the pincers which look like it:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And they are sharp on one side and blunt on the other; when you have cut into one of the almonds, do so with the other in the same manner, then after incising gargle the patient's throat with warm water mixed with salt, and with water and vinegar if there is bleeding; use only water to gargle if there is no bleeding but a discharge of blood. Use peels from pomegranates boiled in water, or leaves of myrtle tree, and similar things until all bleeding has stopped; then treat until it heals; sometimes other abscesses form besides the two almonds, so cut these as you would the two almonds equally.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that had formed inside her throat; it was small, but almost completely blocked her airway so that she could not breathe through it, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if left like this for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	The abscess had risen so high that two tubes had been inserted through the nostrils to help her breathe.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I therefore hastened to act and inserted a tube into one nostril, then pushed it upwards, and a large piece of bowels came out with it; then I repeated the process in the other nostril, opening her mouth and pressing on her tongue; after that, I inserted the tube into the abscess and cut away a part of it, only a little blood came out; thus the airway was cleared and the woman could now drink water and later wine, and I did not stop cutting away at this abscess for a long time; but then it grew back again, filling up the space that I had emptied until it became very large; so I swallowed it and cauterized it inside her throat: thus it stopped growing; and I left those parts, trusting God to take care of her from there on.
de l’uve	Of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the grape descends [into the mouth] and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is below thick and round, it is called a "grape".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cleaned as we have said in the division, and the cleaning does not benefit [the patient], and you see that the surrounding abscesses are relieved, and it is subtle, then you must cut it; and that which is round gathered together and not long; and it is bloody or false coloured or black, then you must avoid incising it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is necessary, therefore, when you see it according to the manner I have described, regarding its whiteness and length, that you seat the patient in front of the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument which we have previously mentioned; then insert the lancet into the grape, and draw it out, and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned for the incision of the testicles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must not cut away any flesh beyond what is superfluous and outside the natural limit; for if you remove more, it will harm the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said about the incision of the two almonds (tonsils), and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient is afraid of cutting, then you must employ an engine for cauterization to alleviate their fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The manner of the cautery is quicksilver (mercury).
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	The patient should place their head in your lap and then press their tongue to the instrument we mentioned in the chapter on cautery. Confine it with hot quicksilver, neither too thick nor too thin, using this tool whose shape is thus:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; 
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this way, take calmly and assemble hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and mugwort and similar herbs, and put them all together or some of them into one pot, add vinegar, and boil; and let the pot be well sealed with strong clay, and inside the pot have a perforated instrument like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it [the perforated instrument] should be made of silver or copper, and one end of the instrument is placed in the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises up to their throat until the throat tissue dies; afterwards, repeat this often, until the tissue dries out, and make sure you do not perform this procedure at the beginning of the appearance of a hot abscess, for many complications can arise; nor should it be done except when the hot abscess is declining.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put a piece of egg shell inside the patient's mouth so their mouth does not become too hot; for the egg shell does not allow vapors to harm the mouth, and it is a good treatment along with healing.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times an object gets stuck in the throat - a fish bone or something else; therefore, you must extract what is visible and press the tongue with your tool to see the object move. For what cannot be seen and remains lodged in the throat, make the patient vomit before food is digested so that perhaps the object comes up by vomiting; or let them swallow a piece of sponge, or a bit of navel, or a lettuce root, or a dry bread crumb; tie a thread to the sponge then let it be swallowed. When it reaches its place, it will swell and then pull out with forceps. If not successful using these methods take this tool shaped as follows:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instruments be bent towards the head so that they can more easily enter the throat, and keep the head raised upwards; and make sure you do not touch the epiglottis, otherwise it will swell up, and do not push against the bone with force; and it is better if the patient pushes the instrument in themselves, as they are aware of where things are located inside them; thus either let him insert it downwards or pull it towards himself with all his might until he feels resistance.
de la sansue de la gorge	From the blood of the throat.
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Never should blood be used as medicine, as I said in the division regarding medical treatment; and if this does not bring benefit, then look into the patient's throat towards the sun, while pressing their tongue with the instrument that I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the leech, draw it out with a small hook or delicate forceps suited to this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, take a tuft of hair and push it into the patient's throat, then insert the other end of the hair into a hot iron, doing this frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is afflicted with water-drinking every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full glass of cold water and open the patient's mouth, pouring it in without swallowing, moving their hand often; as soon as the leech senses the water, it will fall off.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not fall as we have said, then suffumigate the patient with asafoetida, using an instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this several times, for it will fall without harming them.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	Et the manner of the fumigation is that you take a pot with visible coals, and cover it with a perforated lid in the middle, and place the instrument's head into this opening; then add your fumigant, and have the patient put the end of the pipe into their mouth, closing their mouth so no smoke escapes but reaches down to the lungs; and now the mucus will come out, and if it does not, repeat the fumigation several times; let the sick person suffer thirst, eating salty things only, drinking no water; then the phlegm shall be expelled by this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument with which one treats phlegm, when it can be seen, is like bent tongs to insert into the throat; and it has a resemblance to a bird's beak, and has the roughness of a file, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot let go; and here is its form: [Insert diagram or image as appropriate]
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters of abscesses.
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are many types of abscesses, according to what is remembered and written about in this book, and they vary in their perforation and size; and there are two main kinds, one based on their appearance itself, and the other depending on the moisture it holds.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second kind is determined by where they appear in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and abscesses in fleshy places differ from those that appear in joints, and each requires its own specific treatment.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And one should not incise an abscess unless the boil is fully ripe according to its development; and for those that require incision when they are hard, but do not ripen fully, as with abscesses near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses appear near joints, and it is left untreated with the surrounding flesh being rotten, perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which causes contractions in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	When the abscess is near the main limb, and if you delay perforating it until it dies, it will harm the principal member; when it's near the foundation, pierce it before it dies; do not pierce an abscess formed without complete digestion, except for one near the foundation, which can rot thoroughly, elongate inside, become a fistula, and won't heal quickly.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	You must know the opening of the abscess's perforation that is dead according to its development, which happens when pain eases, fever lessens, soreness and redness diminish, swelling subsides, and other signs; ensure the incision sits under the lowest part of the abscess, where it moves; make the perforation as long as the body part, and if the abscess is on hands or feet, joints, nerves, or arteries, make incisions in all equal places without folds.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those who bend, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in fleshy tissue, it is better that you let the perforation remain until it is confirmed as digested fully, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you puncture it before that, the body of the abscess would be elongated and filled with much filth, and by chance the lips and depth of its cavity may have hardened.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And for any abscess that is punctured according to the width of its body, let it be treated according to the needs of the affected limb.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you must apply small incisions for small abscesses, and large incisions for large abscesses, making multiple slits according to the size of the abscess, and if there are such abscesses that require removal of their core, and excision; when it becomes like linen cloth, and is softened, one should treat them as boils: And if there are some which split into three angles, and others like those incised like a myrtle leaf, like abscesses from carbuncles; and there are those where we make round cuts, other kinds of incision and excision.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the spirits jump sometimes with the discharge of bile, which may cause the patient's death, and you will not perceive it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Remove this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, wipe the wound dry, and check if the abscess wound is small; and if it's a full-blown sore, apply strips of linen or old cotton; and for large abscesses with many perforations, place a strip in each hole so that they touch one another; and if you've peeled back part of the skin over the abscess, filling it up with dry cotton wool or pieces of old linen cloth without moisture, bind it up until the third day; then remove it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs during your procedure, bring cold and light water, wet some cloths, and place them over the bleeding site repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the bleeding persists, apply warm compresses and healing ointment, and use the powders I mentioned in various places throughout this book. If it is winter and the skin or abscess is very sensitive, you should put on tents and cloths moistened with warm wine and oil; but if it is summertime and the flesh is fleshy, use cloths dampened with water and oil, or cold wine and oil, for up to three days, as we have said; then loosen the abscess, wipe it clean, and treat it as necessary until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know this universally in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how one must proceed with treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where the head of the skull comes small abscesses arise, and they are like veils, just as the yolk of an egg, and there is much that resembles them.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and soft where there is moisture like pulses; and there are some which are hard and stony to cut into, and there is no doubt if the artery does not act contrary (to this).
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of cutting into it is such that you test every instrument which is called an 'entromissoire', from whence its form comes after, what thing it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if moisture is present, they do it above the long one.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is drained, carefully scrape away anything leaving behind the skin containing this moisture, for it returns if nothing is left there; then apply Egyptian ointment with cotton, if present; if not, use water and salt, place it on the wound, and leave it until the next day; those remaining from the night will be driven out.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then repeat the cotton application as before on the second day, and the third, until you know well that nothing remains from the night; then treat the wound with ointment suitable for healing, until it is completely healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess contains fatty material, then cut it open in this manner, from the long side; and remove pus, and scrape away tissue from all sides, and put all your effort into milking out the contents where it lies; and if the artery opposes you, then do what I told you previously.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also of the abscess if it is fistulous, and of cutting and cleaning as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the incision on the fistulous abscess and the moist area is lighter, for they have little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if in some of these abscesses or heads where there is no moisture, and like the abscess I cut from the head of an old woman; I found the abscess just like a hard stone, rough and white, and it could not be broken; and if one had struck any of them, they would have also made a wound as with a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming to the head, like those that come to children's heads and at the roots of ears, the opening should always be in the lowest place, so the pus can flow out; and treat them as required.
des scrophules	The lumps of swelling
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Often these abscesses occur on the neck and beneath the armpits, in the groin, sometimes they appear elsewhere on the body, and are numerous, tangled together with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each swelling is properly within its own boundary, like the knot and abscess of the head, as we have said; and there are many similar types of these swellings.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are those that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones which do not obey healthy practices.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In those which you see of good disposition to touch, and are similar in color to the body, and move from each part without being close to the nerves of the neck nor the artery or tube, and is not deep; you must cut it from above, and peel off its skin on all sides, and extend the two lips of the heart with tweezers if necessary, as we have said for abscesses of the head; then withdraw slowly, being sure that you do not cut any nerve nor vein, and be careful not to use a sharp or pointed tool lest your hand slip, and do not go too deep so as to avoid cutting what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work, then apply crushed vitriol or some powders that staunch blood into the wound, and bind the wound; leave it until the abscess is pacified, and the wound softens, and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	Once the blood is staunched, return to your work until you complete it; then check with your right index finger if there are any small scrofulae remaining, cut them and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large wound in the root of the scrofula, you should not cut this scrofula at its root but bind it with a strong double thread and let it fall by itself without harm; then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut out the entire scrofula, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound and suture them now, since there is no excess due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	you must proceed to cut the root of it, extract any pus, and suture as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For scrofulas with excess flesh, puncture where it seems dead and remove this as described above, then apply dressings with ointment and similar things so that they draw out the corruption; and when the wound is clean, treat it with healing ointments until it heals.
de squinance	For scabies.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancient ones spoke of the throat surgery; but I never saw one performed in our land, and this is the record of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	Those who have difficulty should ensure that the slit in the throat, known as the epiglottis, is clear; and one must not provide aid for them, because all the veins and passages of the patient are affected by those with an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the passage of the airway, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid the danger that comes from suffocation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we wish to slit the epiglottis, we must make an incision beneath three circles or four in a small crosswise slit between two circles or by the quantity of the upper slit, not into the cartilage; and these are suitable for the sectioning of the epiglottis as there is no flesh here, and the vessels are long enough.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, he must extend the skin of the throat to the entire neck, then split the heart until it reaches the windpipe; remove the blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cut the syphon, as we have said; it is proven by the section of the windpipe that [the heart] should be there where it is broken, and by the defect of the voice; leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Once the time has passed that we fear strangulation, join the two lips of the heart's wound, and sew them together without the cartilage; then administer medicine that grows flesh until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says that this should not be done until the throat is completely blocked and the patient is judged to be dying, with no breath left.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then cut the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, thus keeping him safe from death; and for this reason, the ancients instructed to leave the wound open until the poison of the disease has passed, and it passes in three or four days. Then they ordered the wound to be sewn and treated, so that it was cured; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young lady took one knife and stuck it into her throat, cutting part of the windpipe; I was called to treat her, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found blood issuing from it, knowing well that she had not cut her vein or damaged her lungs, and air was escaping through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried and sewed up the wound, treating it until it was healed; there only remained for the young lady to recover her voice, after which she would return to normal, I say this so that in tailoring the epiglottis one need not be afraid.
de la grosse gorge	From the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called a "hernia of the throat", and it is a large one with a yellow color, more common in women; and it happens in two ways: natural, or accidental; wherein there is no engyn.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental type happens in two ways similar to what we call 'fat' and abscess caused by arterial damage; where there is fear, it should not be opened with fire unless if small, first test and investigate thoroughly: whether you find it as our fat without veins, then cut like a nail, pulling out its root completely if present, acting quickly, treating as necessary until fully healed.
des nous	Des nous
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	You must, when you come to treat the eye, first test and examine all the instrument called an 'introducer', according to its form as it will appear in the following chapter.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method of examining abscesses in newborns is that you take the moistest place you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers back and forth until you know the instrument has pierced the core, then do so according to the size of the abscess; then remove the introducer, taking care not to lose it.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If running moisture is short and whatever its colour, do to it as I have said for other abscesses; and if after the introducer no moisture comes out, know that it is greasy, so make a cross incision and take it with pincers, flaying it lightly on either side and preserve the coat where it lies so you draw it healthy with the eye; and if you cannot draw it whole and healthy, then do so by pieces until nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if anything remains, the wound will return many times; and if even a little stays put and blood flows out of it, fill up the wound with some sharp corrosive powders, secure it tight, apply warm dressings to suppress abscesses, treat it with other remedies until it heals entirely; but should the wound be large, cut open both lips of the wound, then heal them as flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the fresh wound is contrary to you or otherwise prevents haste then apply crushed vitriol, and leave it there for two or three days until the wound suppurates and stops the blood's boiling; return again to remove whatever remains of the nightshade.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Observe here the shapes of instruments used in incisions and they are three kinds: large, medium and small; also four called "albaret" and one called a "beeb", these too come in three sizes: large, medium and small to encircle abscesses or fistula; there are also needles for cutting sutures made from brass, iron or silver, the yellow ones being preferable with black lead preferred for encisting fistulas; again they come in three sizes according to the width of the holes.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of uncines are very similar, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and there are uncines with two curves in three different ways; and there are uncines with three curves, also in three different ways; and there are uncines with two curves, and uncines with a single curve only, again in three different ways; and all of these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these are made sharp, and there are some that only cut on one side, which helps to avoid damaging nerves or veins when excising; and of these introducers, there are several types of dilators, so the patient does not feel it during the opening of abscesses; and they come in three different sizes: large, small, and medium, as you can see; and one only uses them on fleshy parts such as legs, arms, breasts, or similar areas; and sometimes a smaller instrument is made, resembling scalpels, according to this form, which helps stop bleeding.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is placed back into position to heal by closing the veins and arteries, and sometimes this follows this great shape:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, making them appear like female breasts; they remain ugly and swollen, and for those who wish to cure it, one must follow this shape from point b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape the fat and fill the wound with meat-promoting medicine, then join the two lips of the wound together with a suture, and treat it until it is healed; if the breast hangs downwards and is softened due to its size as happens in women, make an incision through it into two parts by means of two similar cuts so that one part supports the other at the end of each, such that the larger line contains the smaller according to this shape, from line b up to g; then scrape away the skin which lies between the two lips and remove the fat, apply what we have said about sutures and powders, and whatever is necessary for the cure until it is healed; if it isn't healed or the incision has not been completed due either to the patient's unwillingness to rest or to blood loss, you must fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive ointment; leave it there until all the remaining flesh and fat have been consumed then treat it until it is completely healed.
des apostemes des asselles	From abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come beneath the armpits are like hard scrofula with sides, and there is moisture within them.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b. to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the matter within the abscess is emptied, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton and treat with ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is like a scrofula, cut it as we have said for cutting scrofulas, and if the wound yields matter, apply cautery as we have described before.
de la routure de l’artere	Of an artery rupture
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When an artery is ruptured, and the skin above it has sealed, many abscesses often form, and similarly, swelling occurs in the vein along with abscesses; you can identify this when it is due to the artery as the abscess runs longitudinally throughout; and when you feel it with your fingers, there is a constriction felt; and if it's due to the vein, it appears swollen outwardly; and it is foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it lies below the elbows, armpits, neck, and many other places, as it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, one must avoid iron treatment, and also for the head wound, it must be avoided, especially in cases of arterial swelling that penetrates through the skin; then make an incision with a lancet, carefully separating the artery from its surrounding tissues until it is exposed; next, insert a needle beneath it, piercing it all the way to the other side, and tie off the artery with double thread at two points as I've shown you for the temple arteries; then puncture the place between the two ties with an introducer until blood flows out of it, and release the abscess; then provide treatment that involves gentle stretching until the threads fall away; cure the wound by applying appropriate ointments until it is healed; if the abscess results from incising a vein, one must grasp as much of the abscess and skin together as possible with their hand, insert a needle underneath where they hold it in their hand, pierce through it, and thread double thread there so that you draw them out on the other side; then bind up the abscess by tying threads between two places at either end, as I've explained to you; if you doubt whether the threads will pull through, insert another needle with a single thread beneath all of the abscess to the first incision point and tie these together in four places; next, open the abscess so that its excess material is released, cut away the redundant part of the heart and leave behind what's bound up; then apply a cloth moistened with wine and oil, provide treatment using tents and ointments until it has healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also abscesses occur in the artery and in the vein, abscesses arise on nerves when they are damaged or through excessive work, and similar cases.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And these occur more frequently on shoulders and fingers and in all places where there are joints, and it is a serious abscess, and its color resembles the color of the body, and it appears in various locations without pain; and when one presses firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not located within the flesh but beneath the heart; and it spreads in every direction, neither forward nor backward, nor below nor above, and an abscess on a joint should not be cut with an iron instrument: perhaps contraction would occur; and if it is on the head or forehead, apply balsam.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, hold it with forceps and cut it at its root; if it is large, suspend it with a hook, then peel and remove it, stitch up the wound, and treat it until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	large boils hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Sometimes they occur on the belly and nowhere else in the body, it is a disease called "fungus" due to its resemblance to fungi, with a subtle root and large head; there are small and very large ones; I saw a man who had two on his belly that looked more like mushrooms than anything else, with no difference between them, they were white, had fine roots, were light brown split open, and moisture was coming out.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them and found one weighing eighteen ounces, and the other six З., and for the operation of incising it is that you watch if the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is white and moist from a subtle root; so cut it with a broad spatule, and have cauterization by fire in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For when cutting it often leads to great loss of blood, and if the blood beats you, then hurry to cauterize; and if you see the patient scared and fearful of the incision with iron, then take a well-made thread of lead, and bind the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days; and then restrain it, do not cease from binding the thread of lead until you cut the artery, and each by itself without work; and if the roots are thick, be afraid to cut especially in the belly, but you may well cut half, then cauterize so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and take care not to cut the vein which is a pale color and poor sense of milk aspect.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess enhanced, and I will come to the treatment of cancer afterward.
quant li boude ist fuer	When it is swollen with pus.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the abscess arises from cauterizing wounds or cracks in boils, and it is on the belly with some swelling, just as happens in other sores, or from blood that comes out of veins or arteries according to what was mentioned before, or from gas; and if it is due to the rupture of a boil and the emission of pus, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, being a slight thing without pain, appearing with different discharges.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the discharge of the intestine, then it is more varied: when you press it with your fingers and it protrudes, and then returns back inwards; sometimes it appears to be constricted, growing greatly at the entrance of the bath and during hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a minor issue, and you can tell this by how easily it moves when pressed with your hand, as it offers no resistance; but if it is due to blood, then these signs will appear - large, hard abscesses that are fixed in one place according to their quantity; and if it is due to windiness, then it is soft to the touch, and you must consider whether this appearance is due to arterial or venous blood, or flatulence.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	You should leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is of the intestine or rectum, you should instruct the patient to hold their breath and lie flat on their back; then bleed them all around the belly; then have them lay frequently in your hands, then go around the place that you marked with a span's length; then stretch half of the abscess above the large inch; then bind it tightly with a strong thread or thick silk cord, so that the knot is below; then operate on the stretched part of the abscess that lies above the knot and insert your index finger, seeking out the intestine; if you find it caught by the knot, then untie it and push the intestine outside the abdomen; and if you find the rectum, grasp it with the inch, cutting away any excess; and if an artery or vein obstructs you, carefully go around it, then return to your task and take two needles, insert two lengths of strong thread through them, and insert the two needles into what you have previously pierced in a cross pattern; then drain the abscess by stretching it open over four points along the needles, and if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place alone until it rots, and cut away the dead flesh as it becomes soft and rotten; then treat the area according to your judgement, and close the abscess as we have said; then drain out any blood or moisture that you find, then treat the place with what is required, and seal the wound.
dou chancre	From cancer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have spoken about the appearances of cancer and how it should be treated with medicine, and how to avoid surgical treatment. We mention cancer arising in the marrow and the great caution needed for its cure; the ancients say that when cancer is located where it can be scraped away like cancers of the breast, thigh, and similar places, it must all be removed at the outset; but when they are large and ancient, you should not approach them because I have never been able to cure any such case nor has anyone else ever done so before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment, when it is located where it can be removed as we have said, involves purging the patient once with black bile; then making them bleed if there is manifest repletion, then prepare the patient to a good place for the operation; then remove your oncology or cancer, and shave off all hair, and take away from everywhere without leaving anything behind; let the blood run out completely, press the location well with your hand or something else, and if the discharge of blood opposes the incision made in an artery or vein, cauterize it so that bleeding stops; then treat them again until they are healed.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have said in the division about the similarities of dropsy, and how the accumulation of water is formed, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that can be achieved with medicines, and those cured by iron; so we will only write down [the latter]; one must not use iron for these two kinds: namely tympanites and ascites, because they are deadly things; therefore when you treat this dropsy called 'eclites' with medicine, and if the cure is not successful, then consider whether the patient is weak or suffering from another disease than dropsy, such as intestinal obstruction and similar conditions; do not use iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient is of strong constitution, and they only suffer from dropsy without any other illness, and that he is neither too young nor too old, then proceed thus: lift the patient straight up with your hands, and have assistants press his belly while directing the water to the lowest part under the navel, then take the spathula sharp like this:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And it should be divided into two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	A point, and yet it should not be so deep that it can reach the intestine when inserted, nor injure it; then look to see if the dropsy is connected towards the intestines: in this case you must make an incision above the navel three fingers directly below the waist; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, your incision should be on the left side of the navel three fingers; and if it's for miuce, it should be on the right, and the patient should not lie over the incision so that excess does not flow to this weak place; then pierce through all the skin with the instrument, insert [it] and lift your hand with a spatula between the skin and subcutaneous tissue as if you were skinning to the amount of one nail or around; then pierce the subcutaneous tissue until the spatula reaches an empty space, which is where water is located, pull it out, and place this instrument which has the following shape:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a fine silver cane, and made of light brass or iron, and on its lower part there is one small hole; and at the side in one place, three holes; and two on another side, and one more on the other; and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the form of the incision that the physicians perform:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top is the handle, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it now descends onto the instrument; empty half or a third part, because if you empty more than necessary at this time, perhaps the patient will die due to the release of their spirit from the body, or they become lost, or approach death; but empty according to his strength, and according to what the state of the patient's strength indicates, and their pulse; then draw out the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now for the heart which blocks the hole that I have mentioned, which you pierce in this manner; then reintroduce the instrument the next day if you see the patient suffering, and draw a small quantity of water; do this daily, and be careful not to leave even a little water inside.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient's condition, and you leave a lot of water inside them, then cure them with burial or hot sand, and through much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and prevent them from drinking; and treat them with drying medicines until they are healed, and cauterize their stomach and liver and spleen after extracting the water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Of the stopping of the penis.
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born without an opening in their penis, or with a small one, or it is not correctly placed.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	It should be pierced as soon as possible with a very thin spatula in this way:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then put the subtle hollow reed of lead in place and bind it there for three or four days; when he wants to urinate, remove the tube so that he can urinate without impediment; then replace the tube afterwards; perhaps this is not necessary as the urine which will come out does not allow him to be closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those with a small tube will be treated by the leaden reed, as we have said, so that it widens.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those whose tube is not in its place become swollen because no one is born with the urethra at the head of their penis; that's why they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis upward and are unable to ejaculate since sperm cannot reach the glans, which is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the operation is such that the patient often lies on their back; extend the head of the penis and the scrotum like the length of a feather, so that the opening faces upwards as it should; and beware of blood loss which occurs frequently, if this happens, stop the bleeding with whatever stops bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	Pustules on the penis.
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cist albathe frequently occurs on the penis and is an ugly appearing disease; there are malignant and non-malignant forms of this condition, so you must take a fine cautery tool to treat it, remove and clean all lesions, then apply wet cotton with Egyptian ointment; cure it using diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the abscess is malignant, of foul colour and discharging, you must apply a cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have incised it, and if the abscess is on a limb, with part of it beneath the skin and part outside, you must first remove the interior abscess; and when it is united, treat what remains outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it together, the limb of the affected area is not assured that it will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption occur in the affected limb and the penis; you must remove all that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster made from honey and flour with pomegranate bark and fig leaves, then cure it with other treatments until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if there is a loss of blood, apply the lunar cautery in this manner:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauterizations help with two conditions together: that is, the loss of blood and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, you must insert a lead pipe into the penis, and let the patient urinate through it; and when the skin at the tip of the penis peels off, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or due to injury or abscess, then you must remove the skin with an instrument until the ligaments are loosened, and the head of the penis is freed from all sides; and if this is a difficult matter to distinguish, then you must peel it with a spatula at the top part of the penis and its skin; then separate carefully between them, and apply a soft linen cloth dampened in cold water, so that it does not dry out again.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not like the detachment of continuity as other wounds are; nevertheless, when we perform this work by our own will and especially on children, it is necessary that we do our best and lightest work for their well-being.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not circumcise their children because it was not practiced in their law, and we only have this practice through our own experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I have seen most masters and surgeons performing circumcision around the glans penis, and forcefully with one knife; it was their choice because there are two layers of skin there, and sometimes they cut the upper layer leaving the lower one intact.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or la recovient coper, and the pain is doubled, and at the cleansing that comes from it isn't secure to point out of member; and in the cleaning of the nail perhaps escapes iron, and run work, and many times they arise thus that they don't need cleaning and I want it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the cleansing that is done by force with all the thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because when you press your hand, you cut equally in I all its tension; but let the thread be well narrow around the skin; and the way of the first work is that you make believe the child, if he understands, that you don't make him do anything more than tie the thread around the rod just so, and then you can make him sit in any way you want; then make him stand between your hands straight up, and hide the forces between your hands or below your feet so the child doesn't see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the rod and blow on the heart, and pull it upwards until the head of the rod is inside; then clean it well from the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the place with a single thread, then bind it below I peg to another binding; hold it by II fingers using the second bandage at the thumb and index finger, cut between the two bindings, lift up the heart quickly and pull out the head of the rod; then let blood come out drop by drop because this is the corruption; put powder on top and over the powder a piece of linen stuck with half an egg cooked tempered in rose water, mixed with good fresh red oil, and leave it there until the next day, and cure him with other cures until he is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of scissors for cleaning is as follows: the two blades should be inclined and sharp, and they should be as wide as the handle equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of cleaning is when the heart inside escapes through the incision; therefore, you must extend it to your nail, otherwise, the skin will form an abscess; and cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, then use pliers, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they exceed three days, and what is below the handle is swollen, leave it until the hot abscess subsides, and lightly peel it; cut it as much as you can, taking care of the part of the handle, this will not harm anything.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure therefore the location of things welding a wound with powder, as we have said in the treatise on powders, and if it scars beyond measure, and it rises above the skin, it will not harm; cure it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	for retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is caused by obstruction due to stones, or frozen blood, or a tumor, or birth defect, or similar issues, as we have mentioned in the classification; and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone blocking the bladder neck, then the patient must be bent over their knees; place their feet on their back, extend their belly from above the back, and restrain the patient's loins as much as possible; thereby compressing the bladder neck for the expression of the stone upwards, thus the urine is released; and if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must perform extraction with all the instrument which is called a 'syringe', this is its form: it is made of fine silver, light-weight like bird feathers; the barrel is one palm long and half wide, and it has a fine point.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, and bottle the chief dou fill deadens the syringe; and cope the superfluiteit of the lainne and the bottle jusc'au chief of the syringe, then oint the syringe with oil or butter and with yolk of egg, and let the patient sit on a seat, and anoint his bladder and virile member with moist oil and olive oil and tepid water; then insert the syringe gently into the virile member until it reaches the root of the virile member, then double the virile member towards its orifice; then push the syringe forward up to the bladder, and let the patient feel when his thing is empty; but this is not done according to this order except because he who goes in there has a twist; then stretch the string at all the woolen pocs and pocs, and urine follows the wool, then take it out, and make the urine flow; and resume the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and let the patient be relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	For bladder diseases.
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scalding or blood enters the bladder, and there is a gathering of pus, if you wish to introduce distilled water and medicine into it, then use an instrument called a "clepsydra," which has this form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed and has three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see. The tube should have such a diameter that it fits tightly around the verge without any addition so that moisture cannot be drawn in, but rather expelled when necessary. When you want to introduce your medicine into the bladder, place the end of the tube into the liquid, draw up the contents by pulling on the attached cord; this will cause liquids to flow through the tube and into the bladder, which the patient will feel as it happens. This is a description of the subtle enema instrument with which one can administer an enema to the bladder: here is its form.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	Et est d'argent ou d'archaut, and it is the head higher; and below at the chest where the shoulder joint falls; then take a sheep's bladder and put in the moisture with which you want to cleanse the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts firmly with a good double thread, and heat the pot with this moisture on the fire; then insert the head of the clyster into the penis, then press your hand over the bladder so that all the liquid passes, until the patient feels that this liquid has reached the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle out of it, and pierce it round about; then insert a strong thread through these holes, then join the circle as one joins a thimble, put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; do likewise with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the liquid reaches the bladder.
de la piere	From the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already mentioned in the division the types of stones and their extraction along with medicines; I have explained the difference between kidney stones and all the signs, and which stones require surgical removal; as well as those in the bladder and urethra; now I will explain it clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	The stone that is formed in the bladder occurs more frequently in children, and its sign is urine similar to water in subtlety; it produces sand, and the patient experiences frequent urination, and then becomes blocked; often this causes inflammation of the genitals; and there are many symptoms in children under four years old, while it is a serious condition for the elderly, and average for young adults between youth and old age; and treatment is easier for those with larger stones than for those with smaller ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the bile that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For sometimes it blocks while seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, make him stand and move backwards so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes comes out from above; then have him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands should be below his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely declined downwards; then seek for it and touch inside; if you feel the stone in this space, now hurry to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not fall out upon being touched at all, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if the patient is an adult; and insert it into his anus, seek for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, lead it to the neck of the bladder; then press upon it with your finger, and push it out where you wish to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the testicles upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin that is beneath the testicles in the area where the incision is made; then insert the spatula cutting instrument, which has this shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	Make an incision between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side; and let it be straight over the stone, and your fingers should be next to or near the anus, and make the incision wide on the outside, and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, but not too large; perhaps the pressure will require that the finger at the anus is removed so there is no obstruction; and know that there are stones with angles and edges: it is difficult to remove; and those which are below, resembling a pea, and round, with a slight opening.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; 
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, one must take care of it and make a bigger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either they die, or urine comes back through an opening that the flesh cannot heal; nonetheless, try to drain it, or break it up with forceps, until you extract it in pieces; and when you have finished your work, fill the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, bind it tight, and place a moist cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to ease the hot abscess; then lay the patient on their back, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you untie it, thoroughly wash the wound with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of saffron and basilicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses develop in the wound and there are blood clots in the bladder, causing urine retention which is known to occur in such a way that it comes out with urine: therefore, insert your finger into the wound, extract this blood, for if it remains, it will rupture the bladder and cause infection; then wash the wound with water, ash and salt, and treat it in all ways you know until it is healed; and ensure every time you treat him that you tie his two thighs together and apply medication to the site.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small and it is in the urethra, blocking the passage of urine which cannot come out; so heal him as I say, cut him many times, you are excused from cutting by this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven this thus.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take an iron rod forged in this shape, with three angled prongs like a pitchfork.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the shaft below the stone so that it cannot retreat into the bladder; next insert the rod gently up the shaft until you reach the stone; turn the rod in your hand within the stone back and forth, until you can pierce through to the other side. Thus will urine come quickly, then press your hand upon that which remains of the stone inside the shaft.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is quickly broken and passes with the urine, then the patient will be healed; if you cannot do this due to any obstruction, tie a thread below the stone and another above it, then make an incision in the shaft near the stone between these two lines, extract the rod, untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood from the wound; treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	Of the stone of women.
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Before a stone is formed in women, and if it happens once, the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that you cannot find a suitable woman who will expose herself to the doctors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third reason is that perhaps you cannot find an expert woman in this medical art; and the fourth reason is that the stone of a woman is usually deeper than that of a man, which requires a more profound incision, and there is great fear involved. If necessity arises for this, then you must take a wise midwife, and if you do not easily find one, seek a skilled and chaste female assistant; and present to her a well-behaved woman in the knowledge of women's health, or a woman who knows part of the art, and instruct her to carry out your examination for the stone; carefully check if the woman is a virgin: then insert your finger into her anus and search for the stone; if she finds it, force it underneath your finger, and instruct her to insert her finger inside the patient, and press your left hand firmly on her bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; 
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know these signs, you will understand the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood defeats you, quickly place crushed vitriol powder on it and hold for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your work, ensuring the stone is fully passed, and have the tools I mentioned for extracting stones from men ready to assist you in your task; and if the blood defeats you again, and it is the artery that is cut, apply the powder to the wound along with tent and bandage extracts, do not attempt this procedure again, leave the stone inside, otherwise the patient may die; treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has cooled and the wound is ready to be handled, return to your work, so that the stone may pass.
de hernie carnouse	A hernia of fleshy material
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Rattish water is nothing other than a collection of moisture or white puss, which is underneath the heart of calves and contained in eggshells; it is called "puss", and sometimes is found properly inside the egg itself, such that people believe this to be another egg entirely; rather, it's the calfskin between what we've described as white puss.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the formation of this rattish water comes from weakness in calves, and that matter is widespread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from striking calves and this moisture takes on many colours: it can be yellowish-brown, reddish, black or white puss, there are more as well; these signs will tell you what the matter is because if it's the white pus we've described then the abscess forms a round shape like an egg and doesn't break open the calves skin due to moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the wound itself, then the abscess comes out with a piece of egg white (pus), and for this reason it is thought to be another egg; but if the moisture is between the hide of calves and the white membrane (of an abscess), you can feel it well. Therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, try all kinds of intrusions before, as already explained above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what follows the intrusion, judge of that which is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with an iron instrument, the patient should be bled according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then place him on his back, on something slightly raised, and put a lot of cloth under him; then sit on his left side, and ask the assistant to sit on his right, extending the limb towards one of the two sides of the calf's heart. Then take the spatula, cut through the hide along its length until you reach the wrist, making your incision straight as you peel back the hide all the way down to the white membrane; carefully remove it according to your skill; then pierce this membrane full of water with a wide opening and extract all of the water, after which put in your hooks, stretching the membrane upwards. Do not touch the heart but only the membrane: cut it into pieces especially its thin side since if you do not separate them cleanly enough, water will return. And should egg white have been released during your operation, place it back where it came from once you've finished working on the membrane; then sew together the two sides of the hide with a stitch, treating it like other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, you must bind the suspending vessels, fearing blood loss; then cut all of the surrounding tissue, extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the water is gathered into two parts together, know that these are two roots; cut the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and place on the wound moist wool with rose oil; put over this another piece of wool moistened with wine and oil, and cover both orifices, putting doubled linen cloths above them, and bind all together with a bandage in this manner:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two pieces of linen, and fill them with wool charpie in this shape so that they are joined by stitching at the waist of the breeches; one of these place under the foundation up to the back, and the other at the arm part; and the other two above the angles, and all is joined together by the binding strap in this buckle manner; sometimes it happens that cauterization is used on this root instead of iron cutting; then you take a slender surgical knife as cautery, cut through the skin over the orifices, warming it so that the white substance containing the water is uncovered; then with this cautery shaped like this, pierce this white membrane at the corners and scrape out this delicate hot cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And strike it in all the ways you can, until everything is uprooted; be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; know that this work is safer; and take care of blood loss, and treat as if they were surgical operations; and if anything goes against you, whether an abscess gets hot or bleeding occurs or something else, then treat what opposes you, according to what was said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is afraid and does not want to undergo this procedure due to its horror, then you can induce perforation as I have told you; when you are certain of the water's presence through the signs we mentioned, have the patient sit on an elevated seat; make a puncture in the abscess below any muscle which covers it entirely, and insert the instrument lengthwise into the body; let the holes be wide so that all the fluid can flow out; then place cotton wool where you made the incision, bind it up, and leave it for the rest of the water to drain out, then treat until the wound is clean; if the white cloth does not allow the liquid to exit at the mouth of the wound, you must insert a quill or the instrument used to draw off water from dropsical patients (of which we have already given the shape); enlarge this hole in the wound and know that the fluid will return after six months or so, and when it is gathered as before, so will pass these days for the patient.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of abscesses of the jaw
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the treatment of this issue there is fear in many situations, which makes it seem better to leave it alone; and I will tell you about the work and similarities of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come to the body, especially in the jaw; and this is due to frequent cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is known to be caused by excess acidity and bile, which spreads to the jaw, or due to impact; and the colour of the abscess matches that of the body; and there is no pain, but it is a deep abscess; and perhaps some abscesses are painful, hard, and discoloured, and sometimes arise from an artery, or from swollen veins.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is caused by an arterial wound, it is recognized as a hot abscess due to its warm texture when you press it with your fingers; and you must not touch it at all.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	One who suffers from swelling of the vein is recognized by its appearance when touched with fingers, and one can easily perform surgery on this type of swelling as well as other types; it involves cutting out the heart of the tumor, then stretching the skin upwards, and removing the white part, thereby freeing the swollen area from all parts of the tumor.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the tumor is already hardened with its own skin, you must therefore remove the tumor and cut it out; and if it is aerated on the surface or inside vessels, then you must release all that tension and cut around it smoothly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is from behind, you must cut it all away and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Once your work is complete, cover the wound with wet wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	of carbuncles on the buttocks
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is a carbuncle wrapped in an envelope like the seed of a thistle, with a softening of the buttocks, and the patient turns very ill when he defecates; and the treatment for this illness is just as fearful as the one before, yet we will tell you how to treat it according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then tie the hanging strap of the testicles around your thumbs, grasping all vessels near the penis and holding them firmly; stretch it well; then cut across these vessels with a broad cutting spatula until they are uncovered, and skin each side as we have said in the extraction of arteries from the temples; insert a needle where there is double thread, tie it at the first point where the vein has been punctured, and retie it to the other end; then cut them straight across in the middle, according to the length of the body, and remove corrupted tissues; cure the wound like others that involve bowels so that no vessel prevents the blood supply from one testicle; because this way there is not risk of harm, but if all vessels are punctured, you must pull out both testes: in order for the urethra to lose its blood supply through the incision of the vessels, it dries up and cannot be cured.
de la routure dou syfac	From the rupture of the syfac
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The occurrence of this rupture is due to the section that opens into the syfac, or the extension on the belly in the region of the intestines, which causes the intestines to descend from this rupture towards one of the hips; and this rupture occurs either in the syfac itself or in its extension, arising from two types of excessive strain: percussion, jumping, sneezing, lifting heavy loads, and similar activities; when it is due to the extension of the syfac, there are signs that it develops slowly over a long period without suddenly occurring; the abscess becomes equalized towards the peritoneum because the syfac presses against the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	The signs are that when it is due to the section of the syfac, it causes sudden pain at first, and the abscess appears diverse under the skin close by; this is because of the exit of the intestine and its body outside the syfac.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines descend with the bowels, becoming entangled there, causing great pain to be endured by the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments with fear, it is necessary to withdraw from them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	The manner of the procedure is such that you instruct the patient to retract the intestines with their hand into the wound if they can reach it; then be mindful of its position on his neck between your hands, and lift their thighs; then stretch out the heart above, and cut all the skin from the lower abdomen along the length; then push inside the scissors of the abdomen as much as you need to open the wound, and make it such that the wind can escape through it; then peel off the white membrane underneath the skin of the testicles until the hard white membrane is exposed on all sides; then push your index finger into what covers the testes, between the white membrane which lies beneath the scrotal skin, and between the second membrane, and remove that which lies behind the testis, and between the second membrane; and with your right hand inside the abdomen of the testes, stretch out the white membrane upward to your left hand, and lift the testis along all its surface towards the abdomen; and command the assistant to stretch out the testis upwards, and untie that which is tied behind; and look for yourself if there are any intestines wound up in the hard white membrane, and if you find anything, push it down into the belly below; then take a needle with thread as thick as ten threads, and push it through the rear part of the membrane, after the scrotal skin, towards the abdomen, then cut the testicles which appear from the threads until there are four threads; then assemble one on top of another in the manner of a cross, and tie them together to the hard white membrane underneath the scrotal skin with a strong double knot; then wind the threads around the testicles, and tie them firmly in two parts so that none of the vessels which nourish them can enter anywhere near it where an abscess could form; and re-tie along the first long thread from end to end of one hand's length, and after these two ties leave a membrane underneath the heart of the testes the size of a finger; and afterwards, cover all according to the roundness that the egg bears; then cut in the part beneath the scrotal skin until the blood and bile flows out, as we have said before; then apply moist wool with oil to the wound, and reapply the thread which we have described.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white skin is cauterized as we have said, after incision, out of fear of profuse bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens often, and leave the bandage until it falls off by itself; and if it delays in falling, then be bathed with warm water, and apply what we have said until it falls; then treat the wound with another remedy until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	Of hernia cruris.
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this infirmary, I have never seen anyone dare to treat it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is treated like the infirmary which is together with the stomach, in such a way that you tie the vessels after cutting above them lightly underneath; then cut into the middle, and treat the abscess of what causes harm, until the vessels fall out; and treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	When rupture occurs in the groin, as we have mentioned, the tissue becomes exposed; and no part of the intestines descends to the scrotum, if it does descend there is little, and it repairs itself every hour; however, if it remains too long at this stage, the wound or hernia grows until the intestine descends; and this happens due to the extension of the hernia in the groin, as we have stated earlier, because it extends then becomes soft, swollen, and exposed; its cure is by cauterization, as mentioned before; sometimes cured with iron like this: make the patient lie on his back often between your hands, cut open the swelling at the rupture site widely according to three fingers size; remove the hernia that is under the skin that covers it then take a rod and put it over the visible part of the hernia; push it towards the abdomen bottom then cut the two sides of the hernia's surface on top of the rod, one side after another; take out the head of the rod without cutting any part of the hernia or extending the egg or other things as I made you aware in the cure of intestinal prolapse; afterwards treat by treating wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you treat a wound on boys, clean it well and heal the wound until it is completely cured.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The knife is appropriate here, but it has no effect on the wound opening up, and cauterization is more effective in this place, being closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of softening the skin of the calves
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the calves is softened in some people because the flesh underneath is softened and can be seen through it; and when one wants to treat it, they must make the patient lie on their back, then cut away the soft skin over the natural skin; next join the two edges together with a stitch, if you wish, first cut off the superfluous part of the soft skin into three or four folds securely; then cut between the stitches and cure it like other wounds until it is healed and the thread removed.
dou chastrement	The castration
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Know that castrations are forbidden in our law, and for this reason, I would prefer not to discuss them in this book; and it is only necessary for two reasons: one is so the surgeon can know how to respond when asked about it and knows the cure; and the other, because we often need to castrate some animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, cattle, and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that castrations are performed in two ways: either by extraction or incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the case of those we perform by extraction, make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles are softened and hanging down; then grasp them with your hand until they retract and you can no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Du chastrement de taille: you must hold the animal down and press its testicles with your left hand, then tie a cord around them, cutting each one once when they have been properly crushed; leave some of the tunics as well as the fine membrane that covers the vessels intact since this kind of castration is less harmful than that which is done by crushing, because something may possibly be left in the testicles from the crushing process, causing the animal to retain its desire for sex. Then treat the wound until it heals.
des hermofrodites	D'hermaphroditis: of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphrodites occur in two ways among humans; the first is that between the testicles appears something like a woman's genitalia, with hair and sometimes it urinates.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is so in women, and it has on the wrist like a rod and two knobs.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	The treatment for men and women is such that you cut all the adhering parts together, and treat them like other wounds; in the second manner, for men whose urine flows through the skin of the knobs, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	Of stinging nettle.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Stinging nettle is an adhering part on the natural body part, so ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You must hold the excess of the nettle in your hand or with tongs, and cut it lightly; do not go too deep, lest blood flow out, then treat any other wound until it is healed; and for another growth that appears at the edge of the vulva, remove it, and perhaps it will be sore, and it looks like a cow's udder, so the ancients called it "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	You must cut it off just as we said for the abscess, and treat it until it is clean.
de erratique	Of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic is when the woman's nature is not pierced, or the opening is small; and it is natural by birth, or an accident due to illness that has occurred; or it is caused by a charred adjustment, or subtle surgical procedure, or species, and it occurs perfectly in the uterus, or on its sides, or beneath, wherever it may be; and prevents conception, and childbirth, and perhaps even menstruation; and knowledge of such a case is determined by examination of the womb.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the obstruction is close and apparent, apply pressure with your fingers or use an instrument.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is so subtle that it has reached the two lips, hurry and do this: place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then stretch the two lips wide apart, so that the subtle syfac is exposed, and cover the opening; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it on the spot, and make the woman lie with a man every day until it cannot close.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the syfac is hard and thick, you must cut it with a spatule similar to myrtle leaves.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the opening is made of new wood, suspend it with a hook and cut it; and have the medicines for stopping bleeding, such as dragon's blood, incense, mixed with egg white; then provide a wide copper tube so that the wound cannot close; and let this persist for some time, and give her dry linen thread; then treat her with other cures until she is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when a child is born dead, you must cut it up according to this method, unless there are deep-rooted abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscess which is deeply rooted in the womb, one should not make any incisions.
des emorroides	Of haemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Haemorrhoids are open wounds where blood usually flows freely, and when haemorrhoids become old they turn into small bumps or lumps; I have previously mentioned their similarities to others, and the signs, and now I will tell you which ones can be cured.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that haemorrhoids and small bumps or lumps, when they are located deep within the rectum, and cannot be felt externally, cannot be treated with cautery.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the marsh, where one can feel it, those are the ones that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	You must therefore put the woman in a cold house, then extend the ulcer with pincers, and cut it at its roots, then sprinkle on medicines that restrain blood, such as dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then press her feet against the wall for an hour, then place her in cold water; and if there is subsequent bleeding, have her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate bark, galls, and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and egg white, and make an ointment which you apply to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops bleeding, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, have the patient cup their back and breasts without harm; then take linen, dampen it in juice of plantain or elderberry with old wine, and apply to the affected area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Once the abscess subsides, treat the area with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough head, must be cut away as I said for the thelul; then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	Abscesses of the gums
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many forms of abscess arise in the gums, such as cancer, stony abscesses, herpes, warts, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have described previously.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is necessary then that I speak in this treatise of the hot abscess which appears on the buttock, which is not one of the abscesses that pierce; and if you wish to know how to treat it, look to see if the abscess is acute at its onset, full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore, do not hasten to pierce it, but let it die until the pain subsides; then have the patient sit on a seat, and provide two small seats for them to lean against, supporting their back and bringing their feet up towards the outside of their legs; their thighs should be spread apart, and they should place their arms underneath their knees, tying them securely with a good bandage. Then suck out the contents towards the right side, and bring in the instrument used to open the mouth of the abscess, from which comes its shape; when you use this instrument, it is necessary that you first mark a line to determine the depth of the abscess so that what enters does not go deeper than it should and cause injury. If your instrument is larger, then cover the depth of the abscess with cloth, ensuring the instrument doesn't harm the patient; the operator must place their horn at the top and hold onto the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; 
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is treated with a hot iron, you must be careful to avoid burning; instead, treat it as we have described in our previous instructions.
de l’enfantement	Childbirth.
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is essential for the midwife to understand the process of natural childbirth and its signs, such as when you see the woman pushing downwards and feeling the urge to bear down: then the child is ready to emerge quickly. Understand that these labours are natural, with the baby's head presenting first, followed by assistance from those helping; and when you witness these indicators, gently push on her belly so the child can exit swiftly; for once it descends upon its head, help is required, and the womb will expel its excesses through proper purification. Those born differently do not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it sometimes happens that he falls on his feet, and the body comes down onto his shoulders or hands, or it may land on his stomach, often even on to his neck, and in other bad positions; therefore, it is necessary for her to be wise and skillful in these matters, and avoid error and deception, and I shall show you all the ways in which she must help him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out onto his head due to natural causes, and the woman gives birth with great difficulty, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a saddle or be held by the women; apply some warm oil of fenugreek to her nature, and then insert the small spatula between her two fingers as shown here:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And split the amniotic sac, and trim her nail so that the moisture which is there flows out; press on her belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must give the woman an enema of fenugreek with sesame oil; make her sneeze using ground cumin, and hold her mouth and nose for one hour: now extract the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands emerge first, you must gently reposition them little by little; and if they cannot be reinserted, then place the woman on a seat, lifting her feet in the air; next, lower the seat to the ground, holding onto the woman so she does not fall during lowering; and if the hands still cannot be inserted, and the child is dead, then cut open the hands with the knife provided here, extracting the child, and reposition evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the emergence of the child's feet.
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child arrives at its feet, you must push it upwards; and then turn it little by little until it is even; next, take one foot and stretch it out little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	When it reaches the thighs, instruct them to grab hold, and make them sneeze strongly; if it has escaped, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it has not escaped as we said, turn it back and forth until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is only slightly dislocated.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come out as we said, take a little mucilage of alum, and oil of turpentine, and melted gum, and grind everything in a mortar; spread this ointment inside and outside the affected part, then make her sit in warm water up to below the ribs; when she is softened below, make a myrrh collar for her, place it underneath, and let it remain for an hour; then have her sit on a seat, make her sneeze, and hold her mouth and nose shut while gently pressing her belly because the child will now come out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	On the birth of the child on its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes into this world, place the midwife's hands upon it here and there; then let her lay her hand on its neck, and hang his feet downwards while he lies on the bed; then let her fold his hands in a certain way, and press them to his stomach, and remove the cushions from beneath him until he is prepared for what follows; if the child cannot do this himself, take hold of his feet and move them forcibly; next push up his stomach with your hand, finally insert all four fingers; then wash the child here and there; and tell the mother to grasp the child while it comes forth.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	On the birth of a child that is larger than normal with an arm hanging out.
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I must devise a way to bring back the hand: if you cannot do it, make her stand and walk; if she can't walk, have her lie on the bed, with her legs spread apart; then apply the poultice I mentioned; if she doesn't give birth, sit her on a chair, try to bring back the hand; take care of the child according to nature's pattern, make her sneeze, and tell her to catch the baby when it comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	On the birth of the child onto her neck, spread out her hands, with her face turned towards the back of her mother's.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	The nurse should hold her hand and turn it over and over, lifting it lightly until it is even; apply a natural poultice of flour and oil as mentioned earlier, telling her to move slowly; after you have done this, sit her on a chair again, tell her to catch the baby when it comes out and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of this very same manner to all of the secondary [joints]
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes loose in this manner to all of the secondary [joints], cut the second one with your nail until the moisture is drained; and if the child can crawl on their face and neck, grasp them from below so that they are not trapped, then kill the child; push the infant inside as you must, and instruct the woman not to move: then deliver gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four come at once; this is not strange, and it does happen.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Those are strange things, and they do not live, if you ask me; I know that they multiply, and they are separated by the healing touch which divides them, which is bound to the swelling; and sometimes they also come out naturally like a worm, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they come out severely, then treat it as we have said, and let the physician be skilled, and act swiftly and gently in what she does; and do so as is best for healing.
de plusors enfans	Of many children.
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the womb I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and they are all shaped like a child by the measurement of God's glorious blood, and it is necessary that the physician knows all this, for perhaps similar things will happen to him; so he should act accordingly as needed.
de l’enfant mort	Of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman of the dead child in her womb, as I mentioned earlier, and there is no progress made, and you are forced to intervene physically; it is essential that you ascertain whether the woman possesses sound virtue, and she has not suffered any accident nor fears death; the woman should be laid on her back with her hips inclined downward, and her legs lifted; the assistant should hold her from two sides, or she should be tied in bed so as to prevent movement during the procedure. The mouth of the deceased child's mother is then rubbed with moist oils mixed with an infusion of althea and fenugreek seeds, and linseed oil is applied to the palms of her hands; these oils are gently inserted into the woman's vagina, ensuring that the position of the unborn child is suitable for this procedure. Take caution if the fetus is positioned on its head during descent, insert the fetoscope into its eyes or neck or mouth or palate or beneath its beard or in its fontanelle or near its sides; and if the fetal descent occurs via its feet, place the fetoscope at its navel or median sulcus; it should be held by your right hand, with the curve of the instrument placed between the fingers of your left hand, gently inserted into one of the aforementioned places until the fetus is completely extracted. This is the form of the fetoscope:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then place it against the other handle, or use a third if needed to ensure equal extraction; and then extend them equally by moving from one side to the other, so that they may be removed, and let the handles be serrated to hold them in place, as shown here:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if any part remains, have the surgeon oil his fingers and push them into that area, then pull out the other part; but if there are no remaining fragments, place this handle higher up and repeat until it is all removed.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	If one hand comes out before the other and you cannot retract it due to constriction, wrap them both in a cloth until they are entirely covered; then cut through the joints of the palms or at the wrist, and do likewise for the other hand and foot.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is standing on their feet, the traction is light, and the adjustment at the mouth of the wound is easy.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	If he is constricted in the belly or chest, you must extract him with cloth wrapped around your hand; and split open his belly or chest as far as necessary to remove the moisture that has accumulated there; and if other organs have been dislocated but the head remains inside, insert your hand perfectly into the wound and pull it down towards the mouth of the wound; then insert one or two fingers, and pull them through forcefully. And if the mouth of the wound is narrow due to hot inflammation which has developed within, you must not exert force thereon, but rather administer moist and fatty substances such as emollients and softening poultices in water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is on its side and you can lay it flat, proceed as we have described for a living child; but if not, then take it apart piece by piece, leaving nothing of the afterbirth behind.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	Once you have done this, proceed as we described for hot abscesses that appear in the armpit; if blood flows from the incision, immerse it in cold water and apply pressure, then treat with other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose belly contained one dead child, then another grew on top of it, but the other died too.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess formed in the throat and swelled until it burst, beginning to rot.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat him, and I thought long, but could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a plaster of strong attraction, and an bone came out, then after some days another one followed.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly surprised for the abdomen has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that these must be the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I examined the wound and extracted several bones from it until the woman felt much better; and thus the woman lived for a long time with only a small lump in its place; and I have not remembered this chapter except that when masters encounter strange cases, they should know how to provide assistance.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To move the swelling back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Here comes the form of the compress, with which one has strips of cloth; and returning to the second head of two lines.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the horns should be more slender than the constrictor, and they should be made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the trunk is two fingers wide, and the width of the tree bark is one finger, and it is a palm and half long; and in the middle of the two lines are two fittings of this same wood, which are firmly attached to each other, with a length of half a palm or slightly more; these two fittings are placed into the mouth of the swelling to open when you turn the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, similar but more slender and lighter, is made of ebony or boxwood like a pair of pliers; it has two heads with two fittings as you see, one palm long and two fingers wide; when you want to open the swelling with this whole instrument, have the woman sit on a bed, feet hanging down and legs apart, then insert the two fitted parts together into the swelling, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs; then operate your hand with the whole instrument as you did with the pliers equally according to the amount that you want to open the mouth of the swelling until the pain is relieved.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; 
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you don't despair of the instrument that you haven't prepared, because its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the labor is prolonged for childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, then make her sneeze forcefully, and press your hands over her mouth and nose; if she faints from this, it's good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, take a pot and make a hole in its lid, then put herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; cook all these herbs or some of them in water over fire; then place one end of the pipe into the pot and the other into the mouth of the womb, holding it so that the vapors go inside the womb; then make her sneeze, as we said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the injury happens during labor.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment, and does not come out easily, instruct the midwife to wet her left hand in oil of sesame or muskroot juice, then insert it into the birth canal, and seek the retained placenta. When she finds it, she should grasp it gently and extend it little by little, so as not to hinder its extraction; but she must move it lightly from side to side before pulling it out. This will cause it to come away easily.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the passage of the birth canal is narrow, we have mentioned the treatment of inducing sneezing and herbal fumigation; but if it does not work despite all these measures, then take care not to force extraction; instead bind what is at the mouth of the womb to the thigh of the woman, then give her a clyster with four-ingredient ointment. This will ripen and prepare [the birth canal], and it will open up; but still, when she does deliver, there may be bad odor in the stomach and head, which can harm the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So you must apply appropriate fumes for this, some of the ancients have tried vapors from watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the tool with which one fumes the woman to retain flowers and the afterbirth is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is of glass resembling a dog's shape, and one puts the subtle head into the natural place, and the wide ends on the fire; and let the fumes be above the coals, and let the rag be wasted until it is gone, and begin another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the fundament
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born without a pierced fundament, but rather it is stopped with a subtle plug: so during the bath you must pierce this plug yourself, and do not use an acute probe, being careful that she is not touched; then place soft wool soaked in wine and oil on top, then treat with ointment until it heals.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will heal, insert a plank wedge into the hole and leave it there for several days; remove it when the child wishes to go outside.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	Sometimes this healing occurs suddenly in a wound or abscess; it is necessary to cut through the scabs, so that they are cured just as we have said of the plank wedge.
de la fistule dou fondement	From the fistula of the anus.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from beneath the anus are called nodations, and growths coming from outside the anus in the space between two parts have a fistula or more; when this nodation is old, it becomes moist, and white or subtle pus forms around it, sometimes these fistulas perforate; they're recognized by what comes out during defecation or flatulence — maybe some worms come out too.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And so for fistulas that reach down to the bladder, and halfway up the penis; they extend right up to the hip socket, and all the way around the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus you can know the fistula piercing through the anus, and not just piercing: it is that you insert your index finger into the anus, and gently push a thin needle made of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is tortuosity, then insert a slender tent made of lead or a horsehair, until you can feel the tent or hair with your finger; and if you cannot feel it, and no excretion, wind or feces come out as we have said: know that it does not pierce; so do not hasten to treat it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is perforated up to the bladder or up to the urinary tract, then urine leaks out, and it cannot be healed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced up to the hip joint, then the wound reaches that place; if there is no tortuosity and the source of pain is found nearby, then one must go directly for surgery, and neither medicine nor quick treatment with ointments will help; in such perforating fistulas, there is no cure but hard work, and the foolish pride of quack doctors who meddle.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In those cases where it is not perforated and not old, there is hope of healing with iron, as I have proven, and the patient must lie between your hands on their back; lift their legs up to their thighs, and incline their thighs towards their belly; then insert a bronze probe, or a lead one if there is tortuosity, until you know where the probe goes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around the anus, you must put your index finger inside, if you then feel that the tendon is pierced; and if uncovered where you can feel between your finger skin or flesh, know that it is perforated; do not work on it until it can be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One says however that one can heal some of them well, but this happens rarely; and the aid it provides is such that you heat a subtle cauterizer according to the width of the fistula, as mentioned before; and insert it hot into the fistula until it reaches near the anus; do this II or III times until you know that these faulty fleshes are burned which resemble bird feathers; then treat it with wet bandages in butter so that all flesh is removed, and then heal it with a soothing ointment.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus cured, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If this cannot be cured in any other way; and if the probe enters, but does not reach the bone at the base, and between your probe and the probe is a thick covering of flesh or sinew, and you see the fistula from which the cover erupts like heartwood; then cut away the start of the fistula, push forward with the probe, and cauterize afterwards until you reach the head of the probe; and the probe will be released and fall out; then clean those defective flesh parts that look like a bird's feather, leaving nothing behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood rushes forth between you and the operation, then cauterize with fire or astringent medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the cauterization with fire combines two beneficial effects: namely, burning away adjacent flesh, and staunching blood flow while drying out moisture; then treat moist wounds with butter or ground substances until the wound heals, once the charred flesh has healed over in the bowels; then treat a weeping sore with caustic ointments hardening tough flesh, and these are dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and will not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula reaches all the way to the anus, and is distant from the body, then insert your finger into the anus and ask them.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the wound, and find there is skin or membrane or flesh where it is about to burst open, and have no hope of healing except through one of these three methods: either cauterize as we have said, or cut deeply until reaching bone, or if possible apply an ointment and treat it like before; and do not go too deep lest you sever the muscle holding together the anus, causing involuntary defecation; then treat as we have described previously; perhaps the wound will be healed without further action; otherwise remove this skin cover and clean it after cutting it away from around the anus, with a compress or other sharp instrument; next remove any faulty flesh remaining in the wound as much as possible; finally consider restoring the wound and blocking off the fistula below the anus: which would cause less distress for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas form in this manner: it is when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it sits against the wall near the inner skin above, take a pierced tent at its head shaped like this:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And here you insert the thread twisted into it in such a way that when you put the tent through the entire thread into the fistula, it should be at its head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is pierced in the edge of the inner foundation, then withdraw the thread from that hole so you can put your finger inside the foundation; pull the head of the thread and bring together the two heads, holding them tightly to one another for a day or two; sometimes hold it until the thread binds these edges together causing discharge; finally treat the wound until it is sealed and clean.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not burst, make it burst by all means you can, unless it is too deeply embedded.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not suitable to cut for the lacing if it is too deeply embedded, and then treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spinalis muscle from which the fistula is made is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other; and for this reason, you do not cut what must not be cut, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	Of haemorrhoids.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Haemorrhoids are of two types: either they are inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there are small ones and large ones, and they bleed a little; and sometimes there is one or several, and they come out from the anus and at the top of the anus. But those that appear outside have very little moisture, but rather some yellow water or blood, and are the colour of flesh. The treatment for these inside the anus is as follows: you must instruct the patient to strain themselves in order to defecate, until the faeces leave them so that their buttocks open up; then they should hurry and use forceps on it, or hold it with your fingernail, then cut into its roots. And if the hooks cannot hold them due to moisture, you can take them by a piece of cloth or cotton wool or a small piece of chamois leather, and extract them with two fingers; then treat them either by applying some warm powder instead of cauterising, or treat them as described in the chapter on cauterisation. You may also cure them using other treatments until they are healed. And if the anus cannot open up, you should give the patient a sharp enema to clean out what is inside the anus so that it can be easily opened. When the patient strains and their buttocks open up, then treatment is easier; and this consists of holding them with your fingernail or forceps, cutting into them, treating as described above until they are healed, avoiding any incision by iron instrument.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you must perform a suture in this way: take one twisted thread and insert it into a needle; then pull the thread through from above and make the needle pierce on the other side; turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and let them be wide; tighten the thread firmly, then knot the thread, withdraw the needle, and do likewise for all others; leave one in place to allow excess blood to flow out; then apply over the wound a moistened piece of fabric soaked in rose oil or cerate, and put it on the wound, telling the patient to rest; leave them like this until they evacuate [the affected area], then treat with ointment and other treatments until healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	dryness of the faeces or wound
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is constipation of faeces in the intestine, and due to the constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	You must cut back to the point of a spatumile or your nail's length into the bark above it, which should not be moist; then clean it until it is firm as it should be; and if it cannot heal, resume scraping more intensely than before, until it heals greatly, and becomes scarred; then clean it until it is healed.
dou fremit	where there is trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Ants are a small faulty appearance between the body, and go deep inside; sometimes it finds coldness, and one feels them trembling like death, and they come all over the body, but more on hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a cane made from a goose quill or a strong vulture feather, and place this cane on the trembling [part of the body], so that the purple circles touch the trembling all around; then turn your hand over the entire cane such that you grasp it all around the trembling, and push in completely, extracting the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you want, make something like this from a brass or iron cane according to this form, and have it hollow underneath but solid on top.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce it, in order to hold it with two fingers and squeeze; And if you want, cauterize the trembling, as described in the previous chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	Of the form of the clyster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	One never performs a clyster with silver or mercury, or melted bronze or wire; and one makes these instruments both small and large, according to what they are adapted for.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those which one adapts in the treatment of children and those who are weak and suffer pain are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the clyster both small and large is thus broadly tied to the belly according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And it has a fastening by which the belly is tied, as you see, and the head is perforated within; and it has on one side two perforations, and on the other one; and let the belly where the medicine is placed be made of either animal bladder or parchment, and be perforated all around with tiny holes, and have between each hole one finger's breadth, then insert into these holes a strong thread made of raw silk twisted in an X shape or woven round, and join together the belly like that of a goat; and when the medicine is within, tie it to the instrument before with a strong thread, then clysterize; and this is the circular form:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicament be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the syringe with oil or egg white, or something similar, then insert it gently; next have the ministers press his two hands together, until he is all bared, then remove the syringe, and raise the patient's legs to the wall, and if the medicament wishes to exit, hold him as much as you can; and if he sleeps a night through, it is greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you syringe him with a dislodgement of the belly illness, and the medicament hastens to exit, repeat it until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are at the foundation or abscess, let the syringe be as gentle as for a child; and this is the form of the gentle syringe with which the skin is tightened.
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already discussed the treatment of wounds; now we shall tell you about the practice of surgery and medicine, according to its completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, where the wounds are located, and what causes them.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	Wounds are caused by various things such as blows from a stone, sword cuts and stabs with knives or lances, or strikes from sticks or arrows, or similar objects; wounds can also be classified according to the body part affected like a wound on the neck, head, foot, stomach, liver, and other limbs. I will tell you about the treatment of each kind of wound, starting with simple head wounds since the rest will follow in their respective chapters.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head, and the bone is not broken, take note if it is due to a stone strike or similar incidents, and the skin is still torn and the wound is large, and you have mild doubts of abscess heat: then make them bleed immediately with the cephalic vein especially if little blood comes from the wound, and let the bleeding be opposite the injured part; and avoid the patient overindulging in wine and fatty meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if they do not want to bleed, then reduce their meat intake, and drink no wine or eat any flesh; place on the wound, if hot abscesses appear, cotton moistened with rose oil only, or with astringent wine; but if there is no heat of abscess, apply instead to the fresh wound in its full blood, and it has not yet moved due to air exposure, the powder I will mention shortly; however, should it have begun to move from being exposed to air, then use some salves until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut or similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by means of stitches, then join them by sewing, as I shall explain for wounds in the belly, concerning suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposing bone, gaping open and only held together by a flap of skin, cut it away; then treat the wound with medicine, restore hard flesh in place of leather, and instruct the patient to eat hearty meats, such as liver and boiled wheat, chicken too, and similar foods.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find the skin is rotting and not yet down to bone, cut away all that is rotten, then throw it out; next treat the wound; but should there be a severed artery in the wound or vein, which will not stop bleeding despite treatment with medicines, tie off the artery, and should you locate its end frayed, stitch it closed with thread; yet if this proves unavailing, cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: it requires that you apply this powder which seals as soon as the arse has moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The manner of the powder is as follows: take one part incense; two parts dragon's blood; three parts quicklime, and finely powder them; use it to dress the wound, holding it firmly in place until it dries well and joins with all its blood; then bind it tightly, leaving it without unbinding, if there is no swelling; for medicine should be removed only once it has healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes quicklime alone is used when there is no incense or dragon's blood available, but the arse must have moved over the wound first.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the fire has burned the wound, especially in summer, do not apply this powder to it; but use some digestible ointments instead or a poultice made of barley flour with water and honey until it runs clear; then treat it further with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone fracture occurs along with the wound, and it is minor, extract it with delicate pincers; I will tell you about skull fractures later.
de la plaie dou col	On the neck wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound occurs on the neck and it is straightforward, there is no distinction between this and that of the head, but if the vein or artery in the neck is severed.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the black one, there is no other treatment than to leave it be, and put nothing restrictive on it, for it harms nerves and makes them retreat; and do not place anything cold on the wound, as the substance of nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest organ; but let the medicine be mild, just like warm water washed in soft water, and mixed with rose oil, and cooked lettuce also washed in soft water, and other stones of fine quality according to this method, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, cut it and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and filled with hair and bowels, cut it at a lower level; and if the artery is severed, and blood flows out, expose it, clean it, and cauterize if necessary; and if the windpipe of the throat is severed, or the heart, and the conduit is preserved so that air can pass through, cut the heart above the root of the throat, but do not touch the throat itself, instead reset it according to its natural shape; then bind it appropriately, and leave it for a few days, then treat it with draining ointments until it is healed; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, probe it; and if there are pieces of bone, pull out the ones you can, and those you cannot, let them remain until the wound becomes putrid, and keep the discharge light and unclogged; and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle over it the powder I mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound with a fistula, treat it as I have described in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	Of the wounds from lances or knives.
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a lance or knife and the injury is deep, examine whether wind escapes with each breath of the patient: know then that the wound is mortal. If it is not deep and remains fresh with all its blood, do not apply any powder nor bind it in the first hour lest the blood congeals inside the wound, returns to the heart, and kills the patient. But instead apply an attracting ointment and bandage twice a day; if you have no such ointment, place old cotton in the wound to draw out moisture, and let the patient sleep on their injury for three days or four or more so that they suffer no spasm nor painful palpitations of heart nor strange fits. And when you see these good signs know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure it then with bandages and other treatments until it is healed; if it cannot heal, operate as you must for a fistula has formed there. Treat it accordingly.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	If the wound is from a sword or knife incision and it is simple, whether on the chest, arm or back, then treat what is in front of you; if it is large, stitch it; if small, dust with powder; if pieces have penetrated into the bone and are wedged there, search for them in the wound and pull out the protruding ends if they are not already separated. If they are not separate let the wound rot so as to facilitate their extraction. For wounds on other parts of the body treat accordingly, as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The rupturing of the belly is extensive, moderate and small; in large wounds some times the intestines or the nerves of the intestines come out, which leads to liquid infiltration; and stitching it up is harder, and sometimes a smaller wound causes more issues than a larger one, because you need to put back all of the intestines slowly if not done from hot to cold; that's why a medium-sized opening is better as it allows easier repositioning of the intestines in their place. And know that abdominal rupture occurs four ways: two are general and common for stitching up the belly wound while two others are specific for other body wounds, but they can be used with more precision on the belly wound; I will explain each one separately
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small and a part of the intestine has come out, and it is difficult to replace, this can be done in one of two ways: either due to the small size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it up in this way: moisten a sponge or soft cloth with tepid water only, or cook it in water infused with squill and cypress and spike, and bathe the intestine until the swelling is reduced; and sometimes use a constricting wine, which is mild and helps to reduce the inflammation.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling subside, moisten the intestine with water or cook mallow, as this eases entry a little; and if it cannot enter, make an incision in the wound using the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids; and the first treatment is mild so that no cutting should be done without great need, here are the instruments for splitting it: it cuts inside at the curve and outwards, see this form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines have moved out of place, reposition them according to their natural form into their proper position if you are able, for this improves the situation.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is wide and located below the belly, you should make the patient lie on their back with their legs elevated above their head; if it is below the belly, place the head and chest higher than the lower parts; likewise, for a rupture in one of the two parts, ensure the affected part is positioned higher than the other. Thus must be administered what I say regarding large and medium-sized wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds use what is available to you; then with your hands place a gentle compress that covers the entire rupture in its palm; this is how sutures are commonly performed: take a needle or multiple ones according to the size of the wound's width, and leave two fingers' breadth at the top of the wound, and insert into it a good strong thread; pierce both sides of the skin with the siphac, which is beneath the skin inside, so that you pass through this part and gather together the two ends of the siphac in fours; then pull one end of double thread around the needle from two sides, assemble the two edges of the wound appropriately, and leave a two-fingers' breadth gap before inserting another needle. Tie off the thread as you have done with the first needle, continuing to repeat this process according to your needs with needles until the entire wound is closed; the needles must be medium sized, between fine and thick since the very fine ones cut through all the flesh, while the too large are unable to enter properly: thus they should be moderate in size. Do not push the needles beyond the surface of the skin and flesh as this would cut and reopen the wound before healing can take place; then clip off the ends of the needles so that they do not prick the patient when asleep, and cover their tips with cloth or rags to hold them in place until the wound has healed. This method of suturing with needles is more appropriate for smaller wounds since only one or two needles are required: the second kind of suture is common too; it involves gathering together both sides of the skin and siphac with a single needle that has strong medium-sized thread, and after piercing all four parts simultaneously pull the needle back to the part where you began in the same way cloth is sewn. Between each stitch leave an interval equal to the size of your smallest finger; this type of suture was used on me when I had a wound on my stomach caused by a knife cut that extended more than a palm's length, exposing intestines which were more than two palms wide, and the rupture was in the middle of my belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned his intestine after it had been outside for twenty-four hours, and the wound was closed in fifteen days, I cured him, and he healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the doctors had judged him to die, and it was a miracle; I did not treat him with ointments because I was in a place where none were found, nor any medicines; instead, I applied old cotton twice daily on the wound, and washed it with honey water until he healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you the two proper ways of suturing: take the needle and push it from outside to in; once it has pierced through the heart from right to left, leave the tip of the needle on the skin where you pushed it, then make it pierce from another side, from inside to out; the understanding of this suture is that you sew like a furrier does furs, leaving one side of the wound open and taking up the other until the whole suturing is completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of stitching, as Galen accurately describes it, is performed similarly to how some do it, by joining the two parts together naturally and bringing one end of the wound close to the other in such a way: insert a needle into one side of the wound near your hand, pierce only that spot, and leave both ends of the wound; then turn the needle and pass it through from the outside layer down to inside, towards the two ends of the wound; then pierce once more from the outer layer down to the inner for each of the other two sides of the wound on the far side; this is a similar method of stitching and the most common one.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen describes this as follows, and it is witnessed by many: the abdomen must be sewn with two needles, each having a thread attached; one needle should be inserted on one side of the wound and the other on the opposite side, in the manner of those who stitch leather straps; note that when the tear is located in the center of the abdomen, the stitching will be more difficult compared to other areas of the abdomen.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgments of the wound are such as those for other wounds: when you find the wound fresh and full of blood, whether the doctor has moved it or not, then stop the intestine from bleeding and sew up the cut; then apply a powder made from healing meat, and if the doctor has already moved it, then apply any appropriate ointment until the wound heals over; cauterize the strings, and suture the edges; then treat the wound like the others, until it is healed; and if you don't have medicines, as soon as it starts to heal over, put on old cotton, moving it twice a day until it's healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you don't need any other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound will lead to gangrene of the main parts of the body, then you must wet a light linen cloth with warm oil or rose oil, and place it around the affected area and under the armpits; and if there is pain or swelling in the belly, which often happens, then administer a mild enema of red wine, especially if the infection has spread to the intestine; make an incision within it, and know that when it's the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The gut which is called "bowel" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is due to the shallowness of its veins, and because of the delicacy of the whole body, and the nearness of its nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the muscle springs from the wound, reset it like an intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and has turned worm-like or black, then you must bind the area that is black, so no blood flows there, for veins and arteries are present; then cut away what lies between the bindings, and suspend both ends of them from below the wound outward to ease the extraction as the muscles fall, and let the wound open.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the breaking of the mouth.
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is round and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people, for I saw a man pierced in the belly by a lance; and the wound was to the right of the stomach, it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and from it issued waste matter and flatulence. I treated him according to my ability and did not cease until he was healed and the skin joined.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it healed, I feared the patient might have pain in their belly; and there was no pain, but he remained in good condition, eating and drinking; and some experts said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be treated as follows: take large-headed pins, then gather the lips of the wound together, and when the pin has opened its mouth, place it on the two lips so that it clamps the opening shut. Then cut off the head of the pin so that it cannot come undone; after this, put another pin in the same way as before until the whole wound is held together; and sew up the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, 
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula wherever she might be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, once it begins to heal, is universally called a "fistula," especially when it is covered and sunken.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is truly a faulty hard and white nodule, where one does not feel pain, and it is also covered like the feather of a bird; and sometimes it jumps clear and sunken, and other times thick; sometimes small, and others large; and I have already spoken about this in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and has no flesh, remains so due to only one of these nine causes: namely, the little blood or matter; or its malice; or because there is hard flesh inside, and on the lips, preventing new flesh from growing; or there is too much sunken area; or the skin is rotten, and the matter is of poor quality; or the medicine used for treatment is not good; or due to a manner of pestilence causing corruption; or due to the nature of the region being slow at digestion, and thus late with healing, and prone to swelling; or there are veins or bones involved: and I have already shown all these causes, their signs, and medicinal cures in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now you must let me inform you of the treatment for fistula, which is done by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Fistula can occur in any part of the body; for there are fistulas that come to major veins, and arteries, and nerves, or on the skin, or in the intestine, or bladder, or in some of the ribs, or in the spine, or in a joint of hands or feet; and so it comes to the proper place of the principal member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of quick healing, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not reach its proper place as I have said, and you have faith in the treatment, and recognize it, take a probe of brass or iron, if the fistula is straight, search with it; and if the fistula is twisted, search for a subtle thin probe made of lead, because lead can bend to follow the twists; and if the fistula has multiple openings, and you cannot properly find it with probes, irrigate one opening, as moisture passes from one hole to another, and clean it; then diligently probe it with your hand, so that you know whether there is bone or nerve, and is entirely hairless, and carefully ask the patient of the pain he feels when pressed by your hand, and where he feels it; and when you truly understand its place, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places I told you, then treat according to what I have said, and remove all pus and corrupt flesh that are inside; and then heal the fistula so that it may be healthy, and if the fistula is deeply situated at its proper place, cut it entirely as much as you can, then put moist probes soaked in medicine into quicklime, and push them until they reach the top of the fistula, until the excess left at the bottom is corroded; and then put ointments that invigorate healthy flesh until it be healed; if not healed by this, cauterize as we have said before, and if there are bones corrupted from the fistula, cut them.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If the wound or abscess does not bother your main limbs as we have said; and if the bone is exposed with signs of decay and blackening, let it be until the decay is entirely removed, then treat any secondary injuries with ointment until they are healed; and if it is not healed and has become infected again just like before, know that you have not gone deep enough: uncover and search until you reach the bottom, remove all signs of infection, then restore the bone to its place; and if it thus heals, it's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the decay is too deep for you to reach it; there are other means to leave it alone naturally; and if there is some small corrupted bone which you can extract with forceps, then remove it with an appropriate tool; and if there are multiple bones affected, take them all out at once, leaving none behind; and if moisture makes this difficult without error or fear, cut away the moisture, flesh, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, apply something that causes putrefaction to the wound, and let it rot around the bones until the flesh is more easily separated from them; and if this is a large bone, such as in the leg or thigh, scrape away only the corruption until all blackness is removed, then restore the wound; but if much of the matter has been corrupted down to the soft parts of the bone, you must be careful and cut it out entirely up to the limit of corruption, then cure it so that it may heal. And I shall tell you about a fistula which occurred in one man’s leg, from which you can learn an example and help yourself in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man about thirty years old who had pain in his leg from an internal cause such that matter came to the leg and it swelled with a large abscess without any external reason for opening; but the surgeons in their folly worked on it so much that they opened up the abscess, and a lot of matter flowed out, and it became a fistula with many holes through which all kinds of bowels and moisture from his body were emitted. Many doctors treated him as a cure over two years without any expert in surgery until I was called upon; when I saw his leg and medicines they used to treat him, I noted that what came out of the openings was of large bulk; moreover, my patient’s skin turned red and acquired a yellow hue.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I drove a tent peg into one of these holes, and then I searched all the holes, and found that one was coming up against the other from every part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I quickly rushed and cut into one of the holes until I exposed a part of the bone, and found it rotten and perforated, with the decay reaching deep inside; I cleaned out what appeared to be the rotten bone, and assumed there was no other decay apart from what I had removed; then I began to restore the wound with soft medicines over a long period, but it would not heal; I started again, and exposed the bone as before, finding that the decay had continued into the bone, so I cleaned it out once more, and then removed it, trying to seal up the hole; yet I was unable to do so even though I cut away an inch of bone around it, revealing its entire core, which turned out to be soft throughout; I restored it with medicines, and it healed swiftly and sealed up promptly, and there was no need to start the procedure again except for the patient's weakness, who could not bear it, and my own fear of death from him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation, he often bled, but was completely healed, and in place of the bone, a hard tissue grew, which had good form and caused no harm or discomfort whatsoever, neither when moving nor when resting.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated like this: Take a linen bandage, and stretch it over the head of the exposed bone, and ask someone to pull it upwards; and take another thicker bandage made of wool, and tie it over the flesh above the bone, stretching out the head so that you can move the corrupted tissue underneath, and uncover the area where you want to operate, making sure not to cut or bruise the skin; and place a piece of wood or a spatula under the bone in order to cut away the damaged tissue; and it is necessary to go as deep as one can see and feel the corruption, and then repeat the operation.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or on one side, you must uncover all the flesh; then place a hot iron beneath, and with silk or cotton, draw out the corruption from one part to another, and let the suture be of the length of the corruption, as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, cut off the corrupted joint, and saw through the bone on which it rests on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, there is nothing else to do but cut them out; and if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand or ankle, this is a very serious matter, nevertheless you must inquire into this corrosion as to how it reveals itself to you; and purify it by all the means possible without injuring the sinew or nerve; and know that there are many instruments for sawing these bones according to their shape, appearance, thickness, subtlety, length, smallness, hardness; and for this reason it is necessary to provide each type of work with its own instrument; and know that the work will show you the instrument you need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the signs of the various diseases; so think about the instrument which is needed.
dou feu	Of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The head rots either internally or externally; and when you have treated this decay with medicine, and it does not improve, then you must amputate that limb up to the point where the decay begins, so that the patient escapes death, or from the greater evil of losing the entire limb; and the signs are that the limb turns black, as if burnt by fire, and can turn blackish-blue afterwards, because this corrosion spreads from limb to limb, affecting the whole body; act quickly in cutting off the limb, and if it is due to the sting or bite of venomous beasts such as the sea scorpion and snake and their like, if the decay affects the top of the finger, then amputate it and do not allow it to reach further than the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	Et s’elle vient jusc'a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc'a bras; 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding occurs while you operate, cauterize the wound immediately, or apply some restraining powders to it; then return to your medical procedure until it is completed, and bind the affected limb with an appropriate bandage, treating it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man's foot: he had a dark spot that looked like a burn from fire, and this corrosion first appeared on his toe, spreading throughout his entire foot; when he saw the corrosion, he quickly decided to amputate his foot, but was cured; after a long time, the corrosion returned in his finger, and so he came to me. I applied some counter-irritants after cleansing his body, however, the corrosions did not stop; He requested that I cut off his hand, but I refused because I still had hopes of curing him through counter irritation. I also feared that if I amputated his hand, he would die since the patient's strength was feeble; The man became desperate and returned to his home where he decided to amputate his own hand, then after doing so, he healed; And let this story be told for others who might need it in the future.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Some time an abscess appears in fleshy places, and remains so long that it creates a great accumulation of pus; then it becomes round and breaks open, and the pus flows out, leaving the flesh bare like some vessels; and the skin that is on top is as thin as delicate fabric, and does not reach down to the bone or nerve; such an illness is called a "sinus", and not a "fistula"; but if it extends all the way to the bone completely, then it is called a "fistula"; and treat this skin by removing that skin entirely around it, especially when it is thin, like some fabric; and do not fear its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you fear that the skin will rot, and corruption is not deep, but the skin has some flesh attached to it, treat it with a clyster as follows: look to see if the abscess is large, and the pus that comes out of it smells foul; then use Egyptian medicine prepared like this: take equal parts of ash, oil, and litharge, cook them in an earthen vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey; then take according to your need, mix with water and honey, clysterize the abscess, and bind its opening; leave the medicine there for two hours, then remove it by squeezing it out. Do this many times until the abscess is cleansed of pus. Sometimes you may use a clyster made from ash-water when such medicine is not available. Take ashes of grapewood, pour water over them, let it settle, and use as clyster until you see that the abscess is well cleaned out; and if the patient cannot tolerate this Egyptian medicine or the ash-water, then apply a clyster made from water with honey and just a little bit of litharge ground in it; or one of honey mixed with wine, for honey has properties of cleansing and washing away, while wine causes flesh to rot. And when you have done all this, make sure that the abscess is well cleansed before applying to it some medicated plaster made with rose oil and wine; or apply a clyster with some medicines and ointments whose properties I have discussed in the chapter on ointments. If the opening of the abscess is small and the nozzle of the clyster cannot enter, then you may slightly enlarge it with an iron tool (scalpel), insert into it an Egyptian dressing, or basilicon ointment until its size increases; but if the wound is too large to be sutured closed, just leave a space for the clyster tube to enter through and remove any excess pus that accumulates.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bowels are intact, they do not permit meat to be inserted; and if you cannot cut under them as you wish, prepare it in such a way that the bowel goes to the lowest place where it is, for when the bowel is whole, no flesh can enter there and if you cannot cut below like you want, arrange it this way: let the bowel flow lightly downward, and leave nothing of the bowels; take consolidating medicines to put on the wound, and spread over a linen cloth that covers all the wound; then with force make an incision wider than the first one at the place where the wound is, extend soft ointment according to the size of the wound onto another piece of cloth, apply this onto the wound in order to relieve the bowels, do not remove the larger outer cloth for many days once; and that which is on top of the wound, take it away frequently in order to release the bowel and know what flows from the bowel if its poison or little or enough, or digested, or undigested; and observe whether the patient feels pain or not, and if there is abscess or no, when your medicine has been spread out this way and you see the nature that jumps onto the wound, then know that the wound has already healed, and approach the saints. Then untie it in the morning, or on the third day; and as soon as you release the wound, change another cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast ejects undigested food after many days, know that the breast is not healing.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle venom takes long to heal, do not despair of the health, for healing approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are people with slow healing of flesh in their wounds, and some who do the opposite; and if undigested food comes from the breast after many days, know that the breast is not healing; and if the breast takes a long time to heal, and it becomes distant, then apply drying medicines moist in substance but dry in virtue, like refining ointment, for there is much vitriol, which is the final medicine; take refining ointment, made with rose oil, and add equal amounts of old wine; then spread it on and use it; this same mixture works better when cooked and thickened if refining ointment is not available, or you can take myrrh, aloes, and incense, grind them, and sprinkle the powder over honey as it warms up; then glue a cloth to it, apply it over the breast, and sometimes they administer long aristologist needles with roots of celestial lily, which are like flour of fitch and centory; use simple or compound ones: grind them into powder and mix them with the honey I mentioned before, then apply it; and if the cure is prolonged, and does not heal from this treatment, know that corruption has gone deep, causing an impression in bone, or hard tissue, or ligaments; so treat fistula as we have said above.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	From the abscess under the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the thumb, or toe, or may arise elsewhere; and when it becomes old, and no attention is paid to it, then a deep-seated abscess appears, and runs and eats away until it reaches the root of the nail, and may eat away the entire nail; and corrosion occurs reaching the bone, causing fetid pain, and the thumb or toe becomes wide, and the color fades.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the classification, and the treatment does not benefit, then you must remove all the excess that remains of the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauterizations are a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is sound; but if the nail grows into the flesh, begins to pierce it, and makes a wound, then you must put under the nail that presses against the flesh an iron rod which will push it upwards, and scrape off this flesh with care and in a gentle manner, then apply on the remaining part of the flesh caustic or corrosive medicines so as to remove all; then cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, you must scrape it and trim the flesh, because as long as there is corrupted bone, healing cannot occur; and if you see that the finger is becoming corrupt, then remove the nail from below, just like explained previously, then treat it until it heals; but if it's wounded or bruised and feels severe pain, first proceed with its treatment; afterwards, trim the nail using a sharp spatula by cutting across it, being careful not to reach all the way down to the flesh underneath the nail since this would cause too much pain for the patient; should that happen, apply something soothing on top.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of the wrist joint of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two small adjoining fingers that are born in the hands of some men are sometimes very fleshy, and there may be either tendon or bone, and at times they have a nail, and none of them appear in the root of the joint, where their origin is found in various people's hands.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those who are born on the inner side of the finger do not move, and those who are born at the joint of the finger may move; the size of the fleshy one is small, in such a way: cut it off at its root with a wide spatule.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who are born at the root of the joint are difficult to treat; you must beware of cutting them.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In him who is born or must be at the last night, you must first cut roundly the flesh to the bone, then cut the bone into a fitting piece for it, then cure it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The sutures that come together in the skull are due to birth, or by joining of a wound, or by burning with fire, or similar causes.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	You must cut this suture so that the bones can repair themselves according to their natural forms; then place between them two tents or oily red cloths, moistened, so they do not join again; or you may put between them two pieces of fine lead until the places are united as is proper.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If there are sutures in any of these bones with the palm, then cut this suture as is proper.
des vils	From villages
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Worms are veins greatly swollen filled with melancholy superfluities that come to many body parts; and they occur more often in the legs of those who walk on foot and work hard, than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	You must therefore administer to him sometimes purging of bile, then the basilic venom.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	Iron treatment is according to two methods: one is when you cut and extract the black blood from bone marrow; and the other method is that you raise the vein and draw all of its blood out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The cut is according to this method: first immerse the leg in very hot water until the large vein is softened, then stretch the patient's leg from above the thigh down past the knee; next make a 1-inch wide incision over the vein at one of three points, lift and draw out the black blood with your hand from end to end, until as much blood has come out as the patient can stand; then tie it off, and instruct him not to eat meat that causes black bile; repeat the evacuation and draining when the veins are full again, which harms the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The treatments for this ailment are as follows: remove the patient's leg hair if it is hairy, then place it in a bath and warm the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins swell; if you have no bath, heat it over fire instead, then make an incision above the vein from below the knee to the ankle area; thereafter loosen the skin with a knife, and peel away the flesh on either side of the vein so that it becomes visible when pressed; it will appear red and black, and upon entering the skin it will resemble a white cord; then push the vein beneath, until it is raised from the skin surface; then cut lightly at another point above this with your knife, then loosen the skin around the vein again so it appears; lift the vein as you did before and make an incision in another place 3 inches higher than that; peel away the flesh once more to reveal the vein, then lift up the vein with your finger as you have done previously; cut at a further point above this one, or multiple points if required; lift it again and make an incision at the toe's knuckle; pull and lift until reaching the second incision made earlier; remove it from incision to incision until fully exposed, then make another incision; if unable to pull and lift, insert a needle with strong thread through it and tie up, inserting beneath the vein as well; turn your hand both ways back and forth until it is finished; be careful not to cut for this will hinder pulling or lifting and harm the patient; once fully treated place moist wool soaked in wine and rose oil onto the wound site, treat until healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the face is distorted and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not amputate; and treat it as we mentioned before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron with which we cut the face is curved, and does not slice, so that it does not cut the vein; and it has a large curve, for if it were slender, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and here is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is engendered in the legs, in warm areas where there are no plants or trees, and on earth that has no moisture; and by chance it may appear elsewhere other than in the legs, and this occurs due to putrefaction which comes from beneath the skin, just as serpents and worms come forth within the body, engendered between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the sign of the beginning of this vein is that a great inflammation comes to the leg, then its color changes, and the vein begins to protrude, just like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the vein opens, you must wrap it with a piece of lead that is 3 and a half to 2 inches long, tie it, and leave the lead hanging on the leg. Every time fluid comes out, wrap the lead around it and retie it; if it's too long, cut off a part and wrap the remainder, but do not cut its root so that the entire vein is exposed; for if you cut it, it will retract into the flesh and cause abscesses and putrefaction where it was, resulting in an ill disease. Therefore, it must be treated gradually until the whole thing is gone, leaving no remains on the body. Sometimes this vein, when treated, can measure 5 palms long or 10; a man came to me once whose vein protruded for 10 palms and, upon cutting it, spewed one string of substance and was pierced all the way through so that everything came out; then its matter is evacuated and medicines are brought to fight putrefaction for some days, after which the wound should be treated like an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes this vein is very delicate, especially when it appears in the ankle joint or foot, and there are many perforations from which blood escapes profusely, so that it must be removed; treat it therefore as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Worms that grow between skin and flesh.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called "ox sickness" in our country because it often occurs in oxen, and it is a small worm that grows between the skin and flesh, moving throughout the body up and down, and one feels them very well as they travel from limb to limb until they tear the skin where they were and fall out; and they are caused by the corruption of certain humours, just as worms, snakes, and worms in the belly come about; and its malice is doubted, for when it travels through the body and reaches the head, if it goes into the eye, it can destroy it; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being cured and treated, one cannot act except when it appears: so then you must bind the place above and below with a strong tight bond, then cut above and drain it out, and if the poison is deep in the flesh, and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies; and its greatest harm is that it runs to the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming towards the head near the eye, so tightly bind beneath it the eyebrow, then cut above, and drain it out; and one must use purging of the body with medicine for the bad humours putrid, and beware of foods causing decay.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	From pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called "vakirir" in our land and it's a pain that manifests in certain limbs which can move from limb to limb; I saw what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman and she uncovered her arm revealing a small swelling in the vein of the arm; then I saw it rise up like a worm towards the shoulder, faster than anything else, like quicksilver when it falls from one place to another; the pain left that spot, settled into the shoulder before spreading all over her body eventually reaching the other arm; she told me after this it would go around her whole body as I had witnessed.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly puzzled by how it moved from limb to limb because I had never seen this illness behave in such a way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Toutevoie, I avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, but I ne l’avoie want, as com I le vis en la femme; and I me pensai that c’estoit por ceu that li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; and n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	Et when tu vues curer ceste maladie, and li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, and puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; and cauterize le leu; and se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, and semblans others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and the parts of the body they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of arrows is such that there are those with large points and small, some have hair or are welded; there are those with two angles, and those which have tongues (fletching); and those made in pieces; furthermore they fall into two categories according to the parts of the body that they strike: one type strikes vital organs like the brain, heart, liver, spleen, kidneys, intestines, bladder etc.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When one of these arrows strikes any of the aforementioned organs and death seems imminent based on the signs which I shall now relate to you: then you must beware extracting said arrow, for many patients will die under such circumstances; but when these evil portents are absent and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then proceed with its removal and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when an arrow falls and pierces the bone, and jumps through the surface that is above the brain, occurs when there is a blackening, burning, turning green or redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and loss of understanding, and vomiting bile; perhaps even discharge of blood from the nostrils or ears; perhaps also losing speech and voice; and appears from the wound white moisture resembling pus, as well as cooked flesh; and if these signs appear to you, then hold back on treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is within.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The signs of the arrow when it falls on the heart are that it is close to the left nipple, and one feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty; perhaps also the pulse changes like the beating of hearts, and there flows out black blood, and comes coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: know then without doubt that death descends.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrowhead that has not perforated the lung is when there is no foam around the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's colour changes, and they breathe heavily seeking cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow falls on the covering of the lung, it is close to the small ribs; it causes great pain and great difficulty breathing, and all the limbs from the shoulders are affected.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow hits the stomach, perhaps something undigested from the meat may come out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow hits the belly, and no faeces come out through the large intestine, there is little hope for a cure or for extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and flows away, and the patient feels intense pain; know that this wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, such as the arm and forearm, neck, throat, shoulder, armpit, back, waist, thigh, legs, and similar parts, are protected in various ways.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or artery, and it is not poisoned, as I will tell you happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	There was once a man an arrow fell on his shoulder at the base of his neck; I grasped it and pulled it out from beneath the ear's fatty tissue, and he was healed without difficulty.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And thrust through the eye into the fat underneath it beneath the paper beneath an arrow whose shaft was of Turk's-turquoise, but we could only get hold of its point towards the stock: and this arrow was all iron light without barbs; the wound was healed, and there befell no evil accident.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And I drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian; and this arrow was Arabic with barbs: I watched over its wounds, and extracted it in such a way that I drew out the arrow; and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And I extracted an arrow from a man which was embedded in his belly; and thought that he would die; but after the passing of 30 days, he did not alter from this disposition: I cut above the arrow, and guided it out, and drew forth the arrow without evil accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you have a man with an arrowhead lodged in his back or shoulder, and the wound has healed over; yet the arrow remains inside him, causing no change to its natural position nor any harm to his bodily functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And see another man with an arrowhead in his face, the wound has healed but remains without causing great pain or other significant issues.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And treat an arrowhead for the king's man that was lodged in his nose, slightly inclined to the right; the arrow was bent and I was called upon for treatment three days after it had happened.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	The wound was very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I sought it everywhere with a subtle touch, but did not feel it; he felt pricking and pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of the arrowhead. I applied a digestive attractive poultice to the place, so that the flesh would not swell; and there appeared to me the flesh of the arrowhead.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I left the poultice on for a longer time, and the wound healed immediately, but the patient remained ill for a long period, feeling the arrowhead inside his nose every day; and he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it opened, and probed, feeling the tip of the arrowhead becoming exposed in the wound; then I adjusted a small hook in the opening of the wound with this medicine until the point of the arrowhead appeared visibly; and the arrow was extracted after four months, and then the wound widened so that I could insert pincers, and I grasped it from one side to another but couldn't remove it; then I didn't cease experimenting and ingeniously devising new instruments, until on one day with well-made pincers, according to what its form will be at the end of this chapter, I grasped it and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	The mirror judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was sealed, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	You have told me the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you focus your care on what I do not say, because the book cannot possibly cover everything; but wise masters compare well a little to great things, and for what is present and lacking, invent new work, and new instruments, in order to treat strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not leave the members in which they are stuck for only two reasons: either through the place where they enter, or by another part; and the one that comes out through where it entered is an arrow entering fleshy parts, and this may be the case sometimes.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not come out now, leave it until the flesh is rotten around it, and the outlet is healed; and also if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, leave it there for a few days, moving it each day; then it will come out, and if it does not, pierce all around with a very fine awl until the tissue around it is enlarged, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and goes up to one of the ventricles of the brain, and any of the accidents I have mentioned appear in the patient: do not pull it out, but leave it until it becomes even after a few days, for if the arrow reaches the surface, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not stuck solely in the bone, and does not reach the surface, and the patient remains a few days without any ill effects, then devise its extraction.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot be extracted directly, then administer probes around it as I have told you; then treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is lodged inside the body so that it cannot be seen, then search for it throughout the wound; and if you feel it, extract it with a suitable instrument; and if you cannot because of the tightness of the wound or the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins involved, make an incision until the wound is large enough; draw out the arrow if you can, and if there are barbs on the arrow that hold it in place, remove the flesh that is attached to two sides as far as you can, then break or bend the barbs of the arrow so that you may extract it; do this carefully so as not to break the arrow, for doing so would make its removal much more difficult.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, leave it until the surrounding tissues are rotten, then pull it out, for its extraction would be eased.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the loss of blood opposes you, so accommodate what we have said about the treatment in its chapter; and beware of cutting the nerve and opening a vein, and use whatever means necessary to remove the arrow without danger, whether quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to how he was positioned when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest aid there is, and if you cannot, then lay him down as indicated by the signs.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	If the arrow has passed through from another side, or nothing appears of it, but the skin is swollen where it can be seen or felt: cut above until the tongs can grasp it, and then extract it; if it leaps out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand round so that it enters into the bone, and enlarge the bone; then draw out the [foreign body].
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	If it cannot be withdrawn, leave it there again and then restart the extraction until it comes out fully; if an arrowhead is stuck in bone, push along the entire shaft of the arrow; if it is embedded and you are administering force to extract it, insert a specially-made instrument with its point entering into the tip of the arrowhead; then push along this device as far as possible, and if the arrowhead has been dislodged, introduce an instrument with its pointed end inwards to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	If the arrowhead is touching a vital organ, you must cut away all flesh surrounding the poison; if you can, then treat the wound as necessary.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow falls onto the foot or thigh or stomach or bladder or side, and it is close by, and you can cut above it, then cut; be careful not to cut the vein or nerve, and then extract it, and stitch the wound if necessary; treat it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the pincers used to extract arrows is similar to that of a bird's beak, as you can see here: [Image]
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many types: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the driving wedge is like that of a bird's feather, to push against the tip of the arrow, as shown here: [Image]
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the pincers for pushing and pulling is thus:
des voinnes dou cors communes	common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are thirty-one veins in the body that can be used for bloodletting, sixteen of which are in the head: two jugulars behind the ears, called 'herbech'; two arteries in the temples; two veins in the corners of the eyes, called 'aspires'; a vein in the middle of the forehead; a vein at the back of the nose; two veins on either side of the neck; two veins above the upper lip, known as 'augeherich'; and two veins underneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	There are five veins commonly used for bloodletting in each arm: the cephalic, which is on the left side and is known as the 'head vein' by laypeople; the median, called the 'fast vein', composed of the cephalic and basilica, also referred to as the 'heart vein'; the basilica, located on the right side, known as the 'belly vein' by laymen, found above the elbow, and the one most often used for bloodletting which clearly shows at the wrist.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the safety vein is the one that lies between the ring finger and the little finger, and it has two branches; in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is under the curvature of the pocket on the left side, the second one is the sophene at the right ankle; and the vein called "nesse", which is in the other ankle; and in the other leg there are also three veins underneath them.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The bleeding of the veins behind the ears aids in treating old catarrhs and migraines; and as I told you, the quality of the bleeder is such that you raise the patient's head, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then have the patient tighten his neck with a bandage so that the two veins appear behind the ears at two places dependent on the head: seek them out with your finger, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, there make an incision; then take the lancet, and insert it under the vein until it reaches bone, then lift your hand all along the length of the vein upwards, and cut both skin and vein quite through with two fingers' breadth, and let out blood as much as you wish; then draw in the edges and bind them up until they are healed; and I have already spoken about incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The bleeding of the two arteries that are in the two temples is beneficial for an old and severe migraine, and for chronic ophthalmia, as well as for the body's production of acute tears in the eyes; and the qualities of the bleeder are as I say: the patient must stretch their neck so that the two veins open clearly; feel the pulse beneath your thumb, then bleed from there; then lift the heart above the vein with your index finger, insert the lancet underneath, and raise the vein, cutting it just as you did with the other two veins, and let the blood flow according to your needs; then release the patient, put your finger on the vein for an hour, then place cotton on top; afterward bind it firmly, and leave it until it is healed; we have already spoken of their incision and extraction at the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bleeding of the vein on the forehead is just as valuable as the bleeding of the cephalic vein for ancient diseases of the face, and for migraine, and redness; and the quality [of the blood] such that the patient strains their neck by twisting it so much that the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called a "digger", whose form is this:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Place the point of the instrument on the vein and press down with your hand or something else to let blood flow out according to the amount you wish; then release the patient's neck, and bind the wound until it is healed, taking care not to work in too wide a flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, the flame should not be too pointed and must not strike across [the neck], because of the bone which is close by, and in case it breaks the instrument when being subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The bleeding of the two veins that are in the two tears helps with the eyes, and for scurfiness, redness, and swelling in the eye, and for diseases of the face; and the quality of this bleeding is such that the patient should twist their neck with some rope, as before; then bleed them, and let the wound be crosswise, a little above the flame, a bit wide, because there is no flesh there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	If the veins are fine, they may break; then make a wound for blood to flow out, as much as you need, and then bind it with cotton, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The bleeding of the vein in the nose is beneficial for fever, severe headaches, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that appears on the face, especially when it's an old ailment; and the quality of this bleeding is such that the patient should twist their neck and then pinch their nose with your left hand, take a fine long vein, and insert it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well otherwise, and the blood will begin to flow now; do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then bind it for one night, as it heals quickly; and this is the shape of the wound:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The bleeding of two guindeges helps with the widening of the armpit, the beginning of mastectomy, and many diseases, abscesses, carbuncles, herpes, and tumors; and the quality of the bleeding is such that the patient should tighten their neck under either side, as we have said; and let the master be standing above the patient's head, and let the patient sit on a chair, then open the vein from one long side more widely, then drain the blood gradually or as needed; then repeat similarly in the other vein, then loosen the binding, and gently tighten all veins so that the patient does not strangle; leave it until morning, when the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	The bleeding of the lips.
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The cleansing of veins above the lips aids in healing gums and treating gum infections, lip cracks, nose wounds, and surrounding areas.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Make the patient sit down facing you and hold their neck firmly as I have explained; then turn back the lip and look at the two veins, one on each side of the upper lip, which can be identified by being darker in colour and surrounded by smaller dark veins: if necessary, open them both up, but first ensure that you know what you are doing. If not, and you are unsure, treat both vessels the same way, as they require identical treatment.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	On the bleeding below the tongue:
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The bleeding of veins that are beneath the tongue aids after the bleeding of the cephalic vein, and it is done at the narrowing of the throat, for diseases of the eye, and for mouth ailments; and the qualities of the bleeder are such that the patient should sit between your hands facing the sun, lift their tongue, and look underneath on each side for a black vein: bleed one or both, but do not go too deep, as beneath are arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the neck that are commonly bled are bled in two ways: either by piercing with a wide, blunt lancet, or a sharp, slender olive-shaped one which is called an 'anesil'; they are broad and narrow according to the width and narrowing of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the Martin flame is very renowned, and it is so wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the full veins filled with thick and visible blood, and that contain thick and troubled blood; and this is the form of the olive flame.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more pointedly subtle, and it is for bleeding delicate veins, where there is delicate yellowish blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The bleeding of the basilica, which is one of these veins, aids illnesses that are beneath the throat, and the neck, and the chest, and the belly; and it is necessary for the bleeder to bleed gently, and to avoid the artery that lies beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it hits the artery, and bleeding occurs, it must be stopped, as I have said; and the wound should not be held but cut like a lancet.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	If the basilic vein does not open visibly, you must draw it out and change to another one; take a little of it, or treat in its place the vein within the arm: it opens visibly; and cut into the wound with a lancet, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you wish to know the place of incision, it is necessary that you stretch out the arm and touch the spot until you feel the pulse; then mark this spot with a sign, and bind up the arm, and cut into the wound like a lancet; watch carefully so as not to wound the artery when you see swelling there, for that is the artery: avoid it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it spurting upwards like a child's urine, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is arterial blood: therefore hasten and press your finger upon it for some time, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, as often happens; bind his arm, and leave it thus, and do not move him, patient; and fear may come, and do not move him until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the bleeding is not stopped and he faints, and no medical professional is present, then sever the artery if it is visible, for this will stop him from suffering; and stanch the blood flow.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take a piece of fustic bark, split it, and take one half, binding it well until the next day; if the bleeding is stopped, that is good; if not, then treat him as we have said, with blood-stanching powders; and this stanching is not grievous in many cases due to the small size of the wound, and the strength of the arm's ligament.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The opening of the vein in the middle helps as it draws blood from the head above and the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic veins, as we have said; and the surgeon must watch out for the nerve that lies beneath, and if he pierces too deeply there, and he finds the nerve, and it swells up and the wound becomes infected, then perhaps it cannot heal; and this nerve often appears, but if it does not appear in some men due to its subtlety, you must treat it with a gentle instrument; and avoid the nerve as much as you can.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then make an incision along its length.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The opening of the cephalic vein is helpful as it draws blood from the head and aids the eyes; and one must treat it by making an incision with an olive-oil flame or a myrtle-oil flame, for this is the safest method for all veins, as there are no nerves or arteries beneath.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Nevertheless, it is necessary to seek the lightest position, and not to do any harm if one fails the first time, and one starts again; and by chance some men's limbs may swell when they fail the first time, but it does no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the discharge is according to your opinion.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about bloodletting is that bleeding is not done except to preserve health and avoid future illnesses; and let the bloodletting be performed in one of three veins which are: namely, the cephalic vein, the median cubital vein, or the basilic vein; and it should be carried out at the beginning of Lent while fasting, and during autumn and winter after eating when signs of fullness appear; and it should take place on the first day or third, two or three hours after the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The bleeding administered for illnesses has no determined time, but rather when the need arises day or night, at all hours and in every season; and it is not advisable to bleed children until they are fourteen years old, nor a woman carrying a child before four months have passed up until seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	They should not bleed the elderly who have exceeded sixty years of age.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wants to be bled, regardless of the method, they should first cleanse their intestines with a light clyster if there is an excess of feces retained, so that the veins do not draw out harmful waste from the intestines and damage the principal organs; one should also avoid bleeding those who are overly full from meat, drunk, or suffering from dropsy. Be wary of bleeding after episodes such as colic, vomiting, belly pains, frequent sexual intercourse in women, labor, lack of sleep, fasting, or any kind of hardship involving the body or mind; then purify the humors if the blood is thick due to excessive consumption of food and drink, or from medicines, provided you are able. Then enter the bath, unless there is something preventing this, as a way to thin out the blood, and bleed from the vein on the arm's underside, nearest the elbow, as we have mentioned; avoid exertion that day, refrain from labor, strain, sexual activity, or any similar activities; stay calm and happy, with the bleeder positioned higher than the one being bled, and rub the patient's arm twice or three times before tying off the vein firmly but not too tight, for this could prevent the blood from flowing. Then massage the area with your hands until you can feel the veins bulging beneath them; then dampen the wound with a small amount of old oil, place your left thumb on the chosen vein directly below where it is to be opened so that the vein does not break when cut, and avoid any twisting or bending at this spot.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that bleed like ropes in a butcher's shop, and some are full of windiness such that when you apply the flame it retreats from the flame, and one cannot open the vein; thus it is with these people; if one opens the wound then the injury is too small, therefore one must be aware of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened on the first attempt, it is good; but if not, try again a little below or above that spot, unless the area is swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the area is swollen and the patient becomes alarmed, leave it for one or two days, do not bind their arm: perhaps a hot abscess will develop; do not go in the bath, then try again with cauterization if you wish; and if the opening is small, let the blood flow gently out and if you doubt that enough blood has come from this spot, apply the flame directly to it; work a little above or below instead of where the vein is swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the place swollen, do not reopen the wound, and apply a poultice of oil, for it lightens the body from blood, and the oil is beneficial in this place; thus administer the oil poultice to every wound that treats veins, to staunch the flow of blood; and likewise does triacle and bowels, when applied on the site, act subtlety to draw out excess blood and separate it if too great.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there is a large abscess that occurs frequently, especially when it has not been cleaned except for the time of opening the wound or vein, then hurry and apply to the place a sponge moistened with warm water and salt, constricting it for an hour; you must do this after the blood has drained from the wound, and if there remains at the site after some days a blackness or greenness, it will not harm; and should you see this, apply something of aloe or myrrh dissolved in wormwood juice, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	For there often occurs an abscess and appearance at the wound of the basilica: so put your hand upon it, and if you find the place soft to the touch of the hand, this is that evil appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Refrain then from putting anything upon it of what we have said, for perhaps there is a court without the artery; but do this: apply a dry poultice to harden the place, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw from each person the blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the colour of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it come out until it is red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for one who is full and robust, and requires blood extraction, that a wider wound be made, and the flames should be broad; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is advisable to bleed them little and often, and one must bleed them by making a diagonal cut, not a deep one; and this manner of bleeding is safe from excessive blood loss and nerve damage, and is better than long or wide incisions.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for one whose body needs bleeding, it is necessary to give them bread soaked in pomegranate juice; if they are heated, draw three or four times from the blood; and if they are of a cold complexion, eat moistened bread in muslin syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints during the procedure after a lot of blood has been let out, it is necessary for him to drink meat broth and subtle fragrant syrup, and use other things that we have mentioned in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to vent his arm and bleed again, when he is weakened by excessive bleeding, it is necessary that he bleeds little by little, according to the amount of strength he has continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he wishes to vent his arm after the first bleeding and has strong constitution, he should bleed seven hours after the first bleeding or after nine hours.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if he wishes to bleed in another place, he should be bled on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For it has much blood inside the body which is already heated, and causes fever; you must draw out a large quantity, and enlarge the opening until it stops by itself; then attend to all conditions of healing, and put your hand on their pulse as they heal, so death does not come instead of relief, and this happens many times when healers are negligent; and do not do this when you want to release the arm, and cause blood to flow a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press strongly upon it; or if it is crooked, that he extends his arm quickly, for this would be bad; but leave it until it heals a second time; or put a point at the tip of the flame, so the congealed blood from the vein's opening flows out, and put on some salt soaked in water, and press lightly upon it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the wound is swollen, leave it alone and do not constrict it, until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to drain blood a second time, let the vein be opened in that same place or in another wound or on the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein between the arm is opened in the place of the vein of the head because it is composed there.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	The way of opening the vein is such that the patient places their hand in warm water until the veins are red; then they should be tied loosely so the vein appears clearly, and now open it across, not from side to side or lengthwise; the hole should be wide and the incision made close to the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot come out, place the hand back into warm water and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough; but if this is done in winter, do not put their hand back into warm water again because we do it more often in winter than summer; and the opening of this vein is safer than any other veins, whether artery or nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The bleeding of the saviour of the right hand is beneficial for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it is done: extend the hand, and dip it in warm water until the vein swells, so that it can be seen; and if the bleeding occurs across the vein, and you cut it from one end to another, it will not cause harm; and do not go too deep, for the nerves are all exposed underneath without flesh, and then put the hand back into warm water, if the blood has frozen in the wound, and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn out as much blood as is necessary, apply oil and linen to the vein to weld together the wound, and do likewise for each part.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The bleeding of the one on the left hand is beneficial for illness of the spleen, and do everything just as I told you regarding the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The draining of the spleen is beneficial for all diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the uterus, retention of urine, kidney ailments, and similar conditions in the thighs and old legs.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its drainage is such that the patient immerses their foot in hot water and rubs over the vein until it perishes, then bind above the ankle joint; and this vein lies at the ankle, extending up along the leg towards the kidneys; drain either the larger kidney or where it appears best to you.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you drain it over the foot, be cautious of the nerves that run beneath, and drain gently across them as when cutting; let the flame be small.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot exit, return the foot to the water, and allow the vein to be properly emptied.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the incision fails the first time, begin again a little higher up, for the skin is salty; do not worry about nerves, as we have said, and proceed in the same manner on the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The skin of the sciatic vein is located at the base of the heel, and its incision helps with hip pain when it involves hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	The quality of this incision is such that the patient must enter the bath and have their heel tightly squeezed for four days while twisting, as otherwise the vein will not open; and if it does open, treat it in every way possible, including transversely; and be aware that you may need to cauterize it, because the skin is salty, and it is very responsive to touch in most men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you don't find it, cauterize any line of it that appears on the back of the foot, towards the little toe, and be careful not to hit the nerves; make the blood flow as much as you can see, then untie the ligature, and apply cotton and press; now it is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	bloodletting with cupping
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping instruments are made of horns, or brass, or glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by wounding and drawing blood, or without wounding.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping without wounding is also done in two ways: either with heat or without heat; and the cupping that involves wounding and blood extraction is performed on fourteen places of the body, some being right at the top of the head; others are in the middle of the neck; two more are on the sides of the neck; one under the chin; two on the shoulders; two on the hips; two on each arm; two on each leg; and finally two on each ankle. Cupping draws out only a small amount of blood from numerous tiny veins spread throughout the flesh, and does not weaken you in any way like vein-letting does. It should never be administered, whether with or without heat, for any illness caused by overabundance as it empties all the body's humours.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if due to the necessity of illness suction cups must be applied, or for treatment, let's administer them each hour at the beginning of the month, or towards the end, and in between as well; because there are some who when they need cupping have a heavy head; and others find fullness and redness on their face, and on their neck, darkening around the eyes; and some see drops of blood in their mouth, with swollen tongues and bleeding gums; and there are those who experience dreams and visions of blood, wounds, death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially during the middle of the month, we instruct them to be cupped after every three hours during the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The bleeding of the nose helps with inflammation ... that reaches the eyes, and it should not be done after evacuating all the body's blood; this venesection is in place of the bleeding from the head, and it should not be used by those of a cold constitution or who have catarrh, as it causes them great harm; therefore, the elderly should not use it, nor those with cold diseases in their heads.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who frequently bleed become forgetful, so the cup should be placed slightly lower due to the fear of oblivion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	Venesection in the middle of the neck is in place of bleeding from the head and basilic vein, and because of this it is useful for narrowing of the oesophagus, and ruptures in the stomach lining, and vomiting, and fullness; and one should not push too hard, as if it holds too firmly, it causes forgetfulness or affects the stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventilations on the two collarbones are useful for headaches, eye inflammation, migraine, and strangulation; they also treat pain at the roots of teeth and can be used in place of a basilic incision; you must instruct the surgeon to guide their hand carefully so as not to cut the artery nor cause excessive bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	Ventilations below the chin are useful for mouth diseases and gum infections as well as similar conditions in the mouth; they can be used instead of incisions on both lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Ventilations over the shoulders treat conditions caused by heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	Ventilations on the armpits are as useful as incisions on three veins of the arm because they draw blood from these large veins; instruct the surgeon not to cut too deep as there is no flesh in that place only nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping glass which is on the buttocks is useful for haemorrhoids of the anus and diseases underneath, and it should be large, made of copper as it needs to suck well; and perhaps if it were thin, it would break; and it causes big wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The cupping glasses on the legs clearly heal, as they attract blood from all over the body, and are useful for old pains of the kidneys, uterus, and bladder, and restore menstruation; and they go in place of two sophenes, or two ankles, but still they weaken the body after long use, and cause fainting fits in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the cupping glass is that you put it on first when empty, suck in temperately, and apply quickly, moving evenly, and do not cease until you see the place red and swollen, and the redness of blood appears; then stop, and replace the cups, being mindful of the body's condition, for there are those who have tough flesh, or clear pores: so it is necessary to strike only once, and make broad wounds, a little deep; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to thin out the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very dense, it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we wish to draw out a little at a time, we are satisfied with just one strike.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we wish to take out a great amount of blood, we start often; and if the blood is thick, strike deeply and fully, so that the heart is suddenly pierced, and it is necessary for him who has coarse skin and hard, whose pores are narrow, that you grease the cups with an aperitif and dissolving oil: if in summer, violet oil, or almond oil, or gourd seed oil; and if in winter, cress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess [material] is large and cold, take marjoram oil, or balm oil, or aniseed oil, and their likes.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one being treated has tender flesh and wide pores, it is not necessary to apply oil, but rather wash it after ventilation with rosewater, or cold water, or mulberry juice, or squash juice, or china root juice, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And for those with excessive moisture, rise easily with myrtle water, or sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And for those with large excess [material], rise from old wine, or liquorice water, or aniseed decoction, or chamomile, or others like it; and they should not be treated with cupping before the bath nor in a bath, but after the bath by one or two hours; and do not sleep after the ventilation, and must keep warm when being cupped and afterwards.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And take care if the patient is choleric, and their blood is too sharp and inflamed; they should eat cold things, such as pomegranates, endive, lettuce in vinegar, similar foods; also mint juice, pork fat, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And for those with a cold complexion, give them honey syrup and aromatic medium wine, which is between old and new, eat little pork, mint juice, small birds, and pigeons; on the day they are cupped, they should drink more than eat; sometimes give some men treacle or nutmeg before or after cupping to strengthen their main limbs; let the blood be thin, but those who are hot must not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The cups that are applied without injury are those placed on the liver, and on the spleen, podagra, and on the abdomen, hips, and kidneys; for these organs do not tolerate wounding in any way, and it is only to attract blood from one part of the body to another, just as we place them on the breasts when the infant suckles; to remove the viscosity that exists in an organ, which we achieve by placing cups on the abdomen and hips so as to reduce its size; and also alleviate pain where there is an obstruction or a stone, perhaps removing the obstruction due to its attractive virtue, or displacing the stone from its place; it acts in this way when placed upon the liver and spleen if there is retained windiness, and these cups are applied empty for suction alone; they may sometimes be filled with warm water mixed with fire, and other times simply with tepid water as is done for pleurisy; we fill the cup thusly using only warm water, or with some herbs which have been boiled in water.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The procedure of cupping using fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it has two inches in width and half a palm lengthwise, with a small hole at the side near its center, just large enough for inserting a needle, and it is made of brass, soft in front so as not to hurt the patient when applying on the limb; and in the middle there should be a bar across of either brass or iron, for placing a burning candle, and they come in various sizes depending on the ailments and ages of those who use them; because cups used on children are different from adults, and thin people require other sizes than fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	To use this cupping device, one must proceed in the following manner: take a wax candle or an oil lamp and insert it into the cup through the bar that is inside of it, so that its flame lies at the bottom of the cup without burning the patient; then apply the cup to the limb, with your fingers covering the hole we mentioned earlier, such that when you want to release vapor, remove your fingers from said hole and take off the cup; proceed in this manner using oil lamp as described before, repeating often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the cupping procedure used to treat pleurisy, it is entirely hollow and has no nozzle or opening. It is applied only when filled with water and placed directly onto the affected limb.
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Cupping is not applied to areas where cups cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, or similar parts; nor to any uncovered flesh like the tongue or nails, and other comparable places. The quality of using them lies in finding cupping glasses that are filled with clear, clean water without dirt, taking them, placing one overnight into pure water until they become familiarized and have nothing inside their interior. Then you must bleed from both vein and cup, afterwards rubbing the limb until it is red, then place the cups on top; once they are full, remove them if this is a spot where cups can be placed as it will greatly benefit later.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, lift the wound slightly, then with water, very well, and then press it; if the wound heals too much after the flesh, moisten a linen cloth in cold water, and place it on top until the blood is staunched; if the blood is excessive, apply powdered vitriol or gallstones, and similar things, until it stops flowing; you can put half of some peeled beans on the wound and leave them there for as long as they are warm against the wound to staunch it now; and if more is required, take other flesh.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the flesh does not want to be taken, rub the wound with fresh blood or stick a needle into it until blood comes out and then put them on top; as soon as they feel the blood, they will warm up; when you see that they are falling off, sprinkle some powdered aloes and boiled ash over it so they will now fall.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	My dear son, know that the foolish surgeon who ignores this chapter will never see any of the ancient medical books, nor read their letters; and for this reason, science is foreign in our land, as I have never found a good one; I have no knowledge other than through the wisdom of these ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated patients with it, by experience, and by my own practice over time; I have described to you in this chapter what is contained within, abbreviated at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments used, as I did in the previous two chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is necessary, therefore, that we say in the prologue of this book the main points of what has been said and which chapters the wise man set forth his intentions, and remains true to reality, so that those who are tested know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	When a fracture or dislocation or torsion or rupture occurs in someone, you must hasten to bleed the patient on one side and then the other, unless something prevents it like frailty of body, childhood, or old age; or if the weather is very hot or too cold; avoid eating cold foods such as raw vegetables and goat meat, do not drink wine or eat fatty meats, nor over-indulge in meat that fills veins with blood until you are sure there's no risk of a warm abscess forming or an outbreak of matter at the affected limb. In this way may the patient return to their previous state of being before injury.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with meats that produce thick nourishment or are viscous, such as wheat cooked in water, and rice, and testicles, and feet, and calf's stomach, and eggs, and fresh fish, and red wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For this thick nourishment helps the healing process and speeds up the recovery from the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that broken bones in the elderly and decrepit cannot heal or fuse well according to their nature due to the dryness of their limbs, nor can those who are too young, such as small children; but do not despair, apply over the broken bone large splints which bind and join the limb together, until it regains its strength as before; do not leave them there for long, and therefore they must be nourished with fatty meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that dislocations are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the skull is different from that of the spine, or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the types of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	As there is fracture that requires sawing, and another by sharpening, like cutting the tip of a quill to write with.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is fracture with an open wound, or fracture with only a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And for each type there is its own device and proper instrument in restoration, according to what memory returns to its place; and the fracture of the bone is known by that which is twisted out of place, appearing clearly on the surface, sounding hollow when pressed with the hand; and where there is no twist nor a sound to touch, and the patient feels little pain, then it is not a fracture but rather dislocation or fissure.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You must not move it with your hand, but apply the medicine that follows hereafter, then hold it firmly and gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture which goes into bone, where the two parts are separated, they must now be brought together evenly, otherwise a cold abscess will form there; and if a cold abscess forms, leave it alone for one day until the abscess subsides; then reset it smoothly and gently, and know that the healing of this type of break is quicker than those with pieces; then hold it as described below.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if there are pieces broken in the bone, separate it into two parts, whether hand or foot, or take your own hand if it is a small limb, or use two cords, or one cord and your hand; set the member according to its natural shape so that when the fractured part of the member is disjointed, bring together by all means its edges as best you can without causing injury or pain to the patient; align well the ends of the bones in accordance with their best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And you will feel it with your hand if it seems to you that it is not well: handle it gently and do not restrain it too much or press it so tightly as those who through their work bring hot abscesses and contractions in the limb, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is in place, chastise well the patient so that they do not move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, or during any other movement; make sure the limb is secure and that there is no pain felt.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when there is no pain felt, it is not yet in place, and you must put it into such a position that there is no pain; be careful to ensure it is properly aligned so that it does not become crooked once reset; the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs vary in smallness, largeness, and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For small limbs like arms and fingers, wrap soft and fine linen cloths; for larger ones such as thighs and legs, use wide, sturdy bandages, as these embrace the entire large limb, constricting it equally on all sides so there is no pressure. Then bind with light pads, three or four turns according to the limb's size, tightening your hand slightly around the bandage. Go above the break and tighten less where the fracture can shift away from; loosen the bandage gradually until you reach a significant part of healthy tissue. Repeat this process with another bandage, returning to the broken area, binding moderately neither too tight nor too loose as mentioned before. Place linen pads or cloths between the bandages evenly then bind everything above with a tourniquet and finally apply your splints if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, apply a soothing poultice to reduce the abscess and alleviate swelling, leaving it on for several days; then place upon your stars, which are made of half of a wide cane cut lengthwise into strips, or from the wood used for cleavers, or palm branches, fashioned thusly:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	but the star you place on a fracture should be slightly larger and wider than the others; it should also be as long as appropriate for the size of the limb, small or large; then fasten upon the stars as you did with the first bandage, then bind above with thread appropriately, as in the first bandage used for fractures; being narrower on top, and broader below; and the thread must be moderate, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft flax; for if the thread is coarse, like I have seen from the work of fools who make their ligatures with twisted linen cord, this is a great error, because the bandage cannot be even if it is too fine, and there should not be less than two fingers' breadth between each star.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the bones of the stars after their veins are constricted, place pads made of linen or woolen cloth underneath to prevent any injury.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by a fracture and the heart is broken, I shall discuss its treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not suitable to extract bones from all fractured limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limb is large, one should not insert bones before five or seven days have passed, or more depending on the severity of the abscess and its symptoms; here I will show you the ancient method of plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and torsion: take some flour from the inner walls of a millstone, mix it with plenty of eggs, then apply this mixture, neither too runny nor too thick, making sure to use it, for this is how most people treat broken bones in various circumstances, especially women and small children, as it is neither overly harsh nor cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Autre maniere d'emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d'uef; se li complexion de l'ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Autre maniere d'emplaustre que vaut a torsion: take mugwort and viscum albus, each 10 zettalitres; myrrh and aloe, each nine zettalitres; acacia six zettalitres; Armenian bole ten zettalitres, and grind well, then mix with water or egg white, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another manner of emplaster for joints and dislocated bones, to ease the pain arising from wear on the bone, and fractures: take new wool, soak it in warm oil then cook it in oil, and place it on the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This emplaster does not restore, but it is good to ease hot abscesses, and properly removes pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of a plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth-softened clay leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of a plaster for the restoration of broken bones and to reduce the remnants of an abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take roots of marshmallow, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, vetch flour, each in equal parts; grind them together and mix with wine; if the limb is hot, mix with moist coriander water or plain water, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method of a stronger plaster than the first one for when a hard abscess comes to restoring the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; 
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras says in his book that one should not apply anything to the broken limb to restore it other than a mixture of wax and oil, nor any other substance more, and he states that this should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And Galen seems to say that one must apply dry substances, slightly warm, onto the broken limb for restoration, such as myrrh and aloe, incense and similar things, just as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another type of plaster that is good for pain and injury: take mugwort and human hairs chopped up, or feathers from birds, and common mallow, and mix them equally, then grind them to make a plaster, adding glue.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then undo the binding a little later and be sure that the patient does not feel any pain or that the bone has moved out of place; do not unbind it too soon by hand, And if the pain returns to this spot, or itching, or there is restlessness or swelling, then hurry up and undo it now, and take light cloth, and sea sponge moistened, dip in water and apply to this area until the itch stops and the pain calms down; leave the limb at rest for an hour, then place dry wool soaked either in water or rose oil over it, and bind again but not as tight as before, carefully until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess has been completely removed, with no redness, pain, or swelling left behind, and you need to apply a plaster cast and bandages, start over again just as you did previously and evenly.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	If the limb doesn't respond to any of what we've discussed, you shouldn't attempt to release it until after three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes even leave it alone for twenty days, as experience shows, until the fracture is healed and the flesh has drawn near again; then restrain it more firmly than before, and thicken its flesh, just as I mentioned earlier; and if you see that the place dries out beyond what's necessary, know that nourishment can't reach there anymore; pour warm water on it every time you release it, each third day, and loosen up a little. Through this process, then, nourishment will return to the limb, correcting the deformity caused by those foolish doctors who restore the limb incorrectly: which is bad, and very dangerous practice too, as I see no alternative but to leave it alone and treat it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of the various types of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many types of fractures and various forms, and the causes are distinct; for there are fractures caused by sword blows, and the point pierces through all the bone down to the soft part beneath the bone, as an axe or a stick does; and for this reason, this type of fracture is called 'axed'.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Where the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called 'absolute'; and these two types of fractures can be large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded blow, or splitting, or the point of a stone, or falling on stones, or similar cases.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a piercing break that reaches up to the membrane beneath the bone, or it is on top of the bone, and this wound can be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound that pierces the bone as subtle as a hair, and it has a small crack, therefore this break is called 'capillary'; and if the wound is made by striking stone, or falling, or similar, and causes a piece of bone to enter inwardly, with its edges like those made by a blacksmith when forging cauldrons; so too does the stone go inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more often to those with moist bones in the head, like infants; and it occurs for all these types of breaks that small fragments are detached like stars; I will speak of them at the appropriate time.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all types of fractures through their dislocation, examination at the tents, and corrupted flesh that is above them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of the hair is recognized by this: when the bone has been exposed and you rub over it, the black fracture opens up.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In treating the fracture, take care of the patient's accidents and complications; if you see no ill accident such as vomiting bile, loss of understanding, extension, fainting, ague fever, eyes going out red, or other similar things in many different dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see no fearful accident and hope for recovery, begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wound comes to you first, and it is in winter, you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day so that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest the membrane beneath the bone be corrupted, and the accidents we have mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the bone fracture reaches up to the membrane covering the brain, you must split the affected area like this: take hold of the wounded person's head and uncover over the bone in every way possible, especially above the wound; should bleeding occur when uncovering the bone or abscess forms, apply the appropriate aid, filling the space with moistened rags soaked in rose oil; let it rest until the hot abscess is soothed and you are sure there is no more blood loss; then begin around the bone to remove it, which must be done according to two methods of work: one method involves cutting a narrow incision in front, and this is its form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then he makes another incision greater than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have several different incisions, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, made of hard iron; work them gently so as not to injure the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is strong and hard, you must bore around it rather than administering incisions with trepans that are not completely perfect so as not to perforate beyond the skull bone, and it should have a margin or circle above the point, which prevents the point from passing through the bone; you need several of these so that each comes into place in accordance with the species of bone, thus having trepans for all skulls; this is how the three types of trepans are formed:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities required to pierce around the broken bone are that you place the auger on the bone and turn it with your hands until you know the bone is pierced; then move the auger elsewhere a little further away, and do this all around, then cut the space of the bone between the perforations with the incision tools, doing so as finely and gently as possible, as we have said, until you can remove the bone by hand or with any instrument such as pincers, tongs; and be careful not to touch the brain or membranes.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and removed the bone, it is necessary that you use an appropriate tool to scrape off any remaining debris from the bone using another instrument similar to an incision tool but finer and more delicate; if there are small bones or scales left over, gently remove them with the tools; then treat the wound with tents and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other manner of work is that which Galen describes, which is more safe; and he praises it strongly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	You must first uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture appears, so that when you have uncovered this part, you will place underneath the head of this lens-shaped cutter, for which there is this form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side only, as the cutting edge is sharp on both sides, so that the blades face towards the bone; then strike gently with a small mallet above, so that you chip away at the bone all around, and take care of the membrane that lies underneath; if it sticks to the bone, remove it lightly, for it can be removed easily without harm or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not pierce through to the marrow, and the bone is merely sliced above it, with small pieces present, you must remove this roughness, and use a subtle scraper with various quantities of blades that you should possess, to adjust for each place the most suitable one, according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Use large scrapers first, then finer ones afterwards, and do not cease until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other delicate fractures and hairline cracks, you must adjust their causes according to its direction; this is something that cannot be answered by anyone who has studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	If the wound is exposed, you must take a piece of linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, placing it onto the wound; then take another piece of cloth, doubled over twice or three times, dampen it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth; do this lightly so as not to aggravate the wound, then apply another binding above, but do not tighten it too much that it causes pain; leave it there for one or two days until the hot abscess has calmed down, then remove it, and apply internal medicine such as lily roots, wheat flour, incense powder, and similar substances; make a powder from these things, and put it on the wound, then apply external medicines without any biting qualities; ensure that the wound remains clean, do not allow pus to build up or for scabs to form, because when scabs appear over the membrane of the brain, they will run and rot, causing great harm to the patient; whenever you place something biting onto a wound, it will necrotize above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take heed then, if any mishap befalls the patient, as we have said, it is undoubtedly doubtful without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no discoloration except for the medicine that has been applied, with such effect, you must take a portion of honey, and three parts rose oil and glue one dressing, applying it to the wound; then treat it in the manner of treatments necessary until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes both parts of the upper arm are broken, or just one, for there are two bones; and the lower bone is cartilaginous, it does not break but only bends or twists, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, you must insert your little finger into the hollow of the arm and place that break evenly within your index finger, and push from the outside until the arm returns to its natural shape; do this gently, taking care not to cause pain in the patient through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is above the nose, and the bones cannot be brought together, you must set it equal to the head of a slightly thicker nail.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the fracture is in two places, make another one like it, and hasten to restore the first on the same day, if you can; if not, after seven or ten days, when the hot abscess has cooled, then place some thin linen cloth at the head of the nose, if the fracture is in a single part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Where you place the other one elsewhere if there is a fracture there; and let these cloth tents be so thick that they fill the nose's openings.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some restorers say that one should wet the tents with butter, and change them each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem good to me, but they should be moistened in a preparation of egg white and flour powder; then leave the tent until the bones are firm and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes goose feathers are pushed into the wound instead of tents, and if you have soft cloth, wrap it around, and hold the break, and blow through the patient's nose; do as seems best to you.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess appears in the nose while you are working on it, apply a piece of waxed cloth or some cotton moistened with rose oil, or dip it in diaquilon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no abscess appears there, apply an external plaster made of flax seed flour and incense powder mixed with egg white, then cover it with light toweling and do not bind the nose; and if the break in the nose is small, and it has broken into tiny pieces, remove these with suitable instruments, then clean the wound thoroughly and treat any foreign matter left inside like iron, soldering them together as with plasters and ointments appropriate to this; and if there are no wounds inside the nose, then treat it with tents and insert canes of lead until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of a broken jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is broken from below, and there is no external wound, and the fracture is only outside, not split into two, nor bent inward, it can be recognized easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; and if the break is on the left jawbone, use the index finger of your right hand to push the fracture inward gently, then align it with the other hand from outside, making sure it is even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jaw fracture is split into two pieces, you must apply traction to both parts until they are aligned.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if movement or fracture of the teeth occurs, restrain them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk, then apply cerate to the broken jaw and place over it two cloths; put on these cloths a large splint well made, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and bind this all together as best you can, commanding the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the shape changes, release them on the third day, and then reset what has changed; apply a plaster over it with mill powder and an abundance of egg or sisam flour after removing the cerate; put light woolen cloth over the plaster, and should the plaster harden but there is no change in the patient's condition, leave it until they are healed; often this healing takes three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if a hot abscess arises, bring about what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a break with an accompanying wound, remove no part of the bone if it has been taken out; extract it gently using suitable instruments for this purpose.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with a flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and none remain, sew the wound shut if it is wide; apply suitable plasters over it to promote flesh growth until it is healed.
de la forcele	Of hernia.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	Hernia breaks many times in front towards the shoulder and the break is of three kinds: it is broken and torn into two with parts missing which is the easiest to restore; or there is a fracture accompanied by a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is thus when there is a fracture without injury, have two assistants such that one holds the shoulder which feels the fracture force; and the other extends his neck towards the affected area; then equalize the fracture with your two hands so that its form is as it should be, nor does it exhibit appearance or completion.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to further extend it, place under the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or wool, its size according to your needs; stretch and lift the fracture force, and press the sphere with your hand so that you equalize the fracture as required.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the fracture out due to it being too deep, have the patient lie often on their harness and place a medium-sized pillow under their shoulder; push the ministers' shoulders down so that the bone of the fracture is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then address the fracture with your hands, and if you find it splintered, you must cut above it; draw out the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot be joined by any means, then chop it with one of the incising instruments that you have; but put some force behind this instrument to prevent further damage.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	It should be shaped like a spoon, and is not sharp, but rather broad, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the wound; it has two ends, as you can see, one wide and the other narrow, like the shape of the wound that was made when you drew out the bones; once you are certain of hot abscesses, cut open the wound if the rupture is small or suspect a hot abscess, then fill up the wound with lint and tented gauze, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if a hot abscess appears, moisten a cloth with rose oil, olive oil, and wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Bind the broken bone, when it is wounded and splintered, by applying an ointment made from mill dust and egg white, then place light dressings on top, and put a stick under the armpit if needed; take a very wide bandage one palm in width, then double-layer the cloth over the dressing, and apply the ointment; take a thin strip three fingers thick and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that its end hangs down; place the strip onto the fracture, and tie the bandage around the neck and under both armpits; draw each part of the binding together, and when you see that it holds the break properly, and clearly see that the strip doesn't move from above the broken bone, bind it tighter daily as needed; make the patient lie on their back, and give them a small pillow under the armpit when sleeping to lift the shoulder upwards; this lessens the stress of the fracture by aligning the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck if you see ill accident may come, for twenty days; then reapply the ointment as needed, tighten it again, and leave it like that until they are healed; it will heal in at most twenty-eight days, but sooner with some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	For a shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Until the shoulder is set in its place, either high or low, and not moved by touch; align it according to the shape of the fracture, and reset it following its natural form as best you can; then apply some flour-powder with egg white, soft wadding, and a double cloth; on top of that add a wide, thin splint slightly wider than the shoulder, and if there are any strands from the splint below the arm, fill those areas in with linen swabs so that the splint sits evenly; then firmly bind it all up with a large bandage so the splint does not move from its place, and check the bindings each day; every time they loosen, retighten them, and adjust the splint if it has moved out of place, laying the patient on their side; after 20 or 25 days the shoulder will be healed, and once these numbers are reached you may remove the bandages, being sure as bone does not mend so lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a fragment of the bone sticks out before and pierces beneath the heart, make an incision above it, remove it, and do as we have said for calming the hot abscess in the breakage of the collarbone.
de la brisure dou pis	From the fracture of the hip.
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The hip is sometimes fractured in two, but this occurs rarely; it often breaks outwardly.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in two, it slants downwards and the patient experiences great pain, lacks mobility, becomes bedridden, perhaps vomits blood, and the ends of the broken bone protrude through the skin, which is easily verified.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	The restoration is such that the patient lies frequently on their back, and a cushion is placed between their shoulder blades; then press the shoulder blades together and bring the sides of the two sets of ribs close to each other with your hands, doing this carefully so that the shape of the bone may be restored as it should; afterwards apply dressings and lay fine gauze soaked in salt water or another light substance on top, wrapping it all in a cloth and tying it securely to the broken bone such that there is no movement; then tie bandages around the back in circular fashion, tightening them suitably, and release their tension every hour, tightening again if they have slackened; and should it be necessary to loosen them due to corrosion or itching of the area, pain, or abscesses, do so quickly, removing the dressings, cleaning away any matter that has accumulated there according to methods for treating wounds, then redress the wound and tighten the bandages until healing is complete.
de la brisure des costes	De the breaking of ribs.
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breaking of ribs only comes from their large size after the back, and to the head within, and they do not bend except for those which are brittle; and one feels it well upon examination by touch.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is that you set the break evenly, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply a plaster, and bind it with a splint if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	If the rib break is directed inward, the patient feels great pain and piercing, like pricking, because the bone pierces the lung; and immediately upon breathing, they cough and spit up large clots of blood, it is an urgent matter, and the ancients have used great appliances for this.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And so there are some who say it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, in order to expel the rupture outwardly.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not cause it, for hot abscesses to come, if they have not already arrived.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have arrived, then treat them with cauterization.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some of you say that we should apply cups to the site, in order to draw out the humors forcefully, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the cup may attract superfluities back to the site due to its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some of you say that we should cover the site with moist wool in hot oil, and apply tents between the ribs to level out the surrounding flesh, then let it be treated by the treatment for pleurisy, of diet and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear due to the bone pressing on the flesh, and there is doubt about their condition, then it is necessary to make an incision over the location of the broken rib, and one must place a tool underneath to protect the lung; thereafter, one must cut into the bone, extract gently, and then sew the two lips of the wound together if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a warm abscess arises, apply damp cloths soaked in rose oil onto the affected area, and place them there; treat the site with what is appropriate for an abscess, and ensure it lies frequently on its side where necessary until it heals.
de la brisure dou col	On the fracture of the neck.
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes there is breakage of bones in the neck, which often leads to bending; this also occurs in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you wish to know if they will heal or not, take note: if their hands are softened, swollen, and deadened, unable to move or extend; and when pricked with a needle, they feel no pain.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is deadly in many cases, and if they change and feel better when the joints are moved and prodded, know that the bone's socket is safe, and the patient will be cured with proper treatment.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar thing happens to the spine of the back, and you wish to know if they will heal or not: take note if their feet are softened, and if there is any accident involving their hands, as well as wind and involuntary voiding on the back; and when they are turned onto their stomach, there should be involuntary voiding.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is reminded of it on his back and wishes to sit down, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is fatal; do not delay in treating it.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if these accidents do not befall him, the matter is more trivial.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is as follows: if there is hot inflammation, apply oil of roses or fresh yolk of egg until it is calmed; then place a comforting and drying poultice, bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; let him not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is severed, you must cut above the heart; remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then treat it with ointment to encourage flesh growth until it heals; and if the head of the bone is broken off, which is called 'the head of the cow', insert your thumb from your left hand, and align it evenly with your other hand's strength, then apply a poultice and splint if necessary; then hold it firmly, and if there is any dislodged bone, do this again, removing it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the broken bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	If the hip bone is broken, there will be only a little reduction at the head, and it fractures down its length, deviating towards the opposite side, causing pain in that spot for the patient, as well as tenderness and swelling where it was fractured.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above it, so that you are over the break; and know where the fracture is and its shape; and if the break is only at the head, make sure this fracture is even, such that it regains its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is down its length, or it deviates inwards, make the patient lie on their belly so that you can see the restoration of this fracture.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it evenly, apply the plaster, then place a wooden or metal rod above it, and compress the fracture so that it does not move; support this area under the armpit until the ligament is aligned.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if a hot abscess forms there, do not touch it until the hot abscess has cooled down, and apply what we have previously mentioned; then return to the restoration process, holding [the wound] as required, unless any unfavorable event occurs; this is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	On fracture of the shoulder joint
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The adjutoires are those bones located between the collarbone and the head of the shoulder, and if they are broken, you must restore them according to one of two methods. The first is that you take a wooden stick of medium thickness, in this shape:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two ends of the stick to each side of the patient's broken arm, and lift it up. Then place the patient on a chair; then lay their broken arm on the stick, until it reaches the armpit, and have half a bend of wood placed in the middle of the stick, then let them hold something heavy or let an assistant stretch their arm downwards; finally put their hands together at the point of breakage so that the break realigns properly.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	The other method is to let the patient lie on their back with their neck tied to one hand; then command two assistants: one should hold what's above the break at his hands and the other should support underneath the entire arm and stretch it downwards so that they both pull in opposite directions from each side of the break.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, then bind the cord below the fracture, and above it as well, and have each of the assistants pull on their respective ends.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is close to the head of the shoulder, then you must place a cord halfway below the armpit, and another towards the front, below the fracture; likewise, if the fracture is towards the front, the cord should be placed lightly without strain so that the fracture is aligned in the joint and on the front side; then align the break as required, and bind it, unless an abscess forms.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess forms, do not bind it for seven days, and place a moist dressing made of easy and red rose oil on it until the abscess is eased; then bind it, but take care to place the plaster over the fracture first, then assemble the arm onto the splint, and put your hand over the shoulder or chest; wrap the cloth around and bind it firmly over the splint and arm so that the arm stays in position without moving, unless something hinders this, or if the bone has shifted.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone will move, use splints, and place a wider and stronger splint over the break, leaving two inches of space between each one; each splint should extend three inches beyond either side of the fracture; then pull on the splints as I said at the beginning of this chapter regarding fractures, more strongly but less frequently.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see that the splints are in place and tightened as we have said when you restore the broken limb, and you suspect a hot abscess, let it be bound until the seventh day, as we have mentioned; then check every three days to ensure no itching or swelling occurs at the site, nor any necrosis of the limb due to excessive tightness.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the direction, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if none of these accidents occur, do not release him from this position unless after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back with his hands on his stomach; place a cushion filled with wool evenly underneath the injured area, and watch every hour during the day or night that the broken limb does not move nor the ligaments soften; if he recovers by virtue of medicine, feed him the diet we mentioned earlier, in such a way that at first the food is delicate; and as he begins to recover, let it be more substantial.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	It is customary that the injured area and leg should be reexamined after forty days in total, at which point he must be released from this position and given a bath with medicated oils to realign his joints.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the dislocation is severe and stuck, it may take a day or two months to heal.
de la brisure du bras	From the breaking of the arm.
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the 'humerus', with one being smaller, attaching to the wrist, and the other larger, towards the little finger; perhaps only the large bone breaks, or maybe the small one, and sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bone is broken, it heals quickly and easily; but when the large bone is fractured, recovery is slower and more difficult than if both were broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small bone is broken, it should be lightly extended and made even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large fossa, you must compress more strongly; extend him on the cushion, and hold the wrist of his hand higher than the others, and his little finger lower than the other fingers, and have the patient cross their legs over themselves, and the cushion in front of them higher, so that the patient does not suffer any strain; then stretch the ministers' arms to the part below his hand or cord, and another minister above him.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	Then place equal mirrors for him, according to their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it is broken into pieces, set each one in its place, and if any piece is detached from the heart and you cannot restore it to its place, then bend and remove it as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with broken bones at the wound, as I have spoken of it in a separate chapter; then take its cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the restoration, warm abscesses appear, use a plaster made of rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard or too soft; bind the cloth gently above it so that the warm abscess is calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	Then remove the plaster, and apply an ointment made from mill dust with plenty of egg, then place the splints, and let the splint of the broken bone be closer to stronger and a little wider than the others; know that there must be six splints or arms in various arrangements: whether the break is in one bone or two; bind more tightly above the break than elsewhere, and always less so as you move away, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter; let the cloths which are placed on the break be soft and moist, but not hard nor rough; and let the thread with which it is bound be made of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And support the member and its ligament after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident occurs in the member, such as itching that arises in the member, then it is necessary for you to sprinkle the member with warm water until these itches are soothed; and let the member not be too tightly rested.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then resume the tightening, and if the ligament is softened and the bones disjointed, or a similar case, then address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you notice that nourishment cannot reach the member because it is too tight, then you must soften it a little, and leave it like this for a few days until circulation reaches it, and then tighten it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said bring relief to the patient, do not release him for twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Inquire around (for suitable bandages), then paint his hands to his neck, and keep his collarbones even, taking care against movement and dislocation, and let him sleep on his back; know that this fracture will be healed in thirty or thirty-five days, perhaps in twenty, according to the make-up and constitution of the patient.
de la brisure de la main	On the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and at the knuckles there are few fractures, but rather frequent dislocations.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is fractured or dislocated, it is necessary that the patient know how to cross himself, and sit upright before you evenly; then place his hand on an extended cloth, and have your assistants extend the broken bones, putting them in line with the mirror, until they are well aligned; apply a plaster cast and some swabs, if no abscess develops, then add a splint according to the size of the limb; it should be wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is around the area of the hip joint, make a circular bandage and instruct the patient to wrap it tightly around their broken hip; then use a long piece of cloth, and let the heart-shaped pad be as big as the palm of your hand, and tie it in place as necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is on the outside, you must place a pad above and another below at the hip joint, so that their hand remains open and straight, then tie everything around the hand, and secure the bandage between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture occurs in any of our fingers, be it the thumb, keep it equal, as is necessary; and secure it with the palm, and should you wish to place a small straight pad to lift the fracture, do not move it; and if the fracture is in other fingers, such as the index or any others, align them equally, and bind it with the healthy finger next to it; or you can bind all of them together forming an 'I', whichever works better, or place a pad above like for the thumb; and take care during restoration and when dealing with hot abscesses, and help those who come, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of a broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The thigh bone is often broken, and this can be easily seen when the leg turns forwards or backwards; the restoration requires that one ligament be placed above the break, and another below it.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then each attendant extends their ligament to its equal place; this is when the break is in the middle of the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is close to the hip joint, one of the ligaments should be towards the wrist, and the other ligaments below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	Also, if the break is close to the knee, then the ligaments should be placed beside the knee, and the extension below; then let the attendants hold the bone in its equal place with both hands, until it returns to its natural shape, then apply the plaster and bind it, unless an abscess appears.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is hot abscess there, let it cool down before returning to your work and treatment; the binding is done in such manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You must wrap over the fracture with I hard bandage doubled in II or III layers, and let the excess remain; then turn the leg so that the heel reaches the root of the thigh, and thread I long wire between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and bring the end of the wire above; then turn the bandage over the leg and the thigh, then place stars over the fracture, and put a star over the bone of the leg; then fill the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths to make the binding even, then start tying firmly III turns or IIII over the fracture; and as you go up from the fracture, tighten less; then take hold of I end of the wire that you have threaded between the leg and the thigh, and tie II stars that are above, then return below to the other end of the wire, until you reach near the foot; and bind it so that it does not move out of its place, then leave it like this, until no abscess or swelling nor any similar thing appears.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, so release it and treat what comes next, as we have said many times before; and if there are fragments of bone that grip, you must remove them, if possible; and if not, then the place must be split open, and pull forth with force; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	Sometimes the thigh is broken so that pins are inserted, as in the shoulder or arm; yet despite this restoration being done well, the patient does not recover.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	Know that the thigh is healed in an L shape, or slightly less so, or more so, depending on the variety of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the groove of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the knee alley there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is only a crack or hole, which happens to all wounds, and unseen wounds, and one feels no pain.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	One restores it by placing what is round evenly with its two sides until they are assembled as well as can be done; then apply the plaster, and use a round splint if necessary, securing it as needed, then follow all arrangements we have mentioned for other breaks, just like hot abscesses and similar injuries; apply to each accident what is appropriate until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	On the breaking of the leg.
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; 
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bone is broken, return to what came before.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is easily seen; return to beneath.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore, promote extension, and make it even, binding the splinters equally; yet if the fracture is severe and there are many fragments, let the extension be lesser and lighter; ease according to your strength.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two wooden splints that wrap the leg on either side, and are as long as the leg from knee to ankle; then layer with two bandages above and below, binding them in the middle too, so that the leg cannot bend right or left, and thus it is secure; some apply a brace of wood along the length of the leg, which holds it firm against movement, especially where there is an open wound in the fracture; move the leg each day to check for abscesses or other complications, and treat until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of broken bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no breakage, but in the bones of the foot, there can be breaks and fractures, often just cracked in various places.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is breakage in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones protruding from each other, have the patient put their foot on the ground, as if they are about to walk, then place your foot over theirs, where the bones are raised, press it until they return to their places; then apply a plaster cast and bandage it, placing underneath the sole of the foot a small board with two handles, then strap it to the foot appropriately, wrap it up with cloth bindings and other things you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	Et when three days or four have passed, you may untie the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the toes broken, restore them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place in the broken toe a rod according to its length, and slightly wider, then put beneath the foot that board I mentioned, and strain it appropriately; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, then place on each toe a rod according to its measure, wrapped in a piece of linen cloth, and secure the board underneath the foot; and let it extend over the top of the board from outside the belly of the foot so that it holds it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things I have mentioned regarding other fractures, as we have said before; and treat each accident appropriately.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Of the fracture of the bone in the wrist.
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Have her sit with legs apart and lean toward the back part of her body, held from behind; then fill up the vagina-like opening in the nature of the patient's illness with cotton until it is as full as she is; then lift her upright slowly by lifting the hips little by little; when the cotton pops out to where it comes from the vagina, pull the bone along with a stick. When she wants to pee, take off the cotton, and put back in after pissing. Do this for seven days or so: the fracture will be restored, and if you want, take a goat bladder and tie one end of a cane into it; then blow strongly through the cane until the bladder is full inside; when that's done, return to nature by breaking down the fracture, fill it with cotton again and leave for some days until it heals.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the wrist of man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said for the hip bone; and these breaks are not hidden from one who applies their study and practice to them, and reads my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break signifies in many ways the right path of restoration; understand this, then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's windpipe and insert the penis into it; then wrap it in cloth around, and leave for three days like this, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	De brisure avec plaie (With breaks with wounds)
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one with breaks and wounds, especially if they are large, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, that they be treated now, as the treatments we have described attest.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, apply vitriol as a restraint, if you have nothing else, then begin again to repair the fracture that very hour or day, unless hot abscesses develop there.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	If hot abscesses appear there, leave the repair until the ninth day, so that the abscess is calm, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause an ill event to occur.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is apparent on the heart uncovered, you must put it in place lightly with your hands, using slight traction.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not available to match your hand's reach, draw it with this iron instrument which has seven or eight tines and is as long as the width of the wound; for this the surgeon must have three or four, depending on how many are needed in each fracture treatment; let them be round and a little thick so that they do not bend under compression on the limb being treated, and pointed at the end and wide halfway along like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called 'palainche', so the bent head must be placed on top of the protruding bone; push it once until it returns and is even with one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must cut away the head of the bone until the instrument has a firm grip on it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then cut it away with an appropriate instrument, whether a scalpel or knife, to your ability; remove what remains in the bone of roughness and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	Make sure it is in its place, then moisten a cloth with black styptic wine, and do so thoroughly if it's on the head; do not apply any kind of grease or ointment to the wound, as this will only cause infection and decay; afterwards administer stars (stitching?) once you have set the bone, leave the wound uncovered, and cut away the covering all around according to the size of the wound, making sure that it does not get trapped with the fracture; many times ignorant surgeons have done these things causing the patient to die or become corroded in some cases; and be more gentle than you would for other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large and you fear an adverse event as we have mentioned earlier, and find pain in that place then one should not stitch it up; but instead use hard cloth around where the stitching would be done to wrap it up tightly.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	When after one or two days you see the wound suppurating, remove what you have placed on it and apply a healing ointment such as tetrafarmacum ointment and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	You must loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at night, until it is firmly joined and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	The limb should be supported in such a way that the bowels move downward gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if after many days it remains unchanged and cannot heal but suppurates again, know that there are small bone fragments which must be sought out with a probe; remove all such pieces which cause this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula forms at the site or any other form of decay appears, then you must treat it according to what he said in his chapter before this one.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, like the thighbone or shoulder-blade, and other similar bones of large limbs, do not extract it because many times death results from doing so but rather let it rot leave it be until that happens; perhaps it will fall out by itself after twenty or thirty days then treat the wound if you can, otherwise just leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	scabs that form on the suture
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We are often consulted after the healing of fractures, especially when it is close to the joint and the disfigurement of the limb is noticeable; perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions properly.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care if the wound is fresh: administer styptic medicines such as aloe, incense, myrrh, and saracolic, acacia, and similar others; prepare any of these or all together with a styptic wine or with egg white or with honey; place this on the night in compresses and bind it tightly, without untying for two days; then disengage it, apply another dressing until knots are removed; you may also rub over a piece of well-prepared pumice stone; because the property of the pumice is to remove all swellings from members; if the knot has already hardened like stone and must be extracted, cut it open above with a razor; or shave away the superfluous parts that appear; or remove it with any kind of scraper until it is removed and cure it so that it heals.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	Of the limb which is weak after recovery.
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is healed, and the limb remains weak and delicate, it happens due to many causes: one of which is that it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, preventing nourishment from reaching the limb; or due to excessive drainage; or large movements, not at the right time; or because there is little blood in the body, making it weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is such that you make the patient eat, and soften their body so that blood multiplies within them; administer a bath to them, and give joy and rest; then apply ointment on the limb, so that the ointment draws in great nourishment, and frequently irrigate it with warm water until nourishment reaches the limb; and return to its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The twisted limb after the injury
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration and the broken bone is visibly protruding, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function; do not believe those fools who say that you must break the limb anew, and many foolish physicians have done this in our land; these practices are to be condemned as they lead to great harm and even death; however, if the swelling and inflammation are fresh, then they should be treated with warm water, or softening herbs can be boiled like mallow leaves, roots, and honeysuckle, along with similar things; apply a softening poultice such as dauco-lipon well made, or take the mucilage of mallow and mix it with chicken fat or sesame oil to make a poultice, or you may use boiled figs mixed with wheat bran, and other medicines that reduce swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the swelling is removed by continuously and extensively rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And provide gentle movements to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twistedness is hardened like stone, and it needs to be removed with iron, you must cut down to the bone, using subtle light incisions; then stitch and diligently treat the wound.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs in anyone, you must reset it immediately without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one waits too long, the joint swells up and might be forced back into place painfully; therefore it must not be moved while swollen: this often causes spasms and other pains; nevertheless, when this happens, make the patient bleed, then leave him alone until the abscesses are healed; then bathe the limb with warm water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each joint as it returns to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations, from head to toe.
des mandibules	Of jaws.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It happens that jaws become dislocated on both sides, and this dislocation occurs in two ways: either they are slightly out of place and softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging downwards, and saliva pours from the mouth which cannot be held, nor can the mouth close, and speech is obscured by the tongue.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is minor, it returns through multiple arrangements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete and whole, you must reset it immediately without delay; in such a manner that the assistant holds the patient's head, and places one hand on their cheek close to the root of the dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation involves two parts; while the other hand should be outside to keep things even. Instruct the patient to relax their jaw and move it around freely in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	The assistant places [the hand] evenly until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the resetting is difficult, especially when it involves both jaws together, bathe them with warm water and oil until they are loosened slightly for easier dislocation. Do not delay the process of resetting as we have instructed above.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back evenly, and the patient's wound is well closed without softening, place on it moist dressings made of rosin oil and wax, then bind it lightly with soft bandages; let the patient sleep on his back, and place two pillows under their head so that it doesn't move to the right or left, nor should they exert themselves in eating, but take light food until the pain is gone, and the jaws are unharmed; afterward, eat slowly what you wish, and do not strain to open your mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well healed and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be reset to their proper place in one hour and are not returned to their positions, fever and regular chills will ensue, perhaps even diarrhea or vomiting of clear fluid.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, know that it is destruction; and many times the one who experiences it dies within nine days.
de la forcelle	Of the fork.
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The shoulder cannot be dislocated from the inner side near the neck or underarm, but it can sometimes be dislocated outwards and this is easily detected.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration method is to have the patient lie on their back often and stretch out their arms; then apply pressure with your palm firmly onto the affected area, and it will return; afterwards, place a poultice and bandage, securing it tightly; the shoulder which faces towards the neck cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it dislocates occasionally, put it back into place as we have described earlier; then apply the poultice and bandage, securing it tight; instruct the patient to rest until they are healed; likewise is the head of the shoulder restored when it becomes dislodged from its original position.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	For the shoulder dislocation.
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: first, it dislocates at the lower part of the socket underneath; secondly, it dislocates on the back side; and rarely it dislocates above, which happens less often; and it does not dislocate behind due to the shoulder, nor inside because of nerves. It often dislocates below towards the socket, especially in those with little flesh, as it falls out quickly for them; for those with enough flesh, it falls out with difficulty and returns with difficulty.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And it happens to some men that there is a blow or breakage, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, and they believe it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	You must therefore test it until you are certain; then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	The dislocations are known when it falls towards the armpit, creating a gap between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, with an obvious difference; you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and beneath the armpit when touching the head of the shoulder, like an egg; the patient cannot return their hand to their nose nor move in any way; if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden as you can feel it clearly upon touch; this type of dislocation is not difficult to reset, whether new or if the child is affected.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	The method is for the assistants to lift the patient's hand upwards and then place your fists beneath the armpit, lifting the joint with force back into its place; the assistant lifts the hand and extends it upwards while putting it underneath; this will bring relief.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not go as we have said in a few days, the patient must be bathed in warm water; and administer to him gently softening and soothing medicines, such as decoctions of althea, fenugreek, and mellilot in water, and let it be administered; then remind the patient on his back, and place under the shoulder a cushion of wool that is even, neither too soft nor too hard, then place the heel of the patient's hand on the cushion, and lift the head of the shoulder virtuously, and pull the patient's hand; and have another minister hold the patient's head so it does not move downwards; this shoulder will return immediately, and if you wish to reset it according to this method: and make sure that there is present a man who is larger than the patient; and he should be on the right side of the patient's body, and push the patient's shoulder under his armpit, and lift the arm up so that the patient hangs in the air; while another minister pulls the patient's hand downwards towards the stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, you may use something heavy with them, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	You may also reset it in another way: have a long pole firmly planted in the ground, so that the shoulder is as straight as an arrow, and not too thick nor too thin; then place it beneath the patient, but let there be soft cloth underneath, and let the patient stretch along the length of the pole; then extend their hand downwards on the other side very carefully, and the joint will return to its place little by little; if it does not wish to return despite all these things we have said, then do this cure: take a pole two arms long and four fingers wide, which has a rounded head so you can fit it perfectly underneath the shoulder-blade, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lay upon the head of the injured person a damp cloth so that it will not hurt them, then place them underneath the sick person's bench; and extend their arm along the length of the wooden shaft, and bind the shoulder to the wood, and attach the arm to the top of the main pole, then put one of the arms on a prop of an upright from the wide side, and let the hand hang down, and leave the rest of the body hanging: the joint should now be in place.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, no matter how, you must then put underneath the bench a round pad of equal wool, then apply the plaster prepared with mill-powder, together with incense and egg-white, all over the shoulder and around it, then tighten the bandage underneath the bench accordingly, and turn the tie on top of the plaster, embrace the hand to his neck, and let the hands stay in that position.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And he must eat little, so that the limb is strengthened, for then it will heal more quickly; and then increase his diet after five or seven days, and move him; and if it is firm and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is forced out of place due to moisture or any other reason, you must apply cauterization to three points as described before in the chapter on cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this and it dislocates again after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot lift his arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is either cut, stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be properly fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the armpit, and breasts, or at the back, is caused by a push, and stretching of hands, and it should be treated in another place; treat until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing process there is cracking in the limb, and it moves slowly, the patient should bathe frequently until this cracking subsides and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of the shoulder dislocation...
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the shoulder joint is repeatedly dislocated and returns to its place; if it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and back, and the dislocation is not corrected because it can be clearly seen and felt; it will dislocate according to each person's specific anatomy.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick person's cut with the healthy one, you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	Because the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm or reach their shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must reset it before any abscesses form, because if an abscess forms, it would be difficult to reset; and sometimes it cannot be fully reset, especially when it is at the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, causing even more pain, and death may occur as a result.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is such that you can reset it by extending their arm with both your hands; and spread their arms, placing your hands around theirs to guide them accordingly towards the cut, above and below, and push the joint back together at the palms or at the wrist until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it occurs when one's hand doubles over against their own hand, and pressure should be applied to the base of the palm which has been dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	If it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension; with one person extending the arm, and another bending it, so that no movement is possible during the extension; then turn the arm in both directions, having previously wrapped a long and wide piece of cloth around it; once you have joined the joint back together with your hand, apply some oil to soften the joint, then press down on the joint firmly until it returns. Once it is back in place, apply dry poultice made from egg white onto the wound, strain this firmly, then bend the arm up against the patient's neck, leaving for several days before removing the binding.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in place, untie the bandage and leave it alone; but if you see that the joint does not hold well, reapply the poultice and bandage, leaving it for a few days until it is securely in position; then you may untie it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if the patient feels a cracking sensation after the joint is reset and it moves again, bathe and gently rub the area, pressing until it is eased; or apply to the joint a dressing of fatty sheep's wool, leaving it on for a day and night, then remove it, and place the limb in a warm bath; when sweating, gently rub the joint, then reapply the dressing, followed by another warm bath; repeat this two or three times until it is healed; if you wish to, apply moist cow manure warmed with butter onto the area, strapping it on; they will return to their proper state.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The wrist is dislocated, and its return is light compared to other joints However, one must reset it immediately while it is still dislocated before the area swells or becomes hot with abscesses.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And to reset it you place the injured hand on a table and your assistants stretch out that hand, aligning the gaze with their palm so they push until it returns Then make sure that it is indeed in its proper place by having the patient lay the back of their hand flat on a table as well as when stretching.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand then have the patient lay their hand flat on the table, back facing up, and you place your own hand over theirs onto that joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that is good; if not, strain the soothing emollient plasters for hot abscesses and leave them like this without beginning again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after several days, the joint will remain dislocated; this does no harm to the patient while the hand is relaxed and cannot grasp anything: then know that the nerves or arteries are severed; unless there is another method of grasping nearby with a cautery, perhaps nothing else will work.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, apply the plaster we mentioned, then strain and leave it for five days, then unravel and leave it like this.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if they cannot move it well, and there is some damage, then bathe them in warm water, and rub it until it heals.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Regarding the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the finger of the hand is dislocated on every side, sometimes at the back of the palm or on the belly; then extend the finger and push the dislocation with your fingers until it returns, then support the head of the finger and bend it towards the part where it is disjoined; leave it for two days, and then make it equal that day; bind it at night as we have said, and release it during the day, moving it, and rebind it at night; do this often until it becomes narrow, and also do likewise if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, performing as you have done before until it heals; and do all the same when it is dislocated from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Of dislocation of the spine from the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine from the back or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no treatment, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that flatus escapes without control, one cannot hold it in, and often some members become weak, such as both thighs or arms, or sometimes the spine shifts into four parts; this shifting of the spine to the rear is called "gilbositez": its treatment is that you must turn if gilbositez came from childhood: there is no cure or healing for it.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And the one that comes from falling or blows or similar things, the old methods of treatment say there is not much benefit in all this; but I have abbreviated it according to my intention and made instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the hump that develops on the chest front, there is no cure or relief; and likewise, the one that appears directly on both sides, and cannot be treated except for the one that arises on the back, as I mentioned; it's necessary that the patient lie down on his face in a level place, with a strainer under him, so he doesn't get hurt; then stick one poker at the head firmly into the ground, and another at the feet, tie a rope over the shoulders of the sick person, and attach another to the hips, knees, and ankles; two assistants know how to tie ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two pokers; they should be well secured, the poker as we have said, and the doctors place their palms on the spine firmly, until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return through this cure, take a board of III arms in length and place it under the wall, let the patient be on their side, insert the head of the board underneath the wall, then put the middle of the board onto the spine; have those who are assisting place their feet on the other end of the board, press hard until it returns to its place; if you wish, do this in a twist that turns toward the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	Stick II posts in the patient's head an arm's length apart and two others near their feet, with a span of space between each post; have one hole in each post where the rope runs through, and make sure these are firmly anchored into the ground so they do not move; for every pair of posts, insert another turning post above them, around which the ropes will twist, and include two small posts at this pivot point that span a palm's length to assist with the turning; now tie one end of the rope between the shoulder blades to the twisting rope near the head, and attach the other rope towards the feet on the opposite side to another twisting post, and have each assistant turn their own rope until it is tight around the spine in an even manner as we described.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d'uef, et puis les estoupes, and puis l'estele d'une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l'espondile sainne, puis le lie d'un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu'il soit sanez; et s'aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l'estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c'est li os qui apert, por coi on n'i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.
des dislocations de la hainche	The dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	You know that only dislocations cause damage to the hip joints and shoulder joints, not like with other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: internally and externally, and anteriorly and posteriorly; it is more often dislocated internally, but rarely anteriorly or posteriorly.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its internal dislocation is that when one joins the affected leg with the healthy one, it appears longer, and the sick person's knee sticks out more than the healthy one, and they cannot bend their unhealthy knee forward; and the area next to this is swollen from a hot abscess because the thigh bone has come loose.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes after default is such that these accidents are contrary to what came before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him to whom it happens beforehand are that he stretches out his leg according to its completion; nevertheless, he does not bend the knee without pain, and if one wishes to make him walk, he cannot proceed, and retains his urine, and his veins swell, and when he goes, he steps on his heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him to whom it happens behind are that he cannot extend his knee or bend it, and one leg is more twisted than the other, and the veins are softened, and the head of the femur is in place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The recovery from this type of dislocation is such that you must wait if the dislocation is old and remains in its position according to its condition, for there is no treatment; and it ought not be presumed upon.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for someone with a fresh dislocation, which can be of four types, you must act quickly to return the joint, stretching it inward and outward, and moving it right and left; perhaps it will return, and no other treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	If it does not return with this method, you must prepare one strong assistant and have them grasp the leg firmly with both hands or bind it above the knee with a strap; another assistant should place their hands underneath his armpits and then tightly tie a cord around his thigh; another holds the end of the cord; all three assistants stretch simultaneously upwards and downwards until the patient is lifted off the ground at once, remaining suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to all four similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, you must treat it similarly. When dislocations are in the thigh, you must lay the patient on their healthy side, then tie a bandage around the root of the thigh, and the place below the groin, then stretch the bandage upwards towards the groin, and towards the hip; another assistant should take his arms, embrace the upper part of the sick thigh, and extend it forcibly outwards: it will return to its place now; and this kind of dislocation is less serious than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot tighten it in this manner that we have described, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft bandage over their heels and knees, and let the sick leg be extended twice as much as the other; then hang him from the head of a pole, and have it suspended two arms' length above the ground; then instruct one assistant to embrace the head of the thigh, and another assistant hanging alongside the patient, who should firmly embrace the thigh, for the joint will return quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is external, so lies the patient, as we have said in reference to the one with curvature, bind the ligament above the sick leg tightly, and also on the foot; then place two hot irons, one at the head and another at the feet, then insert an iron between the patient's thighs into the joint; and have moistened cloths planted around it so that they do not burn the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and let the examiner hold equal to his hand the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it does not, place him on a table, and press as we have said for curvature, and let the patient lie on his healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	Et when the dislocations are in front, it is necessary to stretch the sick leg completely, and according to what I have said; and let the examiners place their weight on top of the affected angle, then push with the other hand, and extend it downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocations are on the outside, it is not necessary to stretch the affected leg downwards or lift it off the ground, instead, it should be positioned as if the hip were dislocated outwards, as we have mentioned about the position lying on two hips; and let him be on his face, with the binding extended as previously stated, and press on the joint onto the table; this will be sufficient when the patient stretches his legs, and they are equal in length; then adjust the thighs, apply an ointment, and wrap it firmly with a bandage so that the hip does not move; let him rest for three or four days, then release the binding, and reapply the plaster; if you see that the legs are now even, bind them as before, and leave this for three days; then release again, and have him walk gently until his limbs regain their strength.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knees dislocate in three ways: that is to say, inward and outward, and behind; it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend their leg towards their thigh, and if it does not reach their thigh, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit straight, and stretch their leg if they can, and place your back on their face, and put their foot on your feet; then take their knee in your palms, and pull it between your two hands, then bend the two sides of the knee sharply; and another assistant stretches their foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that they can gently touch their leg to their thigh; and apply a plaster cast on top, and make them stretch the leg towards the thigh, and keep it bound together strongly for three or four days, then release it; and do not let the patient walk until the limb is strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not broken, apply strong extension as we have mentioned in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	Of the dislocation of the heel.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	Sometimes the heel is partially displaced, and sometimes fully dislocated, internally or externally.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The signs are that the ankle is swollen and more so in the part where it is dislocated; the reset is light, and one must gently extend it with their hands when it is only partially displaced.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	When it is fully dislocated, make the patient sit upright and have an assistant hold their leg above the ankle; pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then twice with your left, extend upwards, and press the foot firmly upwards; do this twice as we have said, pulling and pushing on the foot; if it resets well, but if not, repeat the process, for it will return; if it cannot be reset thus, make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and drive a stout stake into the earth between their thighs, securing cloth around it so as to not injure the patient; then have an assistant hold the thigh, while another extends the foot with their hands or a cord tied above the ankle; each assistant must extend equally, and the stake should be beside the patient's thighs to support them when extended; next, place your hands evenly over the dislocation, while another assistant holds the healthy leg underneath, and the dislocation will return swiftly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is at the right point, place the plaster and pads on top, apply strong pressure, bind the foot to the leg, and watch over the nerves that are above the ankle behind, ensuring the binding is not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the binding loosens, reapply the strain; afterwards, release the binding on the third or fourth day, and prevent the patient from moving for four days; and if they move before this time, it is not secure that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if hot abscesses appear there, it is necessary to ease them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
des dois	twice.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the thumb is dislocated, one should stretch it gently without strain, and this is a simple matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any nut of the foot or back, you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a straight table, and place your foot on what appears to be these joints, then press hard with your foot until it returns; and when it is aligned, and nothing seems amiss, place under the sole of the foot a two-legged table, then strain it forcefully, and leave it there for three days, then release it; and let them rest until they are healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation and you wish to restore it, often the patient dies: do not be presumptuous in your cure if you are not wise in this art and have not practiced it long, nor uncompassionate or unsympathetic, but bold; use at first soothing ointments for abscesses that are hot, and leave the sick man in God's hands if you see no hope of health; when you see some hope, reset now the limb to its place, despite the fact that heat may come from an abscess; once the limb is back where it belongs, then apply soothing treatments for hot abscesses, and treat the wound as required with drying ointments; and if there was a fracture alongside the dislocation which broke small bones, remove them, and do what we have said in simple illnesses; be careful not to fall into fear according to what I've said, because this will serve you well according to your Creator for the health of your body.
Amen	Amen
