O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear sons, I have completed this book which is the final in the study of medicine together with its fulfillment, and I have made an end through its explanations and by its demonstrations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I would complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is neglected in our region and foreign to all, so it's lost its knowledge and been cut off; only small descriptions remain in books from ancient times, by those whose hands have moved them.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come errors and vanity, intentions have been closed off and knowledge has been kept away.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Now it seems to me that I will revive it together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and explanation and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of iron instruments for cauterization, and other surgical tools along with their preparation as required.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good master of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine has become elongated.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who undertakes this must surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and muscles and the number of them, and their movement and moving veins and resting ones, and where they exit.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And so Hippocrates says that knowledge without action is useless, and it is only with practice that one excels; especially in the art of medicine.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that one who is not knowledgeable about the aforementioned things should be careful not to fall into error and cause harm to others; as I have often seen many of those who venture into this field without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut into an abscess of scrofula on a woman's neck and severed the arteries there; so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another surgeon who treated a bladder stone in a man with hot oil, and the stone was large; he carried away with it a part of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and indeed if they cut it out he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another surgeon who took care of the Duke of our land, who had a broken leg with an open wound; and due to their ignorance, the surgeons set the break over the wound using strong ligatures, leaving no room for drainage, and left it like that for some time; they instructed him not to remove it; and as a result, his leg swelled up completely, his foot became infected, and he was lost.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to go to him, and I hurried to come and release his leg; and when I undid the ligatures, he felt peace and no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But nevertheless, the corruption was already established in the member, and I could not heal it; and the corruption continued to spread through the member until the entire limb was lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And then I saw another physician who would open an abscess, and it would then become inflamed due to the evil nature of his work.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	Because a cancerous sore, when it is purged of melancholic humour, should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that all the corrupt matter can be entirely removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, my dear son, it is necessary that you know that surgical work is divided into two categories: one where there is danger in several cases; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and risk.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For this reason, it is necessary for you to be cautious, so that the foolish physician cannot speak ill of you. Take up your arms in confidence, approach your patients gently yet firmly, and employ the better method so that by God's grace, you may come to a successful outcome and gain praise; leave behind those terrifying diseases with great sanctity; remove your armor from what makes you doubt yourself, and have faith in yourself, so that you can pass from this world to the other in glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on any severe illness as a patient unless you want to be called a foolish physician.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauterization and other medical treatments that use heat, and this chapter is arranged from the head down to the feet; it describes the forms of instruments, the tools for cauterization, and everything else necessary for the procedure.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and cupping, wounds, arrow extractions, and similar matters; the chapter orders and describes the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar matters; it is ordered from the head to the feet, and describes the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Now that we remember the work, it is necessary for me to speak of the quality of help and harm in each temperament.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of help and harm is the longest speech, subtlest science, and greatest secret; many wise men spoke about this and agreed upon it; their words are sufficient for I fear lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cauterization universally aids all constitutions where there is matter involved, except for two constitutions: hot constitution without matter and dry constitution without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the combination of hot and dry constitution with matter, some argued that cauterization is greatly beneficial while others said the opposite: that it is not useful for illnesses caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	Because the nature of fire is hot, it should not be used to treat illnesses caused by heat or dryness, and those who say otherwise claim that cauterization greatly aids in treating hot and dry diseases within the body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	When you compare the male body and its moisture to the constitution of fire, you find the former cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it once through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in any case, only someone who has tried it and understands through long practice the chapter on cauterization, the diversity of human constitutions, their dispositions and causes of illness, their progressions, and according to time; we are not afraid of other constitutions, especially with regards to cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the doctors agreed and consented to cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my son, that cauterization with fire is one of the secrets of healing and has greater benefit than any burning medicinal herb.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come forth except to the member that is cooked, and it harms no other member if left unchecked.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Burning medicines pass from member to another in aloignant, and cause the member long-lasting illness; and by chance they kill the patient fire due to its height and the goodness of its substance does not do this, if there is no superfluidity.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found through experiment and the length of my service and study in the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and for this I apologize for the length of speech, as I do not wish to take away the secret that is hidden in fire, and the quality of its work, how it removes illness from bodies, just as the philosopher says in demonstration; now receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, my son, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be performed, and they chose a suitable time for it.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	I say that cauterization is suitable at any time, for the harm that may arise can be mitigated by its aid; especially if the cauterizations are necessary and urgent due to severe pain, where waiting could lead to greater damage to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, my dear son, like the foolish surgeon does; for the illness that is healed by cauterization will not return; and they say it so; but it is not as they believe, because cauterization is only a medicine that alters the complexion, dries up the humors causing pain, and is better than medication due to its swift action, and the power of its effect.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; 
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cauterization is valuable after medical treatments, their understanding is false, and cauterization is indeed the final step in medicine because when we apply various treatment methods for any illness and they are ineffective, then we perform cauterization, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is apparent that cauterization is the last resort in medicine, not according to the misguided beliefs of ignorant doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancient masters said that cauterization with a golden instrument is more beneficial than with iron, and they attributed this to the quality of gold and the superiority of its material; and they claimed that the color of the cauterized wound does not cause harm, but I have proven this false as it is true for some patients; and gold cautery is indeed more effective than iron, just as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet when you heat the golden instrument, you cannot know when it is hot due to the color of gold, and it cools down quickly; if heated too much, they burn in the fire; thus there are enough obstacles here.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use the iron cautery which we have specially adapted for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Here I have ordered this chapter from head to foot so that the path is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	Olive-oil cautery.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is useful for moisture and coldness in the brain, and it can be done because of a disease called "soda", and due to many humors that descend from the head into the eyes, ears, for multiple dreams and toothaches and sore throat, and especially all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged by solvent medicine over three or four nights, according to their health and constitution as well as what they can tolerate; and then have the head shaved.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make them sit cross-legged in your hands, and place their hands on top of yours; after that put the root of your palm on the root of their nose between both eyes; let your two means come together, so bleed with this then heat up the cautery which is called 'olivare', of which this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	Place it on an inky spot, and do this by moving your hand down and squeezing it back and forth repeatedly; then lift your hand slightly, and reapply the cautery to the place until you see bone if you don't see any yet as I told you before; after take a pouch of fine silk, and put moist cotton inside, and place on the spot, leaving it there for three days; afterwards put some butter-soaked cotton on top; and leave it in place until the burning sensation is gone; then treat the wound with an ointment called 'tetrafarmacon', until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if the elders say that the longer a wound remains open, the more it purges itself; thus, aiding its healing process.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said that one must let the cauterization burn until a part of the bone is charred, and then restore what has been burned from the bone, to be healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one must keep the cauterization going until it penetrates deeply, pushing so hard that bone is also scraped away to the width of a woman's hairpin because this allows the humors to exit more readily; and they say you should let the wound remain open for some time afterwards; then you must clean it and seal it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And I do not think either of these methods of cauterization to be good at all in every case, except perhaps where there is fear; and it seems to me that I should leave this alone; for the shoulder joint becomes weakened by continuous discharge due to natural causes, as we have witnessed elsewhere in other limbs; likewise when a patient's shoulder joint is weak by nature, and the first method of cauterization appears safer and more beneficial to me, so I use it thus in practice.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	from old head pain
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When throughout the head there is chronic pain that persists for a long time, the patient must use herbs and pills called 'cochie', and purgatives for the head, oils, and plasters; and if one performs the cauterization we mentioned before, but it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Be cautious if the patient's shoulder is of strong constitution and not too cold; then cauterize below that cautery we mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	Afterwards, make a cauterization on each corner of the head up to the bone, as we said before, and do it where there is a place called 'vessel'; these are places where one applies cups; and lighten your hand so you do not reach the bone: the patient feels much more pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak about it later; and make sure that the cauteries of the corners are subtler than those used on the middle part of the head, and here is how.
dou cautere dou chief	For the head cautery
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in a part of the head and extends up to the eye, and the head has been cleansed with purgative medicines, and other treatments I have mentioned for diseases have been applied without success; then cauterization is performed in two ways: with hot dry medicine or with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery with hot dry medicine is done as follows: take a piece of aloes wood and remove the bark, then cut it into two halves, and make an incision in the temple where the pain is located so that you can place the aloes beneath the skin; once placed there, bind and hold it firmly for twelve hours; after this time, untie it and treat with strong garlic juice, leaving the wound as is for two or three days; then apply a cotton swab soaked in butter until healing occurs.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment, wait until it is healed; and if you wish to do so, make use of certain burning medications that I have described in the twelfth chapter about burning medications.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done in this manner:
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery, which has this shape:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called a 'clos' because the tip is made in the shape of a bell with a little curve and has a small opening at its center; place it on the painful spot, keep your hand steady, and turn the iron slightly so that half of the pointed edge is heated; lift your hand before the artery burns, which is outside, and a lot of blood will flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After apply cotton in aw of silk, and place it on the site for three days; then add moistened cotton with butter, and finally clean the wound of ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this migraine with a 'cultellare' cautery, at all its point, take care not to cut the artery in this fresh migraine.
de emigraine	Of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat a migraine as we mentioned before in the division of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the previous cauterization methods with medicine and iron do not suffice, then you must heat the 'cultellare' cautery until it is white; incise over the site drawing a line half an inch long, remove your hand once, and be careful not to cut the artery or reach the bone; beware of the mandible's movement while chewing, ensure that no muscle spasm occurs in the patient, and watch out for arterial bleeding when it is cut, as this has great risk especially for those who are unaware, unstudied, and inexperienced; leave the operation halfway. But I will tell you how to staunch blood when an artery is cut, and I will show you where this is explained in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these caustics are not sufficient for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him on the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you wish, apply the cautery which we mentioned in the chapter on extracting an artery, with a cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better than the former one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	From earache due to coldness.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When earache occurs due to coldness and one has applied solvent medicines and other treatments as we have mentioned in the classification, but pain does not subside, then heat this cautery which is called a "point":
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pricking all around the affected ear, or both if pain persists in both ears, and move a little above the root of the ear when you have marked the spot to cauterize; make ten points around each ear; then treat the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	Of the torture of the mouth.
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be treated by cauterization is only for those that come from flux, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not apply cautery to those that arise from dryness and nerve spasms.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this type of torture that comes from a flux of eels and purgations of the head, and gargling, and it does not improve, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, another slightly outside the temple, and the third at the join of the two lips; place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and burn towards the head of the ear just above the corner of the forehead, and another in the temple as long as a thumb; leave the cautery in place until half of the heart's beat has passed; this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is similar to the small knife we mentioned before, but it is a little more delicate and the blade should be slightly thicker; after treating the wound as I said earlier, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is an old condition and you treat it as we have said earlier, but the patient does not improve and has no fever, then make four cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one at the place called 'vassal', as we mentioned before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; treat them as we have said earlier.
de litargie	Of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient large doses of lead oxide and pills that purify the brain; then wash his head thoroughly, and apply a mustard plaster to the back of the head according to what is written in the treatise on plasters; and here is how you perform cauterization: do as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healed in this way, it is good; and if not, apply three fire cauteries within the head descending to the neck, with a space of two finger-widths between each cautery; treat them as you would others, and if you wish to combine them, and the patient can tolerate it, make one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, add two more on the two corners, treating until healed; these cauteries are called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	From the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	The head must be cleaned of hairs and as previously mentioned; afterwards, comb the patient's head, then apply a fire cautery in the middle of the head and on each corner, one at the back, and three along the spine of the neck; if more is required, and their body is moist and they can tolerate it, and the illness is severe, make four cauteries along the spine of the back; let it burn until the strongest part of the heart is affected, then lift your hand away; treat them until healed, and these cauteries are called "olivare" as previously stated.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptic should not undergo fire cauterization unless they are phlegmatic; first, the brain must be cleansed with herbs and other treatments as we have described in the division for when the patient is large and suffers from taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot withstand this, let him gargle and chew, cleansing the brain often with good meat; afterwards, seize his head in the middle, and perform the cauterization as we have said before, cauterizing the vessel and each corner; and if the patient is strong and suffers, perform cauterizations as I have described for one who has paralysis and bodily weakness, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterization be olive-oil based as I have stated.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, perform this subtle cauterization procedure as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause of melancholy is due to excess or corrupted moisture and thick phlegm, then cauterize with several cauterizations as we have mentioned for those suffering from paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause of melancholy is due to an excess declining into melancholy and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will cleanse their brain, as mentioned previously in the classification.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, clean the patient's head; then make a well-formed linen bandage, like a circle, and place it on their head; have the patient sit with crossed legs, holding still from all sides; apply the liniment, preferably made of old sheep butter; heat it to a moderate fire so that when applied to the head, they can tolerate it; after emptying the circle within the head, let it cool down; perform this procedure once a week on the patient along with other good treatments until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you wish to cauterize with fire, make several small points across the entire cautery area.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautery moistens the brain greatly; then apply cotton moistened with butter and chicken fat on top.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes' pain
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When pain first arises in the eyes due to the symptoms I mentioned earlier, then begin by giving the patient something that purifies the head and protects it from moisture, and make them sweat in a bath multiple times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After, instruct them to bow their head and cauterize between the temples, performing two cauteries if the pain descends into both eyes simultaneously or one if it is in just one; cauterize all veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, making the cautery long according to the width of the temple; be careful of excessive bleeding and should you see too much blood flow, stop the bleeding as best you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and the caution during incision, how to staunch it; sometimes a cautery or ligature is made below the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are over the veins, or near the arteries that appear outside the head; and it is seen to be from cold phlegmatic superfluities, then make the cautery as I said at the beginning descending towards the eyes: one cautery between the brows, two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or ligatures below the two bones; if more is needed, cautiously cauterize above the eyebrow with very small cauteries.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	From the body of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat him according to what we have said in the division, and he does not benefit, then give the patient to drink three nights of cock's blood; afterwards, raise his head, and cauterize him in the middle over the olive [bone]; and make two 'clavilis' cauteries above the two wrists, a little below the hairline; and beware of the artery so that you do not cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called 'clavilis':
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper [cornea] of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called 'olive'.
de coi ci est li forme:	From which this happens:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that do two cauterizations on the two eyebrows as long as the eyelashes are; and leave it be until the third part of the paper is burnt, according to the way I said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	Of the hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the eyelashes turn inwards and prick the eye, and a cauterization is made in two ways: either with fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are even, then place the patient in your care; afterwards, draw on the paper of the eyes a shape that is like the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be by the hairs; then put moist cotton with egg white and parsley poultice on the eye, then heat the cautery for which here is its form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the marked figure little by little many times until the heart of the sign is burned there; and the signs of a successful operation are that you see the paper retracting, and the hairs rising at the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it so for three days, afterwards put moist cotton with butter as long as the scald remains; after treat with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterward the hairs grow and the flesh is softened again, then resume the cautery on that same spot as you did before; and if the hair has fallen out, cauterize it until the skin rises to its natural place, and becomes even, not pricking the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow large and evenly, then take parchment and make a shape like a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and live coals, one third each, and grind them together well; do it quickly so it does not cool, then spread it on the shape you made like the myrtle leaf, and put it on the paper over the eye(s); if the patient's trouble is in one eye alone, operate with one; but for both eyes likewise; place under each eye cotton moistened with egg white; let the patient's head be in your lap, and place your finger pointing at the medicine, pressing one paw and the snout every time the patient feels a stinging sensation from the medicine, since they feel it as if from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, remove the medicine with your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the bite has passed, lift up the skin, and observe whether you see the paper raised just as it was previously lifted by fire or by incision; if so, then all is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, apply more medicine to the place where it was previously opened, until your work is even and your eyes are sharp; then cover with cotton moistened in butter until the burnt flesh falls away, after cure the place of treatment which is called "diaphenes" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you must be careful in your work, take great care that none of the medicine goes into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft later on, and hairs grow in the eye, start the medicine treatment again on that softened area of the paper specifically, just as you did before; after healing is complete; this is the form of the myrtle leaf.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men vary in size and smallness, and according to this, adjust your methods; do not abandon the right path for one who studies this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	On the treatment of fistula with cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not bring improvement, then it is necessary to perform cauterization according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head on your hand; hold the minister's head between your hands so it does not move or shift; then apply moist cotton wool in egg white or parsley juice onto the eye; afterwards heat the cautery which is shaped like a pigeon feather cap, let the cautery be with you; if you wish, point it from one end to the other, and also have it like a tent; but nevertheless, this pointed cap is best for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Afterwards press the fistula if it is open and drain the pus, then dry it; if it is closed, operate on it and force out the bowels; afterwards place a hot cautery carefully, and hold your hand over the cautery at the knuckle above the eye, so that your hand does not slip; put the cautery into the fatty tissue of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you cauterize down to the bone at the beginning, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, you restart the cautery again, and do another if needed, leaving it for three days. After that, apply cotton moistened in butter, and treat with a drying ointment until it is healed. If forty days pass without healing, use corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; then treat according to what follows in this chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	There is also a method of cauterizing for fistulas that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	If you find a fistula, open the spot with a knife. After that, insert into the opening one slender camel hair of the kind used for this procedure.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	et they make it to the quantity of a .З. of lead; and hold your hand or metal plate firmly, and do not let the patient move at all, so that the molten lead does not flow into his eye; and one must place on the patient's eye moist cotton soaked in egg white or oil: the lead thus fills the place of the fistula, and the healthy tissue passes through with marvelous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization we mentioned, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, one must administer the perforation with a knife, and bring the fistula back to the body of the nail according to what is appropriate in its proper place.
des crevaices en levres	cracks on lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks occur on lips called "scabs," especially in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as mentioned in the previous section, and the treatment is not beneficial, then heat a small knife-shaped cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	Place it on the cracks with pressure until it reaches the bottom; afterward, clean the area with wax until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	The abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess forms at the root of the throat or in the tonsil, palate, or tooth roots, it becomes infected and swollen, turning into a fistula; you treat it as mentioned earlier, but if it doesn't heal: then take a cautery according to the size of the fistula; open the fistula's hole, and keep your hand steady until the hot iron reaches its bottom and back; do this once or twice, after treating it as previously mentioned in 'Treatments', until it is healed; if it heals this way, that's good; but if not, then you must uncover the area and remove any rotten bone according to what you find in the relevant chapter.
dou movement des dens	For the movement of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine which doesn't work, then place the patient's head on your lap; afterward heat the cautery that will be formed as follows: put a rod over the tooth; insert the hot cautery inside immediately, keeping your hand steady so the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth; then withdraw your hand and repeat the cauterization according to your wish; after fill the patient's mouth with salt water, let him keep it for an hour and rinse his mouth with cold water.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	In this way the moving tooth is confirmed in place, and the softened gum is restrained, while the corrupted moisture dries up.
de la dolor des dens	Of the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain arises due to coldness, whether it is present or imaginary, and medical treatments are ineffective, then there is a need for cautery in two ways: butter cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Butter cautery is performed as follows: take cow butter and place a portion of it in an iron or brass spoon; then, wrap cotton around the tip of a toothpick and dip it in boiling butter; apply this to the aching tooth until it cools down; repeat often enough for its healing properties to reach the root of the tooth. If you wish, you can moisten wool and cotton with cold butter and place it on the painful tooth, then put a hot iron against it until the heat reaches the end of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cauterization with fire is such that you take a cane of iron or copper, and it should be thick enough so the fire does not reach the patient's mouth; after heating the cautery, which will be explained later, place it on the tooth and hold your hand there until the cauterization has cooled down; do this often, for the pain will be removed that very day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And the patient should fill their mouth with good butter during the urgency of this cauterization, and then let it cool afterward; this is the method for cauterization:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And cauterize any part of the head you wish to, depending on your ability; this is the method for the cane:
des scrophules	Some scrofulas
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofulas are caused by a cold and damp humour, and do not respond to digestion through medication, then heat the cautery with its chimney, from which smoke emerges afterwards, and make two openings for the smoke at the other end of the cautery; place the hot cautery on the abscess once or as many times as necessary until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; if the abscess is small, use a cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like this for three days; then apply moist cotton with butter until the burning sensation subsides; afterward treat the area with ointments and dressings until it heals.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the chimney:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture prevails over the liver channels, especially when it arises from cold constitution, then the patient must first be purged by solutive medicines; after that, cauterize at the root of the throat, and take care not to go near the throat, only burning a little bit below the heart.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then perform another cauterization at the nape of the neck where it joins with the skull, and let the cauterizations which are called "clavicle" be done as mentioned before; treat the wound as we have said earlier until it is healed.
de la toust	From the cough.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all lung diseases are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and it is an old illness, then perform two cauterizations over the axilla in their armpits; another cauterization in the middle of the chest between the two breasts; and let these be the "clavicle" cauterizations as mentioned before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see fit, perform the fire cautery by pricking with the 'point' which is previously described for treating ear infections; and let there be thirty points or so around it.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the site according to what has been said before, let there be three rows of cautery marks in this pattern:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because the cauterization is more gentle when done in three rows at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Of the shoulder dislocation.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; 
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the heart until it pierces through to the ribs, and four cautery marks would appear; and for this reason, cauterization is done with a three-pronged cauterizer, thus the pattern of six cauterizations is formed; and these nerves follow the subtle path of a tent, which is the shape of the three-pronged cauterizer.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	and sometimes it is adjusted over this one nerve, so there are eight cauterizations instead.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Afterwards, place the small round cauterizer on top and grind it with a needle; then let the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it dislocates again soon after, then do a cauterization on the thick part of the collarbone, with many small cauterizations close together.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When cold and excess moisture affect the stomach to such an extent that it is drawn away from its natural balance, and catarrh multiplies within him, and with usual treatments he does not improve, then it is necessary for the patient to be reminded of his posture on his back, and to extend his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	Thereafter make three cauteries underneath the navel with a spoon-shaped tool of the size of a thumb, for the whole cautery is clinched, and two cauteries outside the two sides such that the shape of the cauteries be at three angles, and let there be enough space between one and another that they are not joined together when casting off scurf; and let the cautery be so perfect that it cleanses the two parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauterys be according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	Et if you want to cauterize with a large cautery on the stomach according to this method; and for those who fear this cautery, first prick and bleed at that same spot on the stomach. Mark a point according to the size you wish to cauterize; then apply the entire 'point' cautery.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating the wound that we had before, until it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver suffers pain from cold and moisture and large accumulations of gas, so that it is thrown out of its natural state by superfluities; and the patient is treated as we have said in divisions, but it does not benefit him, then the patient must be reminded of his condition; and apply three cauteries according to this form, figure, and size on the liver, outside the hypochondria, where the man's coat hangs; and leave a space between each cautery equal to the thickness of a finger; let the cauteries run lengthwise along the body, do not press down too hard with your whole hand at any point during the procedure; only burn halfway through the heart of the liver, and have the patient standing upright on their feet; if they cannot stand, then let them lie down, stretch out their legs, and raise their arms; this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your wish is to cauterize these cauteries with the lancet, if you are skilled and wise in this art, be careful not to burn the entire heart, for you would cause the whole body to dry up; and do not reach the mouth, as the heart is very delicate there, and know it well.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is within the flesh of the liver or its membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient will feel a pain that is not too severe; but if it is in the membrane, they will suffer unbearable pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And so when this treatment requires it, the patient must be reminded of the care needed for their head; then bleed from a nearby spot where the abscess is located, and then heat the cautery which resembles a ray [fish], due to its shape:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize with fire until the heart is burnt, and it reaches as far as the sifac, so that the pores are all closed; afterwards treat according to the treatment of eschars until it is healed; and no one should use this cautery except those who have studied medicine for a long time, and by whose hands these diseases have sometimes been cured.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he may operate boldly, and yet it seems to me that one is better off leaving him alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	scarring scarification
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that for pleuresis one should make cauteries with the roots of aristolochia, and in this way: take a root of aristolochia which is long, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, also thick and as long as your two fingers; moisten it with oil, then apply it to the fire, and cauterize with a cautery between the armpit and neck, and two small cauteries somewhat lower down on that part which is below the beard; two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining slightly behind; one cautery in the middle of the chest, and another over the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on either side of the chest outside the cautery which is between the two shoulders; do not press your hand hard, but apply it gently as if you were smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And some ancient authorities said that any man should use fire cautery like the barber, heating it and placing it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess, which removes pain as we have already stated for liver abscesses.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this procedure there is fear that the patient may die now, or a fistula may develop which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of mice
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the illness of mice as we have stated in the division of treatments, and it does not improve, then there are three types of cautery which are all beneficial.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	One way is to perform three or four cauterizations in a line following the length of the mouse, following the shape of the liver cautery as we have stated before; do not press your hand on all the cauterizations, and let the patient lie prone on their back; another way of cauterizing is to heat the two-nerved cautery as we showed in shoulder dislocation; lift up the heart which is above the mouse, or where the pain of the patient comes from the left side, and make the elevations you lift up the heart according to the heart, following the length of the body, and let the cauterizations be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has gotten rid of pus over a long time, and this is better than the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not useful for dropsy, except for the method called "ascites".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods we have mentioned in divisions, and your treatment is not beneficial, then you must perform four cauterizations around the navel, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back on the spine, and one at the breast; and ensure that the cauterizations are close to the heart's position.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After that, leave the open cauterization for a long time to drain pus, and do not discontinue the patient's treatment after the cautery; and healing will be hastened, and both intentions will be combined with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly shall be the clavicle that we have shown before; and that for the back shall be olive-shaped, according to what has been set forth here previously.
de l’enfleure des piez	Of swelling in the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and they are full of yellow water, you must cauterize on the back of the heel between the little toe and the next; lift your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not go in too deep, lest you pierce the yellow water; let the cautery be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	Afterwards, make two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the fibula; let one cautery be lengthwise below the knee in front and the other above it, in the middle of the leg; leave these cauteries open for a long time without cleaning them, until all the water is gone; then treat with the other treatments we have mentioned.
de la menoison	Of the dwelling.
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the cause of abdominal pain comes from cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digestive faculties which are in the stomach and intestine are weakened, and cannot be cured by ordinary remedies; and you see the patient suffering greatly, with vigorous vitality, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before about the stomach cautery or circular cautery; and four subtle clavicle cauteries around the navel, one subtle clavicle cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, apply a cautery to the wrist, one cautery on each elbow, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	For the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are present at the foundation, one or more, and they are old, consisting of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and are treated as mentioned in divisions, but it provides no benefit, then perform cauterizations: three on the spine of the back, the one that is entirely outside the lower back area in a triangular shape, and one cautery below the navel two fingers wide; if you think their stomach has cooled down, and meat isn't cooking properly, and there's swelling in the face, then place one large cauterization on the stomach, as mentioned earlier, another one over the liver, and another on the spleen with all cauteries being fixed; leave the cautery open for a long period.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment let the wound heal entirely.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Of fleshiness which is named 'thelul'
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you treat thethelul, heat the cautery until it resembles a razor, and then place it fully heated on thethelul that has been cut; leave your hand there until the cautery touches the base of the wound, from which blood will flow; do this once or twice, and if there is muchthelul, cauterize each area as we have said; afterwards treat with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on alchatim, it will be more helpful.
de plaie mal curee	Of poorly treated wounds
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, as we will describe in its place, then such an illness arises that can only be cured by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When someone develops a fistula and it is filled with pus and corrupted moisture, you must first test it carefully with various treatments, ensuring that you know the entire extent of its depth.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	Heat the cauterizing iron until it is very hot and insert it into the fistula according to how deep the probe went in, and repeat the cauterization as many times as necessary - once or twice or thrice depending on what is required; be mindful not to burn any nearby nerves or large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; 
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When kidney pain arises from cold and severe flatulence, and it is not a woman's ailment, then you must perform cautery on the kidneys one each side with the clavicle cautery we mentioned before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a row, which will provide more significant relief.
de la vessie	Of bladder disease
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then perform a cautery outside on the part of the bladder where the hairs of the forearm begin, both right and left, each cautery as long as the length of one thumb; and do another cautery outside the back, or two if needed; let these be clavicle cauteries according to the form mentioned before.
de la marris	Of the unhappy
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the womb is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and flowers are corrupted and their endings delayed; and when they come, she feels great pain: then you must apply three cauterizations around the belly, as we have said in the bladder cautery, and two cauterizations outside the back; and let the cauterization be clamped, as we have described.
de la hainche	Of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moisture descends into the hip socket, causing it to dislocate from its place, and the sign is that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the joint's location can be found at the front of the hip socket, then you must cauterize the patient on the hip socket with one cautery in a circle shape, and make an incision before the joint around the socket as it turns, so that the socket falls within the circle; and let this cauterization be like the one used for the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present, make three large olive oil cauteries, and let the cauteries be as perfect as all hearts; and treat until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of hip pain.
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain occurs in the hip joint, caused by cold and moisture, and the patient has been treated as we have said in the division but it does not heal, and the illness is chronic: then you must purge the patient of thick foul humors with fetid pills or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After performing the cautery; and the manner of the cautery is according to two methods: that is to say, with burning medicines, and with fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Cautery of fire is done in many ways, one of which is as follows: cauterize the hip bone with three triangular cauteries in this form, make them deep and large, leaving space between each equal to the width of a thumb, and let these be olive-shaped; sometimes one cauterizes at the center over the head of the hip, for there are four in this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see fit, cauterize with the circular cautery we mentioned before in hip dislocations; but do so in such a way that the circles encompass the entire hip, and all specific spaces of the heart are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	This is the method used in sciatica when the pain remains in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	Et if it comes up to the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations where the patient says the pain is located, and apply four cauterizations above the ankle; slightly less on the left side. Make the cauterization with a small knife, and burn off any fatty tissue over the heart; and if the patient feels that the pain extends down to the toes or nearby, cauterize where he/she feels the pain at three points or four for each "point" of cauterization.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if necessary, make more; and if it seems that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, apply a knife or circular cauterization, and take great care with all your cauterizations to not leave the area so burned as to burn nerves and large arteries, nor cause greater harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many [people] who had cauterisation done on their ankle, and they left it until their leg was completely swollen, and their foot too, and all of the foot was pierced and corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a bellyache from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, cauterise one part and then the other, following this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise men said about cauterising the hip, from which this method comes, make such an iron [tool] and let it be as large at its head as a two-digit navel orange, or a little less, and have it cross-hatched, and have the cross-hatching on one side be one thumb's width apart from the other; and let the cross-hatching be in two parts, and also like knots, and have a well-made iron handle; and this is its form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et soit escaufez tant qu'il soit toz roges et gitent senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, and leave the wound uncovered for a long time; afterward cure with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says we use this cautery sparingly due to its appearance and because few utilize it; yet it is a good cautery for those who can endure it, and leave it where it adheres.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cautery of burning medicine is such that you make an instrument with interlaced strips in which the width of each opening descends gradually, and it may be made of brass or iron on a single side; its height will be two thumbs, and the distance between each strip is equal to the thickness of one's finger; they are open at the front and top, and join together like so: [image]
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After, place the box of the hip on the patient lying on their healthy side, and quickly press your hand firmly onto the box of the hip; then pour between the two circles of hot water, which should be heated to one pound over fire, and leave it for an hour's time, and let the patient bear the heat and burning sensation.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is found to have cauterization like fire; and when the cauterization has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip with gentle water, and leave it thus for three days, and apply butter until that which is black from the scalding is removed; and leave it for another three days so pus can drain out; this would be the final aid after the cure of ointments until it heals.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain extends to the thigh or down to the leg, use an instrument on it similar to what you have done at the hip equally; this is the method of the hot awl, and I have written about it in my treatise on medical correction.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, equal parts of each, grind them together, and put it in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	where there is a small opening so that the point of a razor can enter; place another well-sealed pot on top and put some warm water above, until you have two fingers' worth of liquid above the powders when you lift it with your hand; let it sit like this until cool water and vapour rise to the sealed pot, then take all that water and pour it back over the quicklime and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be very painful and treated with various medical procedures and cauterization of other members, for it produces a similar effect as fire, and also has other medicinal properties which can be used to cauterize the hip, such as sesame oil, honey from acacia trees, hot water and soap; all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a cure for a man who was cured of hip pain and sciatica, and he greatly praised it, saying that no other treatment was needed, and he was healed immediately after this cure, and he bathed as follows:
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says to do it in this way: take fresh and dry verdigris, grind it very well with one pound of fat, apply it on the hip, thigh, and leg where the pain is located, then bandage it; let it sit for three hours or until the patient no longer feels any burning sensation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then have him enter the bath until his body is slightly warmed up, and let him go to bed, and the pain will disappear completely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such medicinal cauterization without first evacuating the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat fat, it helps greatly; and the cautery should be done in such a manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take woolen cloth and grease it with old oil, then apply it to the depression that is between the big toe and its neighbor, called the fossa.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Then take dry goat fat and hold it to the fire until it becomes charcoal, then place it on the wool and leave it there until it is extinguished; repeat this process, continuing in this way without ceasing until you feel that it has reached up to the hip joint, and the pain has ceased; this kind of cauterization is called "goat cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	from the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether due to falling or from impact, or excessive strain, or similar cold matter spreading, in none of these cases are cauterizations effective except for that which comes from the influx of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary that after the patient has emptied their bowels with foul-smelling pills or other similar medicines applied to the back where the pain persists, three lines marked out with charcoal, and in each line, five cauterizations should be made or more according to the nature and quantity that the patient can endure; and let these cauterizations follow the "pricking" method. If you wish, make three or four clavicle-like cauterizations following this pattern:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease affects small children, and the signs of its onset are a narrow collarbone when they stand up, fear; and you find in the last spine of the back an appearance that arises above other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and treat it, cauterize with the hot iron according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	The iron should touch every part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see fit, cauterize around the spine with the hot iron pricking two or three lines, and let the pricks be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Afterward treat the area until it is healed according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply the iron where there is a nerve spasming.
de la dolor des jointes	from the pain of joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain is due to moisture spreading to every part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, which doctors call "podagra" correctly, and when it is caused by cold and medicine cannot cure it, it should be treated with cautery like this: make a set of cauteries around the ankle joint, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if you need to apply it to the front of the foot, make a single small cautery which is called "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	If the pains extend up to the knees and other joints, which happens often, apply three cauteries to each knee or four if needed, always using the olive-shaped cautery; and if you need more, make more, but do not hold your hand on it longer than until the heart iron is burnt.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, administer the cautery as we have described in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make two lines of points around the wrist; and if any pain remains in the fingers, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come down to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and provide good care for the patient and have them take medicine.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you provide good care and treat the phlegm, they will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	On the fracture of the shaft.
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When a fracture occurs in the shaft, and the pieces descend into the hollows, if it is fresh, then on the day you treat it, make sure they do not eat; and let them use things that ease the belly so that the faeces descend from their stomach. Afterwards, have them sit on their back between your hands, and instruct them to hold their breath until the pieces are rejoined, and draw them together with your two hands, then cauterize underneath the fracture on the bone of the wrist, and make a sign like half a circle above the body; then heat the following cautery:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	Until it is white and throws off scabs.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then return the balls to their place; and let the assistant hold his hand still so that it does not go back; and handle the patient's thighs well, and put a cushion under him with another bolster on his thighs, and one more to keep his hands in place; then apply the cautery at once by your whole hand, and do it right and do it until you reach the bone, and if you don't reach it the first time, repeat again until you come up to the bone; and be careful that the ball does not pop out when you are doing the cautery so as not to burn him; for fear he may die or something else happen.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	Know that when you don't reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And the cautery for children should be subtle according to their size, and for adults, also large according to their measurements; after three days treat the place of the cautery with butter until the burning sensation is gone; after that cure other ointments so it may heal, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is fully healed; and ensure that his nourishment is sufficient for a long time, so that the mouth does not protrude when he tries to get up and walk.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	After forty days, when he wishes to get up, provide him with a well-made bandage, and wear it for another forty days; let him have good rest, do not overexert himself and avoid too much overeating or overdrinking, as well as excessive screaming; and by following this instruction, he will be fully healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I shall now speak of the treatment for amputation in this chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Of abdominal rupture.
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other abdomens and are known, and you see that they do not grow any further, then apply the appropriate caustic cautery, and burn a third of the heart; after that, treat it as we have mentioned before; and some ancients say that it should be cauterized with a three-angled cautery in this shape:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But first mark the place with a sign, and draw a line across the width above the rupture, and another below it, then hold your hand in between the two lines while applying the entire cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	The first set of cauteries is lighter and more gentle.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, either from a fall or injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and medical treatment is ineffective, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "point," and the cautery should be applied according to the length of the limb, its size, weakness, strength, location of torsion, and the nature of the pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the first cauterization is successful, it is good; if not, perform another cauterization on top of the previous one, for it is customary that it must move to the nearest limb, which is why you should continue with cauterizations until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	of surgery
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The months are healed sometimes by cauterization with great help, especially for illnesses that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	If you see a patient being cauterized, take note if the illness is in its early stages and whether it has been treated according to what we have said before about dividing [the body], and does not descend or remain; if you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the entire patient, then make five cauterizations on the head: one between the eyebrows at the front, another towards the forehead at the end of the hairline; two more above each temple, and a final one behind on the occiput. Leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the bone, long enough for scabs to form so that vapors from the thick humors can escape. Then cauterize according to what is described before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	Et si la gangrène est répandue partout; et qu'elle s'aggrave visiblement, alors tu dois le cautériser avec ces cautères que nous avons dit pour la tête, et un cautère sur le nez, deux cautères sur l'épine dorsale du cou, six cautères sur l'épine dorsale du dos, un grand cautère sur la croupe et un autre à côté, et deux sur chaque épaule; et deux sur les côtes, et deux sur les tendons de la cuisse, et un sur chaque joint des mains et des pieds, et sur les creux des mains; fais attention aux nerfs qui sont sur le talon arrière, afin que tu ne les brûles pas; et parfois fait un cautère sur l'os du poignet, et un autre sur l'os de l'estomac, et un autre sur le foie.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more I do cauterization, the more I help, and it benefits him; and know that the patient feels no pain from cautery as the healthy do, because their body is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	The cautery should be large and small according to the limbs and joints, depending on what you find suitable for each type of iron instrument.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After the treatment, treat the place with flour paste mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling appears in any limb and is treated with medicine, oils, and poultices, but it does not heal, then apply cautery to the limb according to its size; let the cautery be slightly inward from the heart; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes cauterization is performed on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, thus removing any inflammation; however, no one should intervene if they are not knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
de albaras	Of erysipelas.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called erysipelas is not healed and medical treatments are ineffective, cauterize it with a strong cautery, according to the size of the heart's species, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changes; then treat it with a mixture of wheat flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and pigeon blood and dove blood, each in equal parts; bind all together with a cloth, and leave it exposed at the site until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of cancer with cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When cancer appears at the beginning, and you wish to stop its progress, cauterize it with a circular-shaped cautery, all around the edge of the cancerous growth.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And yet the wise ones say that a cauterization should also be performed in the center of the cancerous growth; however, I do not think this is good, as I fear it will become ulcerated and corrupted, which I have already seen happen on several occasions; instead, it is more proper to cauterize around the edges with the circular cautery, as we have explained previously regarding types of cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone suffers from a disease called "adubelati," and it is delayed in dying, either due to the excess of matter it produces or because of the patient's condition (being decrepit, that is, very old) and having little blood, or because of the season; if you wish to hasten their death: then cauterize them with many small cauteries applied punctually; afterwards, leave them be.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing through the whole cautery, then heat up the cautery with what it is made of:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of the disease called 'adubelati' until the cautery has pierced the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it from outside in a way that eases the course of the decay.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment, wait until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cautery with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of illness that exists is called 'corrodens', and it is nothing other than a wasting away of the limbs, for it withers the limbs just like fire withers dry branches.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this illness in a place that can endure fire cautery, then heat the small and large clavicle-shaped cauterizers moderately, according to what is suitable for the location of the illness; afterward, cauterize it from all sides so thoroughly that you eradicate any corruption, leaving nothing of it behind; let everything corrupt be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it for three days, and apply to the cauterized spots a soft ointment with oil so that the scabs from the fire are removed, along with all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	Afterwards treat it with ointments producing flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that healthy flesh has not formed, it is good; but if this does not happen, recommence the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted parts.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this treatment has sometimes been cured by medicine without fire cautery; but nevertheless the cauterization of fire is of greater help and I have already described the cure with medicine above, take it when you need to.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	for blisters that come on the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often there arises in the feet by default a disease which is called "claws" according to our understanding, and it is an erroneous swollen thing that wounds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterization of this disease is according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cautery, and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Cautery of fire is such that you heat a cauterizer like the quill of an owl, and it should be made of good iron to fit the nail from all sides, with thin edges; afterward place it hot on top of the nail, then turn your hand around the nail until you reach the bottom; leave it there for three days until it begins to discharge pus. Then apply a plaster of wild mallows crushed with honey and leave overnight so that the nail falls out and is uprooted from its roots
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the place of ointment, getting rid of any matter until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by force of the body and occur often in hands and feet, you must apply hot water cautery to them; it is done this way: take a copper or iron pipe, or an owl quill, and place it over the nail and wart, that is, warts caused by verrucae; put the pipe so that it covers all around, then fill with warm water, hold your hand steady, and press while turning your hand so that the edge of the pipe reaches the root of the nail, allowing the hot water to reach deep down to the roots. Let the patient endure this for an hour, then leave them be and they will fall out completely from their roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another until you eradicate all those that are in the body, then treat them with ointments that produce flesh.
li cure dou trembler	The doctor of shivering.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some shiver due to coldness of nerves, quartan fever or other causes, you should apply four cauterizations on the spine of the back, one between each vertebra; one cauterization on the foot, and one on the stomach using an olive-shaped tool; this will stop the shivering and hasten recovery from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	Pustules with a foul smell.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes the body breaks out in baths or foul-smelling pustules, which come from large corrupted masses.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	So it is necessary at first when they appear that one should apply a cautery to each head of the pustule: A subtle cautery made from myrtle wood, with its tip taken by fire, or from long aristoloche root, or the lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes the cauterization is done at the beginning when they first appear, according to this method, and it prevents their further growth but destroys the excess from which they come, thus healing them; yet it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often there is great loss of blood from the artery that is cut in a wound which comes out spontaneously or after an incision to treat an abscess, or during cauterization of a limb, and similar things; and it is quite difficult to stop this bleeding.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And nonetheless, when this happens to someone, quickly place your index finger on the wound's injury and press firmly until blood is calmed beneath your finger and no more drips out; then put several small and large olive oil-coated cauterizing irons onto a flame until they're all red hot; next take one of these - either big or small depending on the wound and where the artery lies, place the cauterizing iron on that vein you've been holding with your finger, and hold it there until bleeding is stanched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if blood spurts when you lift your finger from the wound and the first iron has cooled, quickly grab another of those that are still on the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	Do not stop repeating this process of one after the other until bleeding is stopped completely; and be sure to avoid damaging the nerve nearby, or causing further harm to the patient; know that when blood flows from an artery it cannot easily be stemmed especially if the artery is large unless it's done through one of these four ways we've mentioned: cauterization, extraction when not treated directly, strong binding with thread, or application of medicines capable of stanching bleeding; and bind tightly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will apply compression with narrow bandages or place burning substances on top, or other similar treatments, it does no good if not done properly.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone without any mirror or medicine present, they must place their index finger on the wound of the vein as we mentioned earlier, and press down firmly until it is compressed over the wound and the vein; do not move the finger, but keep it moist with cold water that is very cold so that the blood becomes frozen and thickened and compressed; and prepare in advance what is needed for cauterization and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We told you in the first chapter about all diseases that require fire cauterization or burning medicines, and their causes, instruments, and types of cauterization; I placed this chapter on the head down to the feet, and will proceed through this book in a similar way so that what is sought can be found more easily.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, as I begin this work, dear child, you must learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one about cauterization, and therefore greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in extracting arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many people come into treatment in different ways.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	Some come from such backgrounds that they become so afraid of their illness and the severity of its nature that they die quickly due to fear, and one must be fearful of this.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these there are some who give you their sense, and say: "Wait, I am healed"; but the disease is deceitful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	You must not consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put more trust in your honor than in your greed, and do not work foolishly but wisely on what you are certain of, and from which you can gain profit and fame; and use prognostication and indication in treating your patients for their recovery, and this will help you gain a good reputation, glory, and praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Most dear son, may our Lord give you good understanding and uprightness, and if He wishes to inspire you with the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter for you, arranged in chapters, according to what is before it in the chapter on cauterization, which I have explained to you from head to toe, so that you may find more easily what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	A head full of water.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness often comes to children at birth, when the midwife grips the child's head too tightly; and sometimes it comes from an unknown cause that one does not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this illness occur except in children, and death rushed towards all those that I saw; therefore it seems to me better to leave such treatments aside.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose shoulder was full of fluid, and the head swelled each day so much that he could not bear it; and the moisture increased until he died, and this moisture had gathered beneath the bone above the armpit, between the heart and the bone; and when the condition is such that the moisture is located between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you must make an incision in the head, a long one as wide as two fingers, so that the moisture flows out; and this is the form of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more profound, and the abscesses are larger, then make two incisions in the form of a cross, according to this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see signs of the commissures of the head opening from each side, and the fluid escapes when pressed inward with your hand, but it does not return to its place: then you must make three incisions in the head in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision extract the moisture forcefully.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Afterwards bind the wounds with cloth strips and apply powders, then put on wine and oil, and leave like this for five days; afterwards release it, and treat the wound with dressings and ointments, and allow the head to move freely, and feed the patient dry meat without moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another method of incision is to observe where the swelling of the abscess appears, and its accumulation of pus; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Make an incision where the abscess appears and pus accumulates, and cut it open according to your ability; be careful not to sever the artery; let blood flow so that the patient does not die from loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of rheumatism.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When someone has a disease called 'cataract' in the eyes or throat, and it is an old illness that does not benefit from medical treatment, then the last resort is cauterisation along with cutting of the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	You must therefore, when you are about to cut the veins, have the patient lean back; then rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries show through, then tighten the patient's neck with all your might using a cloth; then look where the windpipe lies and the carotid arteries on either side of it, which can be seen beneath the jawbones; then mark out these areas, then cut both of them with a sharp spatule, so that the incisions reach down to the bone, and let this be done from the front of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see it, push the spatula beneath the artery and the cup above, cutting just as much as needed across the width.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, blood will gush out continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the artery does not open to touch, you must measure its width at three digits, then cut down to the bone; and what needs to be removed of blood is six cupfuls, perhaps a little more or less, according to how much the patient can bear, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains on the bone any point of the siphon, if hot abscesses do not appear, then clean the wound and bind it, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	Of migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine comes, with a persistent runny nose, heat in the temples and forehead, and similar ailments, and it is treated with various medical remedies but does not improve, we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have explained.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extraction is as follows: The patient should pull back their hair from the temples and pay attention to the artery that appears in the temple, for it becomes visible through its pulsation, although it may be hidden in some people who are too cold; if it is hidden, the patient should tighten their collar with a few cloths, then rub the area with a rough cloth and warm the place with hot water until the artery becomes clearly apparent; then take the spatule whose shape is as follows:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then draw it upwards with pincers, and remove any membranes that are underneath on each side; and if the artery is delicate, turn it to the point of the uncinae, then cut off that part according to the size of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, then blood cannot flow through at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out blood from the six openings until three; and if the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread, so that no putrefaction comes before the wound heals, and let the blood flow accordingly; then cut off the superfluity between the two ties at the same time, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a knife down to the bone until the fingers are amputated; and this is an important operation, especially when the patient has no fever and is of hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cauterization is helpful to end moisture, thus it provides greater aid for moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries, one must fill the space with old cotton and place well-made tents on top; when you remove them, ensure that they are treated with dry medicines to promote healing, and use tents to cover until it is healed; if there is no clotting within the artery while you work, quickly cauterize it or apply vitriol and hold it in your hand to stop the bleeding; if these are not present, then put your thumb over the wound until blood clots, cool the area with cold water until bleeding stops, and ensure it is properly compressed; what matters most during this extraction is that you cauterize the vein using this trenchant method on two sides, but ensure the cuts are deep enough to retain heat for longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too thin, they hold less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there should be a thickness of space between the two blades, and then when you have struck to insert both places, place the hot iron on top until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein into two places; they should be separated by the two horns because this cautery is not continuous throughout. And this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes flow down onto the veins that are above the top of the head in front, and it does not help to treat with medicine what is done there, and you see the patient's face turn red, and feel a trembling sensation on their forehead; and their temples are thin and moist so that the hairs fall out, and they become heated, and scorched by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», and it is that you do at the back of the patient who has this disease the hairs he has on his forehead, then make him III incisions on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be like II in all the front downwards up to the nose, and the others II on the two sides above the temples, and beware of cutting the arteries that are on the two sides above the temples; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and each wound be the size of III fingers across joined together; and have ready a piece of sponge and lots of clean cloth to dry the blood, then insert the sharp spatule of II parts of which this is the form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the first incision which is above the temple up to the second incision; and scrape all the heart that is between the II incisions with all its skin that is over the bone, then do likewise from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then withdraw this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	so insert into the first incision the instrument that is called 'the knife', and it is very sharp on one side, while on the other side it is soft, not sharp at all, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the cutting edge towards the flesh close to the heart and the soft side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle incision.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And sever all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes so that the incision is continuous up to those which emerge from the heart, and then do likewise in the middle incision up to the other side; and then extract the blood equally, and press the place for the blood taken out; then insert into each incision a plug of old cotton, and apply onto compresses moistened with wine and oil and egg-white, and make sure that no hot abscess forms there; on the third day remove the ligature, and immerse it in a large quantity of lukewarm water, then treat it with basilicon ointment together with rose-oil, and other treatments used for wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	Of eye disease
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When someone has an acute catarrh and you see their eyes sunken and small, with weakened vision and burnt sclera; the hair falls out, and on the head there is sharp pain, and the patient sneezes; then know through these symptoms that this matter and this catarrh originates from multiple veins, and the cure for it is as follows.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you instruct the patient to press their forehead back, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead and another one across the brow bone.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	Beginning with the incision at the left temple, move to the right temple, and let it be an incision down to the bone; keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples which control chewing; and when the bone is exposed, remove all blood with a sponge, then fill between the two lips of the incision with old cotton and linen cloth; next bind this with cloths soaked in wine and oil, but beware of warm abscesses; once it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow there, then treat it with desiccative things which cause flesh to form.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, make a plaster out of it; apply to these wounds to generate flesh throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Cleaning of the ears 
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that falls into ears is one of four things: either grains, or animals/insects, or stones from the mine or similar objects such as iron; or seeds, like beans, peas and pulses; or liquids and fluids, such as water, saliva and similar substances.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When a stone or any other object that does not fit well into the ear falls inside it and doesn't grow within it, place the ear under sunlight.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you can see the stone, instill a few drops of violet oil or sesame oil into it and promote its extraction; make him sneeze with powdered substances, then block his nostrils when sneezing occurs, put some pieces of linen cloth or wool around the ear; stretch the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Mout de fois vient fuer par cete cure; et s'elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	S'elle saut fuer as pinceures, c'est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l'oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s'elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d'arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l'oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n'i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s'elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If she cannot be cured of all these things that we have said, then hasten to split the ear rather than let warm abscess come or spasm occur; and the way of the splitting is such: first bleed the patient with a cephalic vein cut, and extract blood according to the measure of its power, then make them sit between your hands and turn their ear upward, making a small incision in the root of the ear at the fat place where it hangs; let the incision be like a moon, so that you come to the stone, then remove it as best you can, sucking quickly with your mouth; cure it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that has taken root and swells up, proceed with its removal; if it cannot come out, apply instead the very fine spatula in this way...
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and apply an incision to that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not attempt this if you believe that the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made several incisions; then extract it with subtle pincers and sucking, as we have said, so that the extraction is eased.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case of water that falls into the ear, the patient should first use sneezing as a remedy, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let them lie on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If they leap due to this, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, take many pebbles according to the length of your thumb and light ones, and warm them slightly by fire; put these in the patient's ear hole, and they will leap up due to this. With one foot on either side, strike a pebble against the pebble that is inside the ear; continue striking with pebbles until all water issues forth, so that it leaps out entirely; if you wish, take one hollow reed, insert one end into the ear, and apply fire to the other end until most of the reed has burned away; then repeat this process using other reeds until all water flows out, as we have said for stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	For the extraction of an insect, if it is small like a flea or similar, treat it as we have described in the division [section]; but if it is large and can be felt, then apply extractions with pincers; this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When extracting worms embedded in the ears, if you treat them as we have said in the division and apply the described remedies [presumably in the previous text], but there is no improvement, then one must look into the ear with sunlight; if any worm is visible, extract it using fine pincers; if none are seen, take a thin rod of this form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let the lower end be narrow and the upper wide.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And apply the most subtle cautery to the ear according to the amount of pain the patient can endure, then suck strongly throughout the entire canal; do this often until all the wax comes out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey and come out, then plug the canal with cotton as I have said for stones; and if they still do not exit as we have said, then administer distillations as the ancients have proven in the extraction of worms, and you will find it in the treatise on distillations; and distil your oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, which is shaped like so:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And whether it is made of silver or copper, make it narrow below with small holes, and above attach the part for distillation; and to press down on the distillation, use a copper instrument designed for this purpose, and if you wish, take a razor and wrap its tip with cotton; then pour in your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you want to put into the ear canal, and let the ear be there; then push the razor inside along with all the cotton, and press your hand firmly so that the oil is distilled right up to the end of the ear; and the patient should feel it inside, and make sure the distillation pot is just warm enough when distilling in the ear; and take care it is not too cold, for then the medicine would not be as effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	The stuffing of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without holes in their ears; and the same thing happens to men due to ear blockage caused by a wound, or something lodged inside the ear, and these blockages sometimes become embedded deep within the ear so that they cannot be seen; and at times it occurs where the blockage protrudes from the hole, and it can clearly be seen.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which becomes embedded and cannot be seen requires prompt treatment in many situations, and for that which can be seen you must place the ear of the patient towards the sun; look inside: if you see an apparent obstruction, treat it with this specific medicine.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	Make sure it is smooth and sharp at the front and back so that it does not injure the ear; if the obstruction is due to something lodged or flesh from within the ear, hold some subtle pincers and gently remove all of this material until it is all gone.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the earwax is completely blocking the ear, take a delicate and light scraper and warm it slightly over fire, then place it in the ear canal.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you sense wax buildup in the ear that causes discomfort for the patient when listening, perforate it gently, taking care not to damage the nerves of the ear; then place a plug into the ear according to the size of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not do this until the wound is healed completely, instead take a plug and dip it in rosewater, then dust it with ground vitriol; if you see swelling around the ear, then remove that plug and replace it with another coated in ointment made of sweet oil and wax, until the swelling subsides; treat the patient until they are cured.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is an outflow of blood, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that stop the bleeding as mentioned in the section on distillations.
de la char des papieres	Of the paper flesh
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This elderberry which comes in paper form around the eyes when moist and dry, should be spread with tongs and pincers, and cut with a small spade from its roots; then place crushed vitriol on it.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without the bark, then cauterize with a subtle lenticular cautery, and the cauterizer after incision is worth little; and often they reappear, as something remains of their roots; and when cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	For the hail.
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times on papers there are things that appear like hail in form and hardness, and for this reason, the illness is called "grandine", and it consists of a dense accumulation of moisture between the two parts of paper; the procedure goes as follows: take notice if the grandine moves from one side to another, which is an easy thing to know; then do the following: make a large incision, then scrape off the top layer lightly on both sides, then pick it up with forceps and peel it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	if you cannot peel it off without piercing the paper slightly, then there is no harm done to the patient; and if the tear is large, join it with a seam, treating it until it is healed; and if it's small, don't force anything as the ointment will restore it quickly and generate flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hailstone is descending into the ear towards the upper part, it turns the paper upside down, and hold the hailstone with pincers, and cut and press it from one side to another; and if the paper is removed by incision, it matters not; and when the hailstone is cut, irrigate the eye with salt water, and treat the place of what causes damage to the flesh until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	from the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Wax is a fat that builds up on the eyelids of children more than adults, and it greatly irritates their eyes, causing catarrh in the mornings, and they cannot bear to look at the sunlight because tears rush to their eyes; and for this reason they lean forward onto their faces, sleep with their eyes open, and have moist upper eyelids that are swollen and covered by an appearance of wax that appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the place with your two fingers and feel the exit of excess between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	The manner of the operation is such that the patient puts their head on your chest; then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent-like structure in the shape of a circle according to the amount of excess that exits from each part, then place it upon them; press with your two hands on either side so that the excess gathers within the circle; then make an incision in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula, but do not make it larger than the wound made when opening a vein; and cut the skin perfectly until you reach the excess; often excess comes out through the incision, resembling a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract it then entirely with a piece of cloth padding between your two fingers on the outside, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread; be careful not to press into the fissure so that you do not reach the spatula all the way to the eye, lest you bruise it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	If the splinter does not come out at first when you reach into the fissure, increase it slightly so that it appears; then extract it as we have said, dip the cloth in oil and water, put it on the spot, and hold with a bandage.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if such men grind salt and put it on to corrupt that moisture which has remained.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat him until he is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it reaches the warm abscess site, treat it with soothing emollient plasters until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow on papers that are not meant to have them and become ingrown, they harm the eyes, causing various ailments such as habitual tears and softening of the papers along with albuginea, ultimately leading to eye destruction; and treatment is done in four ways: either by cauterization with fire, or by medicine depending on what was said before this chapter about cautery, or through incision and suturing, or via canes according to my instructions.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	Place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the paper of the eye towards your left hand; if it is turned inward, that is fine; otherwise insert a needle with thread above it; and let this be near the margin of the paper where the hair grows next to these hairs, and pull the thread over all the paper, and turn it towards the shaver; then make an incision in the area under the paper beneath the ingrown hairs with your scalpel cutting through all layers from the large lacrimal gland down to the smaller one; afterwards remove the thread, and place beneath the paper a small tent made of cotton and cloth, then suture above the paper a figure like that of myrtle leaves, yet be sure that the figure is according to how much you wish to raise the paper which has been divided into portions.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	Et si a teil qui a mestier c'on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc'a petit;
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut this one which overshadows the small forces equally according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the forceps, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle with a thread, and put it in the middle of the wound; and pass one thread through the large muscle, and the other thread through the small one, and bring together the threads evenly between your fingers; then lift your hand evenly, and raise all the skin that you have gripped, as we have explained, then join the two lips of the wound by stitching, and treat it until it is healed; and if an abscess forms on your incision, sooth it with cerote and similar soothing ointments; and sometimes the hair of the paper turns: in this case, you must use what we have said about incisions; but the suturing, both one and the other, is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of the cords is done in this way: you should turn the paper and make a slit inside according to what I have said, then make two cords per side, and two fine ties as long as the paper and as wide as the width of your thumb; cut at both ends where you hold the threads together; then carefully assemble one with the other on top of the paper from the eye, pulling the two cords tight from each end; let it sit like this for a few days, and the skin that is tightened will die and blacken and rot until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes too long, apply some force and treat the wound until it heals; once the wound is sealed shut and the paper can be lifted, there will no longer be any hair growth on it; this is the shape of the two cords you should make according to this pattern and these dimensions in length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, and y boute i fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the growth is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you will treat the growth from below along all the thread that you have placed there, until the growth comes out of the hole above and you see it by the vision of the eye; then you will pull the growth and the thread, and close the eye and let it remain closed for two or three days, until the hair dries in its place and flesh grows over it; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from the natural ones, and raise it with that one which you leave there, until they lengthen and then remove it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the corruption of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, which is called 'aleacrati', or the corruption, comes to the eye, there are two types of it: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it occurs suddenly due to a wound, or from a cut, or cauterization, and through similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of treatment is to cut open the suture, separate its lips, and insert linen tents, binding it until it heals; and you must not use things that dry and constrict in curing it.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do that, the disease returns worse than before; but use softening things like fenugreek; and cook water or other liquid with flax seeds, ointments of melted diakion in any oil, and wrap a tent around it, curing it with these.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the secret of your cure lies in ensuring that it does not heal according to its previous form; and these treatments we have mentioned are only ways to address this illness so that it does not return in its original form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of flesh coming to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease, which truly is called "axacrati," is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident arises from wounds and ruptures and cauterization and similar things; the method of treatment is such that you should take a needle with a doubled thread and insert it into the flesh so that one end emerges on the left margin to the right, so that two ends come out in the meat; then stretch the flesh above all the needle, and cut at the single spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure on the paper corresponds to what is required, that's good; if not, take a razor and put it into the incision, then turn over the paper, make two incisions at its edge inside the paper; let the ends of these two incisions be in line with the angles of the cut you have made, and let the angle itself be such as when joined together makes the figure like that of a letter called "I griesche"; now remove this flesh according to how much less its sides are than the paper it follows; then join the two separated parts, sewing them up in a thread of wool; cure him with what we have said about softening medicines and bandages until he is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the illness comes from a tear or a suture or cauterization, you must make an incision filled with paper underneath the hairs, and according to what is stated before; then separate between the two layers of skin like I said; and one should perform the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in its form, and wise masters devise every way possible to restore figure to their natural form; and patients themselves, depending on what treatment they need and which instruments and arrangements are required.
dou soudement de la papiere	suddenly from the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this fusion occurs in men's hands in such a way that the paper above is stuck with the white of the eye, and it cannot move or perform its natural functions, you must therefore insert the tip of a razor underneath the paper and lift it up; stretch it with pincers until you cut what has hardened with a subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too rough so that the patient does not suffer from the spatula being too sharp to hurt their eye; make your incision such that the skin returns to its natural form; all of this is healed and sometimes salty water or warm water are used on the eye, or a collar; then place between the paper and the eye a linen bandage, and put wool soaked in egg whites over the eye; after three days use a collar and things that solidify until it has been cured.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the fingernail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the fingernail is of two types: it is nervous and similar to hard sinew, and another which is not nervous, but resembles white frozen moisture, such that when one touches it with iron and tries to scrape it off, they cannot; both kinds begin near the great tear duct, and grow little by little until they cover all sight, light, and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is such that the patient should lay their head in your lap, then open their eyes; raise some paper to your hand, then coil the fingernail with small scissors, and stretch it above [the eye]; next take a needle, and attach a horse, cow, or ox hair, along with strong thread; double the point of the needle slightly and insert it into the fingernail, piercing all the way through with the needle, and tie the nail with a thread, stretching it above; then scrape away all the hair on the side of the nail which adheres to the eyelid and eyelashes down to the head, afterward removing the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a very fine spatula and small forceps, leaving the natural flesh of the duct untouched so that tears may flow normally through the incision; sometimes you should stretch the fingernail only with the scissors, and thread as we have said; then scrape it away entirely with a very soft spatula which is shaped thus:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And make sure that the spatula does not touch and rupture the fleshy membrane, and that the plumule is not perforated; after the incision, pour into the eye a pinch of crushed silk, and from the litharge collar, leave it until the next day; then treat it with what is necessary until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, and the hooks cannot enter it, this similar condition of the nail is often treated by doctors; they grow as I have described in the division, and if you see them being cut, operate on the patient's eye, and take a light spatula with a small sharp point according to this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And gently lift the nail and if you see that it does not thin out and the reason approaches, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litharge and red collar and crushed silk, and plug the eye until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same operation until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, as with a warm abscess, then drain it, and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the eyelid flesh causes great harm to the eye, then suspend it with a hook, and cut off a part but not all, so that no liquid comes from tears; then instill into the eye red colloy made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that is born on the pupil.
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	In some men's eyes, red flesh may sometimes be born, covering the pupil and spreading onto the papers and turning outwards, resembling a rosebud; and thus you must perform this operation: place the patient's head in your lap, then open their eye, and scrape off all that flesh with appropriate hooks, sustaining it forcefully; first cut away the top layer of skin, and continue shaving until all is removed, being careful not to damage the eye in your work; let the incision be made with a spatula as we have mentioned for the toenail and small forces from which one removes scurf, just as the form after this chapter demonstrates; once the incision is complete and all flesh removed, fill the eye with ground seal or distill red colloy and similar corrosive medicines into it, then place cotton soaked in egg white over the eye to ensure that hot abscesses are soothed; if there remains any redness, and warm blood rises up before you, and you doubt a hot abscess still exists, then leave the eye be and treat the abscess with soothing remedies for hot abscesses; then return to your operation until it is healed, and thus do when any flesh may adhere in the eye through such like.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nonetheless, you must ease the treatment of each weak eye in its natural way; and for accidental injury, with iron tools; and do not put your hand into any of these procedures until you see that this limb is able to undergo such treatment.
des voines des eulz	the roads of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Underneath are the red veins that cover the eye, hindering its vision and weakening it day by day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Thus, it is necessary for you to first examine the eye to see where these veins are, and whether there is any other disease besides them; then treat it in this way: instruct the patient to place their head upon your lap, then suspend those veins with a thread according to your knowledge. The threads should be fine and doubled over like so...
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	Et let them be two inches apart by degrees in the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	puis when you have gathered the necessary forces those veins must be opened subtly, and wipe away the blood hour after another, until you see those veins depart from the eye; and take care not to wound the eye with the points of spatulas, and perform this work at midday in front of the sun, and be very ardent in your task so as not to cut into anything beyond those veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the eye green and red collyrium to corrupt that which remains from the sebaceous gland.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	Et if you do not have the ability to gather all of these in that hour, then make a plaster over the eye from things which soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pains are eased and there is assurance that the abscess is warm, then recommence according to this method which is described above until it is healed; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the eye's fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The physician calls it an 'arissati' fistula: when you treat it with cautery and burning medicine as I have previously stated, and it is not healed, there is pus within which you must cut open above the abscess, where it should die, and drain all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, clean it with all the instruments to remove this form; and it is called an 'aspre chief', and make it of iron until a smooth head, and point it like a file as it currently appears.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place on the spot of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand lightly until you know that corruption is gone; do this a few times, then restore the area with drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	if the bone is fused, and skin grows over it, and the body of the fistula is also healed, remaining so for forty days, and it does not recur or become infected again, and no other bad complications arise, then know that it is cured; if this is not the case, there is only one other method to treat the fistula by returning it to the navel opening in the following manner: you must uncover the bone a second time with an iron instrument, using sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered, take one iron probe shaped like this, with three angles, and let its handle be tapered as shown here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	place the probe on the bone near the ridge, keep your hand an inch away from the patient's eye, then turn the probe until it pierces the bone and the patient feels a breeze as air passes through if they hold their hand over their navel; you may restore the opening with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the skin grows and hardens over the hole, the material will move towards the navel; this is an easier process for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the eye's exit
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eye opens completely without any obstruction or diminution, and there is no disturbance to the brain, you must bind the patient; then treat it, and apply cupping glasses or leeches without injury to suck out the blood, then place on the eye a poultice made of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla, and extract the foreign body, then apply an ointment over bandages and soft cloths; as for the manner of the cloths, you must take very soft cloth and fold each piece into four, then lay one over the other according to the amount needed by the eye; then bind it firmly with a hard bandage above, and repeat cupping without injury to suck out blood; then remove the cups and leave the eye bound day and night, and if the bindings become loose, you must tighten them greatly; then remove the binding after the day and night have passed, and if you see that the eye has healed, it is good; if not, repeat the ointment, cloths, bindings, and cupping until it is cured.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Pour le traitement d'une plaie au tissu cicatriciel durci
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a rupture occurs in the cicatricial tissue, it appears and protrudes through the skin like grains of resin, and it is appalling to see; if you observe this, the treatment involves inserting a needle into the root of the lower eyelid until it reaches the upper part, then passing another needle with double thread from the eyelid margin; pierce it and leave the first needle in place according to its position; cut the double thread at the eyelid margin and tie one end of the cicatricial tissue around it, securing it tightly, then remove the needle and apply moistened wool mixed with egg white over the eye; let it remain until the threads dry along with the cicatricial tissue, then treat the eye with comforting substances until the wound is healed; sometimes the wound is restricted by the cicatricial tissue on all sides using a circle of cloth until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes show great signs of inflammation, pierce them with a subtle spatula that comes directly from the eye, drain the white moisture and draw down the eyelid, then remove it immediately; finally extract it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the bow of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease, which is called 'alcunnati', arises only from the bow of the eye, resembling descending water but it is not water; and regarding the nature of its appearance when operating on a patient you should have them seated upright in a chair that has been prepared, then take their head between your two hands, move it until you see the bow rise above your eyes; next pierce it, do not let it descend or dim the light, and allow the patient to see things as they usually would; if it does not descend below, know that this is water, but if the descent of the bow is not arranged as we have described.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you seat the patient between your hands, then take the fine spatula and make an incision on the horny layer of tissue (conjunctiva) over the cornea one hole along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the horny layer and the cornea, until the bowels are visible; and when they have been evacuated, instill into the eye warm water mixed with honey, or water in which fenugreek has been boiled with honey, then treat it with another cure until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	Eye waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen the appearance of eye waters in cases of division (of the conjunctiva), and what is needed to pierce them; so we treat it according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You should make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from light so that the sun does not shine in their eyes, and bind the healthy eye tightly; then place the paper of the other eye in your left hand if it is the left eye, or in your right hand if it is the right eye; then take in your right hand, if it is the left eye, the instrument called 'almagda', or in your left hand, if it is the right eye; then place the tip of the instrument near the cornea with the thickness of a line at that white part of the eye to the end of the minor lachrymal gland, then push the instrument called 'almagda' gently, and turn your hand so that it pierces through the white of the eye, and you can feel that almagda comes out into emptiness; and the measure of almagda's route must be at the precise depth of the space that is from the pupil to the end of the iris; and this is the cornea of the eye; then you will see bone in that paper because of the clarity of the horny layer, and now place the instrument until it reaches where the water is, then express it through a small hole after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the water descends now, the patient sees before him and an instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After rest briefly, and if the water rises again by another route, insert the needle with the instrument, and when it is inserted and does not ascend, extract the almagest gently while turning your hand back and forth; then put a gem-studded drop of water into the eye, and withdraw from within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place over the eye pads or linen moistened with rose oil and raw egg white, and bind it together with the healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, place on it crushed cumin with plenty of egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the ointment cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, as there are such men who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument which is called 'alberit', of which this is the form...
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deeply, but make it a subtle incision, then apply the ointment as we have said; and upon completion of the work, provide the patient with an attractive blindfold, in which they sleep on their back in a dark place; be free from all movements, and take light food, and do not move their head to the right or left, and remain bound according to their condition for three days; then unbind them in that same dark room, and test their vision, and make them look at some things, and then rebind it until the seventh day; and it is not appropriate that you perform this during the hour of treatment or after incision now, but it is necessary to delay it, because fluid rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	If an abscess becomes hot and swollen, remove the eye before the seventh day, and treat it with that which soothes abscesses; when it is calmed, then bind up the sight and apply to its face some ointment for one day only, and remain in this dark room thereafter.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	Then leave this house little by little, and adapt to these circumstances; know that no disciples should involve themselves in such a case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from Iran, who told us that in his country they make perforated almagest, through which water is drawn off; but I never saw any such thing in our land, nor did I ever read about it in the books of the ancients; perhaps this is a new invention.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of almagda, so that he who does not know them may see them; and they should be properly made of brass.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And the heads of these birds should be made with the same subtle craftsmanship, and the back ends in three pointed corners.
de la char sor le neis	From the skin over the nose.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes there are hair masses joined differently, which appear like scorpions with many feet; and if such have hairs enhanced with bright colors, or soft skin of good complexion.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	For that soft skin without enhancement, you must have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; open their nostrils and press upon those hairs, pulling them out firmly; then cut with a subtle sharp spatulum what you can bear, until you know all hair is removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if any part remains that cannot be cut off, open it with all your subtle and light instruments so that nothing is left; and if you are overcome, or the abscess is hot, then treat him as required; and if these are malignant abscesses, hasten to cauterize them until the blood is extinguished and all the flesh is removed, then apply a dressing of egg whites and vinegar or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the dressing works and moisture reaches up to the palate, know that it is healing; and if the moisture does not drain properly, know that there is unremoved flesh on the bone which your instruments cannot reach: then you must insert into this wound a piece of flaxen thread somewhat thicker than a hair, tied at both ends with knots about an inch apart; have the patient grasp one end of the string in his nostril until it comes out through his mouth; children often do this when they are at school, and anyone who wants to can manage it easily; then take hold of each end of the thread in a separate hand and pull steadily, letting the moisture come from both ends by means of the thread; be sure you know which is the nostril end and which the mouth end.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this so that you know the night has corrupted that flesh, then draw out the son, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and replace it in the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of the flesh; and then place a piece of lead in the nostril for some days until it is healed, and if there is need of drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to clean out the head, with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it can be made of silver or copper, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and its shape is the same; if you wish, make a closed tube, and let the instrument be full to clean out the head; and have one hand on the head to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	sur the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Often there arises on the head of the nose a disease called 'telul', and it grows and becomes large over time, becoming a visible thing to behold; and for this, you must cut it out at its beginning, and remove it all quickly, then apply cauterization or burning medicine upon it; and if one waits to cut it until it is large, take heed if it is hard, of black color, lacking sensation: one should not touch it with iron as it is an abscess embedded deep, for when one cuts it once, great mischief befalls the patient; and if the abscess is soft to the touch, not of black color, and you see that it can all be cut away, then purge the patient and cut it without fear, and treat the area with drying and astringent substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when the cartilage repair operation occurs in one of these procedures, it is rarely beneficial, except for a few men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	You must therefore, when it happens to anyone, examine if the wound is fresh and full of blood; then adjust the two lips together with a suture, then treat it until it heals; and if the lips are already torn apart on one side or the other, you must remove all parts of their heart until they bleed, then bring the two lips together in a suture, hold them tightly, and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood and powdered incense; put a piece of strong plaster or another sealing plaster on top of the powders, and leave it there until it heals itself, then treat with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way of suturing is such that you bring the edges together: either with needles, as we have said for abdominal suturing; or with thread, as I have made known to you.
des apostemes des levres	Inflammations of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those with wounds inside their lips have a hard abscess, like grains of wheat, some smaller and others larger; you must turn back the lip and cut open each one, take them with forceps and cut it in every part; then fill the space after the incision with powdered vitriol until the blood stops flowing; and leave it exposed for a while, treating the area with dry substances until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	On the flesh of the gums:
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times there grows on the gums flesh that is attached, which the ancients call 'albulus'; you must hold it with forceps and cut it at its root, allowing the bowels or blood to flow; then apply ground vitriol, or other restraining and drying powders; if this flesh returns after incision, and does so repeatedly, cauterize it a second time; it will not return after cautery; these are the instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of worms.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Never are found in the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, barks that are ugly and rough; sometimes these teeth become black or yellow-green and wormy, so much so that corruption reaches the gum, making them stink; have the patient sit with their head in your lap, then pull any bark where it appears, until nothing remains; do this also for the blackish, greenish, yellowish and other such discolorations, until they are cleaned; if you remove what is present due to the initial reason, that's good; if not, repeat on the second and third day, until everything has been removed; know that teeth require various instruments of different shapes to be extracted according to their condition, because the rasp used to extract teeth from above have a different form than those used in between them; these forms and others should therefore always be available.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you delay in extracting it as much as you can, for this must not be done; because it is a very high substance until such time as there is no excuse to extract it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is compelled to extract [the tooth], it is necessary that you are certain of which tooth causes pain.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the pain leaves the patient, and they think it is in a healthy tooth, and have the good tooth extracted; yet still the pain does not leave because of this, until the bad one is removed, for we have already seen this with these sufferers; and when you are sure which tooth causes pain, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth with all your might using a sharp spatula to protect the gums from all sides; then move [your instrument] with your two fingers or subtle forceps at the first point of contact, prying open until it is well loosened, then firmly close the forceps; and let the head of the patient be on your knee between your knees, holding them steady so they do not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it cannot be done, then take one of these instruments and gently insert it on each side, moving it like you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	If the tooth is perforated and worn down, you must fill it with small pieces of cloth where the hole is; then gently extract it with forceps so that it does not break during extraction; and one must work very carefully around the gums to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	Be careful not to break the tooth and leave a piece behind, as it may cause even greater pain for the patient due to the remaining root.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	Beware of not acting like the ignorant surgeons who, due to their haste and boldness, sometimes break the jaws and fail to manage what we have described; instead, they cause great harm to the roots that remain or the broken jaw, as we have often seen; when the tooth is removed, wash the area with wine, oil, and silk; if there is bleeding, which often happens, fill the space with powdered vitriol; if this does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of instruments, with which one moves teeth first, should have long points and thick handles so they do not double when you extract the tooth; these are the forms.
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be made of thick metal, well-crafted, to prevent bending during extraction, and have teeth so as to hold the tooth firmly.
de la racine des dens	From the root of the teeth.
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains after extraction, you must place moist cotton soaked in butter over the wound for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the wound is softened, you can then insert the tongs called "algefri", which look like a stork's beak; they should be shaped like this inside:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these forceps, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root, and place the instrument called 'althali', that is, a scalpel, of which this is the shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out with this, it is good; if not, then assist yourself with all the instruments, of which the shapes are shown hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one assists with this instrument that has two blades, of which this is the shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron instruments that are in front of the teeth's root, and this instrument which resembles a large pair of forceps, of which this is the shape:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let these instruments be kept intact so that they do not break, and know that there are many dental instruments; also other instruments which are not listed here; the wise subtle masters find their own instrument by themselves according to what their works and the illnesses show them because of such diverse diseases as ancient ones didn't teach about any instrument for this; if one breaks some bone or part, then look for the corresponding instrument that is needed, as I told you, and study the gestures of which here follows its form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And they should be big and sturdy to hold the bone firmly so that it does not escape but can be held and removed; then restore its place with suitable medicines for this purpose, and if there is decay in the bone which is small, remove it completely using all these instruments:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, and the form is ugly, especially in virgin women, then you must know whether the tooth is newly born after the other teeth, and it is not in its rightful place, nor can be healed or limed; therefore remove it. And if it has air with the tooth, take this instrument whose shape resembles a small beak, made of sharp iron at the tip:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And use the hammer often and strike it with bare hands for its hardness against that of teeth, and so you do not move the others; if it appears possible to lime it, then take this lime whose form is as such:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	which is like the lime used to make needles; and you must lime this tooth often with bare hands gently so it does not move when biting; then finish it off at the end with any sort of razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, then lime its sharpness until it is even, such that it neither hurts the tongue nor disturbs speech.
quant li dent lochent	When teeth loosen
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When front teeth loosen due to impact or fall, and the patient cannot bite down without them falling out, even after treatment with constricting medicines which is ineffective, they must be secured with a gold wire, as silver wire turns green and decays but gold does not change; the wire should be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the space between the teeth; if you wish to align the teeth, take the wire and pass it double through two healthy teeth, then place the loose tooth or teeth between them until you reach a healthy tooth on the other side; repeat this process covering the entire affected area, extract your hand carefully and gently so as not to move the tooth; secure the wire at the root of the tooth to prevent escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cut the gums of the filament with a pair of forceps, and assemble them, and put them back between the healthy tooth and the tongue, so that it does not harm the tongue; then leave it as tight as possible for as long as it can stay there, and if it loosens or the thread frays, tighten it again with another piece of thread; thus it will remain in place and serve its purpose forever, this is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of two healthy teeth and two loose ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when a tooth falls out, one should put it back in its place, fresh for fresh, as we have said; and do not let anyone who is not skilled and patient intervene, and sometimes the form of a tooth is made from cow bone, and it is placed where there is a gap, and tightened as we have said, and thus it remains and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cut loose the tongue's tie
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	This is the tie that comes from beneath the tongue naturally or as an accident of healed wound; and to operate on it you open the mouth of the patient, have their head in your lap, lift up their tongue; then cut through the nervous tie widely so that the tongue is freed from its hold, and if there be hardness or knot due to sudden wound, insert a hook and cut this tie widely; take care not to go too deep for fear of cutting into the artery below; and when you have done it, wash the place with rose water and oil, or cold water, then put beneath the tongue a tent of linen; and let the patient hold their mouth open each night so that the wounds may not heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	If bleeding occurs, apply crushed vitriol directly to the site; if blood continues to seep, cauterize with the wart-removing iron, which is beneficial for this purpose; then treat it further until healing occurs.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you notice that it has turned pale or black in color and hardened to the touch without causing pain for the patient, do not touch it, as this indicates cancer; if it begins to turn white and moist, remove the crust with a spatula and clear away any moisture; if blood continues to seep during your treatment, apply crushed vitriol until bleeding stops, then return to your work until everything is treated; afterward, clean the site with linen and silk, and treat further until healing occurs.
des apostemes de la gorge	From abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Never enter the throat boils that are called "godath", and properly we call them the two tonsils, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they do not heal, then take care: if it is a hard abscess of little sense and false color, never touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, never touch it with iron, also due to the outflow of blood; but let it mature, and then you will remove it, or it would break on its own; and if it is white in color, runny, and the root is subtle, prepare your instrument for cutting, but first check if the abscess calms down and becomes peaceful.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, and his chiés soit en ton sain, and li oevre la bouche and lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, and presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	When you press the tongue against all these instruments and see an abscess, take a lancet and insert it into the almond-shaped area, pushing as much as possible. Then pull anything that comes out with the needle back towards the instrument from which it originated; this results in a form resembling forceps. However, its tip is curved and has two sides, both sharp and made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have these instruments available to you, use regular pliers instead, which are shaped like this:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	One side is sharp while the other isn't, and when you have punctured one of the almonds following this method, do likewise to the other in exactly the same way. After making the incision, gargle with hot water mixed with wine or simply water; if blood flows then use only water for the gargling or boil pomegranate peels/bay leaves, etc., until bleeding stops. Then treat it until healed. Sometimes, other abscesses appear in the throat besides these two almonds so when this happens you must lance them just like the aforementioned pair of almonds.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that had formed inside her throat; specifically, the small type of abscess; it had almost completely blocked her windpipe so she could not breathe through it because it was obstructed, and neither could she eat or drink, and she would have died if we waited even one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	The abscess was so high up that two reeds had been placed through the nostrils to act as airways.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I quickly grabbed a reed and inserted it into one of the nostrils, then pushed it upwards, and a large portion of bowels came out through the nose; then I repeated this in the other nostril, and opened the mouth and pressed on the tongue; after that I inserted the reed into the abscess and cut away a part of it, only some blood came out; thus we unblocked her windpipe so she could start drinking water and later wine, and I kept cutting from this abscess for a long time; however, the abscess would regrow, filling up the place that was emptied, until it became very big again; at which point I advised to lance and cauterize it inside the throat: then it stopped growing; I left these parts, trusting God to take care of her from there on.
de l’uve	Of the eye.
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When rheum descends to the eye, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called a "perpendicular"; and if it is below large and round, it is called an "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cleared as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the abscesses are eased, and it is subtle, then you must cut it; and one which is round assembled and not long; and it is sanguine or of false color or black, then you must avoid its incision.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is necessary, therefore, when you see it according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and length, that you seat the patient in front of the sun, and press their tongue with an instrument which we have previously mentioned; then insert the probe into the eye, and draw it out, and cut it with one of two instruments that I have mentioned for cutting almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must not cut away flesh beyond what is superfluous and beyond the natural limit; for if you remove more, it harms the voice and speech; and after incision, use what we have said about incising two almonds, and treat until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient fears cutting, you should employ an engine for cauterization to alleviate their fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	The manner of cautery is sharp fire.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And have the patient place their head in your hand, and then press their tongue with an instrument we mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and seal it with hot sharp fire, neither too thick nor too thin; and use this tool which is shaped thus:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; 
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or cauterization; if it is treated with fumigation in this way, take calmness and hyssop, oregano, rue, chamomile, hawthorn, and similar herbs, and mix them all together or some of them in one pot, add oil to it, and boil; and the pot should be well-glued with strong clay, and inside the pot have a hollow instrument shaped like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be made of silver or copper, and one end of the instrument is to be inserted into the patient's mouth so that the vapour rises through the throat until the uvula is withered; afterwards repeat this often, until the uvula dries up, and take care not to do this at the beginning of a hot abscess as many things can happen, and never perform it when there is a decline in a warm abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and place a piece of egg shell inside the patient's mouth so that their mouth does not become too hot; for the egg shell does not allow vapors to harm the mouth, and it is a good treatment along with healing.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Often something becomes stuck in the throat—a fish bone or some other object; therefore, you must extract what you can see and press the tongue down with a tool so that you may view the object; and for whatever does not appear and remains lodged in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach; perhaps the object will be expelled by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a crumb of dry bread; attach a string to the sponge and then have them swallow it; when it reaches the object, it will become attached, and you can then pull it out; if it does not come out by these methods we've mentioned, take an instrument made of bronze in this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instruments be bent towards the head so that they can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised upwards; guard against touching the epiglottis lest vomiting occur or you push bone into it; better that the patient pushes the instrument in themselves because they know where the object is located; if he puts it inside his mouth, then pull on the entire instrument evenly until it comes out.
de la sansue de la gorge	From the leech of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Never is the leech medicine if I have not said so in my division of cures; and when this does not profit, then look into the patient's throat in sunlight, then press their tongue with the instrument that I mentioned to you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the leech, draw it out with a very small hook, or use subtle pincers that serve this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that does not work, take a hair plait and insert it into the patient's throat, then insert the end of the hair plait into hot iron, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And let the patient drink cold water every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth and pour it in without swallowing, and move their hand frequently; as soon as the leech feels the water, it will fall out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not fall out as we have said, then smoke the patient with asafetida, using the instrument I mentioned for smoking the eye; do this multiple times, for it will fall out without delay.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of fumigation is such that you take a pot with live coals, and cover it with a perforated lid in the middle, and through this hole place the head of the instrument; then throw your fumigation into it, and have the patient put the end of the cane in their mouth, closing their mouth so that no smoke escapes, but instead goes down to the phlegm; now the phlegm will be expelled, and if it is not, repeat the fumigation many times; let the patient suffer from thirst, eating salty things, and have them refrain from drinking water; then through this treatment the phlegm should exit.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument used to remove phlegm is like a pair of curved pincers designed to enter the throat when one can see it; and they have the appearance of a bird's beak, with a roughness similar to that of a file, so whatever it grasps cannot be released; here is its form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are many kinds of abscesses based on the descriptions that will follow in this book, and they vary according to their penetration and size; they can be classified into two types, one depending on its appearance itself, and another due to the moisture it holds.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second type is according to their location in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	Because abscesses of the head are different from those of the anus, and abscesses in fleshy places differ from those that occur at joints, each requiring its own treatment.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And one should not lance an abscess if the bowels are weak according to their condition; but for those that must be lanced when they are ripe, and do not weaken due to their condition, such as abscesses near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when an abscess forms near a joint, and it is left to rot away, perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint become corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Where the abscess is near a main limb, and if you delay perforation until it dies, it will harm the principal limb; when it is near the foundation, pierce it before it dies; and one must not puncture an abscess formed without digestion completed, unless that which is near the foundation rots away entirely, forms a fistula, and cannot heal for a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you must know the time for perforating an abscess that is dead based on its development, and this is when pain subsides, fever breaks, swelling reduces around the abscess, and there is less agitation and sharpness of head of the abscess, along with other signs; and one should make the incision at the lowest point of the abscess, where it begins to move; and the perforation should be in line with the length of the body, and if the abscess is on hands or feet, or near joints and nerves and arteries, and all similar places where there is no bending.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those that bend, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in fleshy tissue, it is better that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed as digested and complete, just as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before that, the body of the poison would be elongated and filled with much filth; and perhaps the lips and depths of it harden.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if to any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you must bring small abscesses with small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many incisions according to the resemblance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses that require cutting through, when it is soft like cloth, and has become numb, then one must act as for boils: and there are those that are divided into three angles, and there are some that are cut like the leaf of myrtle, just like abscesses from sores; and there are those where you make a round incision, and other incisions and similar cuttings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who have no head, just as in a soft superficial abscess, you must fully pierce it; and when the abscess is large, and it has formed a great bow, and you pierce it, do not extract all of the bow at once, but take out a part; then stuff the abscess until the next day, then remove something from it again; do this several times gradually, until the entire bow comes out; especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or decrepit old men.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the spirit jumps sometimes with the release of the bow, which may cause the patient's death, and you will not realize it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Examine this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, then dry the wound, and observe if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a full incision, place linings of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess with many perforations, you must insert a lining in each one so that they touch each other; and if you have cut away part of the skin around the abscess, fill it with old cotton or shavings of linen cloth without moisture, and bind it until the third day; then remove it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs during your work, bring cold and clear water nearby, wet the cloths, and place them over the bleeding area multiple times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the bleeding persists, apply compresses and a poultice, using the powders I mentioned previously in this book, and if it is wintertime, and the area or abscess is very sensitive, then you should place warm tents and cloths moistened with wine and oil; but if it is summertime, and the area is fleshy, then use cold water and oil on wet cloths, or wine and cold oil, for up to three days as we have said; afterward, unbind the abscess, dry it, and treat it appropriately until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know this universally in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how one must proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where the head of the chief comes small abscesses, and are manners of us that are in cloths, just like the neck of a hen, and there is much of similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and such where there is moisture just like pulses; and of such kind which are hard and stony to cut, and there is no doubt if the artery does not act otherwise.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of cutting is such that you test all instrument which is called "entromissoire", from whence its form comes after, what thing it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it holds moisture, they do it from above through the length [of the limb].
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is drained, remove it carefully without leaving any skin where the moisture was contained, for it will return if nothing is left behind; then apply Egyptian ointment with cotton, if present; if not, use water and salt, pack the wound, and leave it until the next day; this will draw out what remains from the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then restart with the cotton, as before, on the second day, and again on the third, until you are certain that nothing remains from the night; afterwards treat the wound with ointment appropriate for healing, until it is completely healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess is in a fatty area, cut it open like this, lengthwise; and throw away the onions (pus), and remove the skin from all sides, and take great care to extract whatever hair lies beneath where it rests; and if the artery opposes you, then do as I told you before.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Also treat the abscess if it is full of pus, by cutting and curing as I told you before.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cutting into the purulent abscess is easier, as it has little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And in some of these abscesses where there is no moisture, and here I speak of an abscess I cut open from the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess like a hard stone, rough and white, which could not be broken; if one had struck it with any implement, they would have made as much of a wound as a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses occurring on the head, those that come near the child's crown and at the root of the ears, the incision should be made in the lowest possible position to let out the pus; and treat them as required.
des scrophules	Scrofula.
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	These abscesses often occur on the neck and under the arms, as well as in the groin area, and sometimes appear elsewhere on the body; they are very numerous and interconnected with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	Each scrofula is properly contained within its own region, just like the knot and abscess of the head, as we have mentioned earlier; there are many variations of these scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	Some contain pus, while others are malignant and resistant to healing.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, in that place where you see a good arrangement for touching, et est semblans a la color dou cors, and it resembles the colour of the body, et muet de chescune part and quiet on each side, et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, and not dry at the nerves of the neck nor at the artery or the passageway, et n’est mie parfonde; it is not deep; si covient que tu la copes par desus, so you must cut it from above, et l’escorche de chescune partie, and peel each part, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, stretch the two lips of the wound with hooks, se tu en as mestier, if you need to, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; as we have said for abscesses of the head; et la trai poc et poc, and drag it a little at a time, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, and let the spatula not be sharp nor cutting, que li mains n’eschaipe, lest the hand escape, et ne voise trop avant, and don't go too far forward, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois. so that you do not cut what you mustn't.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not stop bleeding, apply ground glass in the wound, or some powders that stem blood, and compress the wound; leave it until the abscess is pacified, the wound softened, and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	Once the bleeding is stemmed, return to your work until you complete it; then examine with your index finger if there remain any small abscesses, cut them and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the abscess, you must not cut that abscess in its root but bind it with a strong double thread and let it fall by itself without harm; then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment and treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut out the entire scrofula, then you must join together the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, since there is no remaining superfluity due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	you must proceed to cut the root of it, and draw out the fire, and sew it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For scrofulas that have superfluity, pierce it where death appears; and pierce it like the one mentioned before, depending on how it is, then apply ointments with bandages and similar things so that it does not corrupt what remains of corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, treat it with ointment to promote flesh until it is healed.
de squinance	of dislocation
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke of the operation for throat cancer; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is their description.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those with dislocation, it is necessary that the slit in the throat known as 'epiglottis' be avoided; and no aid should be given to them by this method, because all veins and passages of the patient are affected by abscesses hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in II amandres.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the passage of respiration, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid the danger that comes from suffocation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, we must make an incision beneath three circles or four with a small cross-hatching between two of them or by means of the quantity of the incisions on the surface, not in the cartilage; and their skin is suitable for the sectioning of the epiglottis which has no flesh, and the vessels are deep therein.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, he must stretch the skin of the throat entirely, then split open the heart until it reaches the windpipe; remove the blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cut the esophagus as we have said; this is demonstrated by the interruption of the breath from the trachea which should pass through a whole location but does not due to its being interrupted, and through the defect in voice; leave the wound open for some time.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed since you suspect strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound from the heart, and sew it entirely without the cartilage; then apply medicines which promote flesh growth until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dying, and breathing has ceased.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then cover the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe, and they will inhale through the wound, thus preventing death; and for this reason the ancients instructed to leave the wound open until the evil of the illness has passed, and it passes in three or four days. Then they would instruct to close the wound and heal it, once it was healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw a young lady take one knife, and thrust it into her throat, cutting part of the windpipe; and I was called to treat her, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found blood coming out of it, and I knew well that she had not cut a vein or any part of the throat, and wind was escaping through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried and sewed the wound, and treated it until it was healed; there will be no harm to the lady other than her voice being hoarse, which shall return after a while; because of this I say that one need not fear incising the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	From the swollen throat.
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called a "swelling of the throat", and it is a large abscess with a yellow colour, more common in women; and it presents itself in two ways: natural or accidental; where the natural type has no origin.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental type presents itself in two ways: similar to what we call a "fatty tumour", and the other way resembles an abscess caused by arterial injury; and it is dangerous, one should not operate with fire unless on those that are small, first examine thoroughly: if you find it like our fatty tumours, without any veins attached to it, then cut it as one would cut a tumour, removing all its covering, provided there isn't much of it; cauterise quickly and treat as necessary until it is completely healed.
des nous	de us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many ways of addressing us exist, of which I will mention all the similarities; now it is necessary for me to explain all the differences between 'us' and 'issue'.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that 'issue' is heat and fever lasting until the ebullition passes, and the putrefaction is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With us there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains I syfac, which is its own sack and follows the colour of the body, and begins like a scab, and grows larger; and they are of two types, either dry or moist, and very diverse in colour as I have said in the classification.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to treat the head, that you first examine and inquire about all the instrument called "entromissoire," according to its form as it will be presented in the following chapter.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the way to examine new abscesses is that you should take the moistest place that you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers back and forth until you feel that the instrument has pierced the core; this should be done according to the size of the abscess; then withdraw the entromissoire and pay attention to what comes out.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If running moisture comes out, whatever its color, treat it as I have said for other abscesses; and if after the entromissoire no moisture comes out, know that it is greasy, so make an incision in the form of a cross, take hold with forceps, and gently peel away the skin from each side until you get to the cot where it lies; pull on the healthy nut with the incised edges; if you cannot remove it whole, tear it into pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if anything remains in the wound, it will return many times; and if a piece of it stays there, and the blood troubles you, then fill the wound with sharp corrosive powders, bind the wound tightly, apply warm abscess-relieving substances on top, and treat it with other cures until it is healed; and if the nose bone is large, cut open the two lips of the wound, and cure it with something that encourages flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the bleeding vein is opposed to you or anything else troubles you, hasten and apply crushed vitriol to it, and leave it bound for two or three days until the wound becomes gangrenous, and stops the boiling of the blood; then return to cutting away what remains from the night.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the shapes of the instruments used for insertion, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small; and there are three types called "albaret", and one called "breb", and these also have three sizes: large, medium, and small, to probe abscesses or fistulas; and they are like needles that cut sores, made of yellow brass, iron, or silver, but those made of black lead are better for probing fistula swellings; and they come in three sizes according to the size of the openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of uncinas are very similar, as you can see here: large, medium and small; some uncinas have two bends of three types each; others with three bends also exist, but in three different ways; we find yet other uncinas that only present one bend, although they too appear in three manners. All these kinds are necessary where they are placed.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these instruments are sharp and made in such a way that they do not cut the flesh other than on one side, thus avoiding damaging nerves or blood vessels while removing necrotic tissue; this is what we call a curette. Curettes come with rounded ends to avoid discomfort when opening abscesses, and there are three types: large, small, and medium, as you can see here. We only use these instruments in fleshy places such as the legs, arms, breasts, abdomen, or similar areas; sometimes we also make smaller ones resembling scalpels for stopping bleeding, according to this shape.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and put it back in place to heal by binding veins together, and arteries, and sometimes they return according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, making them look like women's breasts; and they remain ugly and swollen, and for those who wish to cure it, one must follow this form from point b. to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	then scrape the fat, and fill the wound with healing meat, then join the two lips of the wound together with stitches, and treat it until it is healed; and if the breast hangs downwards, and is softened due to its size like in women, one should split it into two sections above, via two similar incisions; thus one part will hold onto another at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from point b. up to g.; then scrape away the skin which is between the two lips, and remove the fat, then apply what we have said about stitches and powders, and whatever else is necessary for its treatment, until it is healed; if it isn't healed, or the incision hasn't been fully made because the patient won't rest still, or due to a loss of blood, you should fill the wound with moist cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; leave it there until it melts away flesh and fat, then treat it until it is completely healed.
des apostemes des asselles	From abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that appear under the armpits are like hard scrofulas where there is pus, and if they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those which contain moisture should be cut according to this shape, from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the entire mass within the abscess is emptied, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton and treat gently until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is similar to a scrofula, treat it as we have said for cutting scrofulas, and if the wound goes deep, apply cauterization as mentioned before.
de la routure de l’artere	Of an artery's rupture
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is ruptured, and the skin above it is sealed, many abscesses may form, and likewise, the vein becomes swollen and abscessed; one can recognize this situation in that when it is for the artery, the abscess runs lengthwise perfectly; and when you feel it with your hands, you sense a constriction; and when it is for the vein, there are reddish swellings appearing; and it is foolish to cut into this abscess, especially when it lies beneath the axillae and jaws and on the neck and in many other places, as it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, you should avoid iron-based treatment, and similarly for those at the head, you must also avoid it; in the case of an artery swelling opening through the skin lengthwise, proceed by making a small incision with scissors, separating the artery from its surrounding tissues so that it is exposed; then insert a needle underneath it, piercing through to the other side, securing the artery with double thread at two points, as I have instructed for the extraction of the two arteries in the temples; then compress the space between these two bindings with an introducer until all blood has escaped from this region, and untie the binding; then adjust the treatment so that it hangs loose, allowing the ligature to fall away; then treat appropriately following this procedure until healing takes place; if the abscess is due to a vein incision, make sure to grab as much of the abscess tissue along with some skin, insert the needle underneath the part you hold in your hand and pierce through, securing it there with double thread so that you draw it from the other side; then bind the abscess together like I told you previously, using thread binding one end of each of the two threads' ends to its own end (of the thread); if you are uncertain about whether blood is escaping or not, insert another needle into the entire abscess underneath all threads up until where the first needle pierced through and secure the threads at four points; then cut open the abscess so that superfluous matter escapes, afterwards remove the superfluous heart-tissue while leaving what is bound intact behind; finally apply a moistened cloth with wine and oil, providing treatment via tents and ointments until healing.
des apostemes des ners	From abscesses of nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Likewise abscesses come to nerves when they are bruised or by excessive work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And they occur more frequently in shoulders and fingers and everywhere there are joints, and it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles the body's color, and it is found in various positions causing pain; and when one tightly restrains it, the patient feels pain, and it is not complete in the body but below the heart; and it spreads out on all sides, neither forward nor backward, or below or above, and one that is in joints should not be cut with an iron tool: perhaps contraction would occur; and those that are on the head or forehead, treat with a spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, hold it with forceps and cut its root; if it is large, suspend it using a hook, peel it back, then remove it and stitch up the wound, treating it until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	Large boils hanging.
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Sometimes they occur in the belly and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" due to its resemblance, with a subtle root and large head; there are small ones and very big ones; I saw a man who had two on his belly that looked more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, had a fine root, were gently split open, and moisture flowed from them.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them and found one weighing eighteen ounces, and the other six thirds, and for the work of incision, you must consider if the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is white and moist with delicate roots; then cut it with a broad spatula, and have fire cautery ready in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For cutting often leads to excessive loss of blood, and if you faint from it, then proceed quickly with cauterization; and if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the incision with iron, take a well-made linen thread, and tie it around the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days; then tighten it, and do not stop tightening the linen thread until you cut the artery, each by its means without effort; and if the roots are large, be afraid to cut especially in the belly, but you can well cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return, then treat the wound, and make sure not to cut the vein which is of a reddish color and poor in sap and milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an aggravated abscess, and I will come to the treatment of cancer afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the wound is fresh
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the wound comes from cauterizing a sore or fissure on the skin, and it is on the stomach with some of the bowels exposed, as can happen in other types of wounds, or there is blood flowing from veins or arteries like mentioned before, or due to windiness; and if it is through the rupture of the skin and the emergence of the bowel, then the color of the abscess resembles that of the body's color, and it is a light thing without pain, and emerges in diverse ways.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the emergence of the intestine, then it becomes more diverse, and when one presses it with their fingers it retracts, and then returns, and perhaps it is squeezed, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and for heavy work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a minor issue, and it becomes apparent when you press it with your hand, as it does not constrict; but if it is because of blood, then it shows through these signs: abscesses that are large and hard, fixed in place according to quantity; and if it is due to windiness, then it is soft to the touch, and the treatment depends on whether the appearance indicates arterial or venous bleeding, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	You must leave the healing process.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For if there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance indicates an issue with the intestine or anus, you must instruct the patient to hold their breath and lie down straight; then bleed them all around the belly; command them to often rest between your hands; then go around the place that was marked with a palm's-length span; extend half of the abscess above along the length of the large inch; bind it tightly with strong thread or sturdy silk rope, leaving enough room for the knot outside; open up the other half of the abscess over the knot and put your index finger inside, seeking out the intestine; if you find it caught by the binding, undo it and push the intestine outside the belly; if you find an artery or vein, carefully go around them, then return to your work and take two needles with strong thread through them; put the two needles across what was pierced in a cross shape; drain the abscess over four places on the needles, and if it drains, remove the needles, leaving the place until it rots, allowing dead flesh to fall away by itself; or you can cut it when it is soft and rotten, then treat as required, finishing the abscess as we have said; drain any blood or moisture that you find, then treat the place accordingly, and bind it up.
dou chancre	The cancer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have spoken about the appearances of cancer and how it should be treated with medicine, and how one must avoid using iron for its cure. Now we speak of cancer that is engrained in the marrow, and great caution is needed during its treatment. The ancients say that when a cancer is in an area where it can be scraped away like the breast or thigh and similar places, then it should all be removed as soon as possible at the beginning; but if it has grown large and old, one must not attempt to treat it for I have never been able to cure any. Nor has anyone else ever cured such a cancer before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when it is in a place where it can be removed as we have said, one must purge the patient of black bile once and then bleed them if they are obviously bloated. Prepare a good place for the operation by laying the patient down comfortably; next cut out all of the cancer with your knife, taking it away from every side without leaving any behind; let the blood flow until its finished, then wipe the area well with your hand or something to make sure no more is left coming out and if the flow of blood makes you think that an artery or a vein was cut, cauterize it so the bleeding stops. Then treat the wound with other treatments until it heals properly.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already mentioned in the division the similarities of dropsy, and how the accumulation of water is formed, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is achieved through medication, and those cured by surgery; so it is written only. And you must not touch with iron in these two types: namely tympanites and yposarche, for they are mortal illnesses. Therefore when you treat this dropsy case which is called "eclites" using medicine, and the cure does not help, then consider if the patient is weak or has other diseases like constipation, stomach inflammation and similar things; do not touch them with iron because it is doubtful and dangerous. And if you see that the sick person is of strong constitution, having only dropsy but neither too young nor old, proceed as follows: lift the patient upright on your hands, and have assistants press his belly from below pushing the water to the lowest part of the abdomen, then take a spathula with spines like this
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be two parts cut.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	thrust a sharp point into it but not so deeply that it can reach the intestine when thrust in and cannot wound; then look to see if the dropsy is caused by a swelling of the intestines - if this be the case, you must make an incision three fingers' breadth above the navel on the right side: but if the disease lies in the liver, then let your incision be made on the left side of the navel; and if it lies in the spleen, let it be on the right. It is not expedient that the patient lie upon his back so as to allow the superfluities to flow into a weak place: but pierce all the skin with an instrument, thrust it through and raise your hand above all the spatumile between the skin and the muscle (as in skinning) to the extent of one nail or thereabouts; then make an incision in the muscle so that the spatula may reach the hollow place, which is the water-place: then draw forth the water, thrusting this instrument into it - here is the form of the said instrument.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Et is semblans a une caine d'argent subtil, and is d'arain ou d'archaut legier, and has en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d'une part, III pertus; and II d'autre part, and I d'autre; and is li chiés tailliez si com une penne, and c'est li forme de l'incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	au chief desus est li alemele, so that when the instruments come to the water, they descend now upon the instrument; empty it therefore by half or a third part, for if you empty more than is appropriate in this hour, perhaps the patient dies due to the resolution of their spirit from the arm, or he falls unconscious, or he approaches death; but empty according to his strength, and according to what the dispositions of his strength signify, and his pulses; then draw out the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now for the heart which stops up the aperture that I spoke about, which you pierce in this manner; then renew the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and draw off a small quantity of water; do this each day, and beware of leaving so much as a drop of water behind.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt the patient's condition, and leave too much water inside them, cure them by burying or placing them on warm sand, and through excessive sweating or baths and sun exposure, and restrict their drinking; then heal with drying medicines until they are dry, cauterize over the stomach and liver and spleen after removing the water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Of the stopping of the penis.
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born without an opening in the penis, or with a small one, or it is not properly positioned.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If necessary, pierce it with a very fine pointed tool in this way:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then put the subtle lead plug in the hole, and leave it bound for three or four days; when he wants to urinate, remove the plug so that he can urinate, then replace it; perhaps this is not necessary because the urine which flows out will prevent the closure from remaining.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	For those whose hole is small, the lead plug is a treatment, as we have said, and it will widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the hole in its place are deformed, as no one is born with the hole at the head of the penis, which means they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis upwards; nor can they procreate because the matter cannot reach the uterus, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of this work is such that the patient often lies on their back; extend the head of the penis and its shaft like a feather's length so that the opening faces upwards as it should be; take care to prevent any bleeding which happens frequently, if it does happen then stop the blood with whatever stops blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	Pimples on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often this albath comes to the penis, and it is an appearance of ugly flesh; there are malignant and non-malignant ones; you must take them with a subtle hook, then cut and clean all of them, afterwards put on cotton moistened with Egyptian ointment; treat it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, of a foul colour and smelly, you must apply a cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it open, and if the ulcer is on its surface, with a part inside the skin and a part outside, then you must remove the part that is inside first; and when it is healed, treat what is outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat them together, the surface of the shaft is not secured so that it is not pierced, and there comes blackness and corruption on its surface and in the glans; then you must remove all that is black and corrupt, then apply a plaster made from honey and flour with pomegranate bark and fig leaves, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauteries help with two conditions combined: that is, bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, you must insert a hollow reed into the penis, and let the patient urinate through it; and when the skin dries at the tip of the penis in those who are not circumcised, or due to wounds or abscesses, then you must peel off the skin with a sharp instrument so that the ligaments are loosened, and the head of the penis is freed from all sides; and if this is a severe matter to treat, then you must peel it with a spatula at some point between the tip of the penis and the skin, then separate carefully between them, and place a fine damp linen cloth soaked in cold water, so that it does not dry out again.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not like the dislocations of continuity such as other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this work of our own will, and especially on children, it is necessary that we do our best work, and the most gentle for their wellbeing.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision on their children, as it was not part of their law, and we have only acquired this knowledge through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For the majority of masters and surgeons performed circumcisions around the age of one, using forceps, and a single knife; they would remove their foreskin as it had two layers, sometimes cutting through the upper layer and leaving the lower one intact.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Now you cut it back again, and the pain is double, and in the cleaning which is done there is not an assured point of the limb; and in the cleaning of the nail perhaps the iron escapes, and they run to work, and many times thus arise that they have no need of cleaning and I want it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the cleaning that is done with force to all the tight binding of thread I have found the goodness of experiment, for the force cuts equally well both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Because when you press your hand, you cut equally well in I all the tension; but let the thread be well tightened around the leather; and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are not making him tie the thread around the rod only, and then you can have him stand up in any way you please; then make him stand between your hands straight, and cover the forces with your hands or beneath your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the rod and blow into the heart, and pull it upward until the head of the rod is inside; then clean it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then tie at a sign the place with a double thread, then bind beneath I peg to another binding; and hold II fingers by the second binding with the thumb and index finger, and cut between the two bindings, then lift the heart upward quickly and pull the head of the rod; then let the blood run little by little, for this is the poison; and put powder on top and over the powder a cloth glued with an egg yolk cooked in rosewater, mixed with good fresh oil roses, and leave it there until the next day, and treat him another treatment so that he heals.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of forceps for emasculation is as follows: the two handles should be turned and sharp, and the handles should be as wide as the main part equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in emasculation occurs when the heart inside escapes through the incision; therefore, you must extend it to your nail, otherwise, the wound may fester; and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, then use pincers, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they exceed three days, and what is beneath the shaft becomes swollen, let it be until any festering heat subsides, then lightly peel back the skin; cut as much of it away as you can, while taking care to avoid damaging the shaft itself, which will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure therefore the place of recent wounds with powder, as we have said in the treatise on powders, and if it is cut too deeply from the heart, and it goes above, it will not harm; cure it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	From retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to the obstruction of a stone, or frozen blood, or foreign body, or similar matters, which we have mentioned in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is caused by a stone in the bladder neck, then the patient should be bent over their knees; place their feet on their back, extend their belly away from their back, and restrain the patient's testicles as much as possible; this will force the bladder neck to express the stone above it, so urine can flow out. If it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must perform extraction with all the instruments called a "syringe", of which this is its form: let it be made from thin silver like bird feathers; let the tube be one palm long and half wide, and be thin at its end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, and place the doubled string at the head with a pouch of wool or cotton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; and insert the head of the thread inside the syringe; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, then cut away any excess wool and push it up to the head of the syringe, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, and anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, and have the patient sit on a chair, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; then lubricate the bladder and penis with moist oil, olive oil, and warm water; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches its root, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; then bend the penis upwards towards the belly, puis boute la siringure avant jusc’a la vessie, and push the syringe forward up to the bladder, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; then have the patient feel it reach an empty place, and this is not done according to order unless the passage where it goes is twisted; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, and stretch out the thread with its entire wool pouch, et li urine en suit la laine, but the urine follows the wool, puis l’estrai fuer, then pull out the thread, et fai corre l’urine; and let the urine flow; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, and restart with the syringe until the bladder is emptied, et soit aligiez li malaides. and ease the patient's suffering.
des maladies de la vessie	Of bladder diseases.
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scabs or blood come into the bladder, where decay has gathered, and you see that water and medicine must be distilled within it, then make all the instrument which is called 'clepsydra', and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed and has three apertures: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see; and let the tube through which the medicine passes be such that it plugs well into the penis without addition, so that moisture can be drawn out of it, and blown in when necessary; and when you want to introduce your medicines into the bladder, put the head of the scent-bearer into the urine, and draw the air from within it; thus will you draw up the urine through the tube, then blow strongly back into it; so shall the urine enter therein and return now to the bladder, that the patient may feel it; this is the form of the subtle clyster wherewith we clysterise the bladder: thus it is:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is made of silver or archaut, and the head is higher up; below at I chest level where the ligature falls; then take a sheep's bladder and place the moisture with which you wish to catheterize the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts firmly with a good double thread, and heat I pot this moisture over the fire; then insert the head of the catheter into the urethra, then squeeze your hand over the bladder so that all the moisture flows in, until the patient feels that the said moisture has entered the bladder; and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment paper, make it round like a circle and pierce it around; insert I strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles I thimble, and put inside whatever you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, press with your hand until the liquid comes out of the bladder.
de la piere	From the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already mentioned in the division the types of stones and their extraction along with medications; I have spoken about the difference between kidney-induced stone and all its symptoms, as well as which type of stone requires surgical intervention; and concerning the bladder, urethra and penis; now let me tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is formed in the bladder occurs more often in children, and this is a sign that the urine resembles water due to its subtlety; it contains sand, and the patient experiences pain when urinating, which happens frequently, then stops; moreover, many have haemorrhoids with this condition; the recovery is easy for children up until four years of age, while it's very difficult in elderly people, and intermediate among those who are young adults aged between youth and old age; also, treating large stones is easier compared to small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the bile that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it sometimes obstructs when seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by their feet, lift them up and move them backwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes comes out from above; then have him sit down between your prepared hands, with his hands below his thighs, so that the bladder is completely inclined downwards; then search for it and feel inside; if you perceive the stone in this space, now be quick to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not fall when touched at all, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is a child, or with your middle finger, if he is an adult; and insert it into his anus, seek out the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, direct it towards the neck of the bladder; then press upon it with your finger, and push it outside where you intend to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to stretch with his right hand the cords upward, and with his left hand remove the skin that is beneath the cords in the area where the incision is made; then insert the spatula, which has this shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	Make an incision between what is between the cords and the fundament, not in the middle but at the left side of the navel; let it be straight over the stone, and your fingers should be close to or touching the fundament, and make the incision so that it is wide on the outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, but not too large; perhaps the pressure will push what is at the fundament out without effort; and know that there are some stones with angles and margins: they are difficult to remove; and others which are underneath, similar to a pea, and round, whose exit is gentle.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; 
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, you must take care of it, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either they die, or urine returns through an opening that the flesh cannot close; still try to extract it, either by pulling or crushing with forceps, until you remove it in pieces; and when you have finished your work, fill the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, compress it, and apply a moist cloth with oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then have the patient lie on their neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you untie it, rinse the wound well with oil and water, then treat it with a salve of alfina ointment and basilicon ointment, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if an abscess appears in the wound and there is corrosion, and blood coagulation in the bladder, causing urine retention that is known to come out with urine: so push your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will inflame the bladder, and it will rot; then cleanse the wound with water, oil, and linen, and treat it in all ways you know until it heals; and every time you treat it, bind his two thighs together, and gather your medicines at the site.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small and it is in the urethra, stuck there so that urine cannot pass; then treat him as I have said before, cutting many times, which you are excused for doing due to this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven this thus.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	When you forge an iron tool according to this form, it should be three-pronged and fixed onto a pole:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Take a thread and tie it around the shaft below the stone, so that it cannot move back into the bladder; then insert the iron tool gently into the shaft until it reaches the stone; turn the tool with your hand in the stone back and forth, until you can pierce through to the other side; urine will immediately flow, then press your hand on what remains of the stone inside the shaft.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it breaks and comes out with the urine, then the patient is cured; but if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents you from doing so, tie a thread below the stone and another above it, then make an incision in the shaft towards the stone between the two threads, extract the iron tool, untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood from the wound; treat it until it heals.
de la piere des femmes	Of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Sometimes a stone forms in women's bodies, and if it happens once, the treatment is difficult, and it is prohibited for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that we cannot find a suitable female expert who can expose herself to view, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third reason is that we may not be able to find a skilled female expert in this field; and the fourth reason is that the stone in a woman's body is often more embedded than in a man's, thus requiring a deeper incision, which is feared greatly. If necessity arises for such a procedure, you must seek out a knowledgeable midwife, and if one cannot be found easily, consider a subtle yet chaste maiden; or present it to an intelligent, wise old woman who knows part of the art, and instruct her to do what you command regarding the investigation of the stone; ensure that the woman is a virgin: then insert your finger into her fundament and search for the stone; if found, push it under your fingernail, and advise her to put her finger where the patient feels pain, and press her left hand firmly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; 
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know the symptoms, you can predict the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood overcomes you, quickly apply crushed vitriol to the wound and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops. Then return to your work: wait for the stone to pass, and have on hand the instruments I told you about earlier (for extracting stones from men), so that they are ready to assist you in your task. If the blood continues to flow and it's coming from an artery, apply this powder to the wound and pack it with tent cloth and bandages; do not attempt a second procedure - leave the stone alone and don't try to extract it, because the patient might die. Then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	Once the heat of the blood has been calmed and you are able to touch the area again, return to your work: wait for the stone to pass.
de hernie carnouse	Of hernia, fleshy.
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramusaceous water is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white serous fluid, which lies beneath the heart of animals and contains the egg; it is called 'serous fluid', and sometimes is properly within the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that this could be another egg; it is the skin of the animal between the white serous fluid we mentioned; and they do not know its name.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramusaceous fluid is due to weakness that comes in animals, and this matter is spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from the impact on animals, and this moisture has many colours: or it is inclined towards yellowish colour, or it is without red, black, white watery, and more can happen; these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is in the serous fluid we mentioned, then abscesses will appear, a bit like the shape of an egg, but does not open up animals' body, as there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the flesh itself, then it is an abscess with part of the egg, and for this reason, one thinks that it is another egg; but when the moisture is between the skin and the white surface, one feels it well. Therefore, to know the colour of the moisture, try all the introductory treatments listed here before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what follows after these introductory measures, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, the patient must be bled according to their ability and the fullness of their body; then have them lie on their back on something slightly elevated, placing a lot of cloth beneath him; let his minister sit at his right side, and stretch out the limb towards one of the two sides of the heart in the region of the hips. Then take the spatula and make an incision through the skin from end to end along its length down to the wrist, making sure your cut is perfectly straight while cutting away all the skin until you reach the white surface; peel this off carefully according to your ability; then pierce this with a water-filled needle at one wide opening, and extract all of it. Then place your hooks, and stretch out this surface upwards; do not touch the heart but only that area of the skin. Cut through all of it into pieces especially on its thin side, for if you don't cut carefully enough, water will come back in abundance; And if the egg happens to have moved during your work, return it to where it was once you've completed treating this white surface; Then sew together the two lips of the skin with a single stitch and treat as other wounds until they heal.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the testicle corrupted by another disease, then you must tie the suspending vessels, fearing the loss of blood; afterward cut away all the supporting tissue and extract the testicle, curing it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the swelling is gathered into two parts together, know that these are two roots; then cut away the other part just as you did with the first one equally, wipe off the blood and place on the wound wet linen soaked in rose oil; put over this another piece of woolen cloth moistened with wine and oil, cover both testicles with it, wrap it all up in doubled rags and bind it securely with a bandage made according to the following pattern:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two pieces of cloth and fill them with woolen wadding according to this pattern and stitch them together around the waistband of the breeches; one takes up the root from its base up to the back, while the other goes all the way round behind the testicle to the armpit; the third piece of material covers both roots in front. Join the binding cords through the loop at the waist of the breeches and this completes a very useful dressing for inflammation, which may be treated with cauterization instead of an iron probe. You take your fine lancet-shaped cautery instrument, cut open the skin overlying the testicle, heat it as we have described so that the white substance containing the swelling is exposed; then take the cautery according to this pattern and perforate this mass at several points with its serrated edge, scraping off the white material with the fine hot cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And beat it in every way you can, until everything is crushed; be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; know that this work is safer; and beware of bleeding, and do as with surgery; if anything opposes you, or an abscess gets hot or there is bleeding or something else, then treat what opposes you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	If the patient is afraid and does not want to undergo this procedure due to its terribleness, then administer perforation as I tell you, for when you are well certain by the signs we have mentioned that the aqueous humor is there, make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the part below with a spatula as wide as possible, and place the perforation along the length of the body; let the openings be wide so all the fluid can flow out; afterwards put cotton on the spot, tie it up, and leave to drain the rest of the fluid, then treat until the wound is healed; if the white cloth does not allow fluid to exit at the mouth of the wound, you must insert a feather or the instrument used to extract fluid from dropsy patients, which has this shape mentioned before; widen the wound and know that fluid will return, and it reassembles after six months or thereabouts, and when it is reassembled as before, so the patient will live their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	From the abscess of testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Be aware that in the cutting of this branch there is fear in many situations, which is why I think it's better to leave it; and I will tell you about the procedure and similar cases regarding the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come on the body, especially on the testicles; and this is due to numerous factors.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is known as an excess of acid and bile which spreads to the testicles, or due to impact; and the colour of the abscess matches that of the body; there is no pain felt, yet it's a deep abscess; sometimes they are hard and stony, of dark colour, and can arise from damaged arteries or swollen veins.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is due to an arterial wound, it is recognized by the hot abscess-like swelling when you press it with your fingers; and you should not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	He who is afflicted with a swelling of the vein is recognized by its feel when touched with the fingers, and you can easily perform the operation on this type, as well as on others; and it is that you cut out the core of the tumors, then extend the egg upwards, and draw off all the white matter from the yolk.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already hardened with these tumors, it should be drawn out and cut; and if it is aerated on the surface or within vessels, you must remove all that membrane and cut it roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the flesh around the egg is at its rear end, you must cut it all away and extract the egg as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Once your work is complete, cover the wound with wet wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	from carbuncles on the buttocks
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is a carbuncle wrapped around like a tumor, with the softening of the buttocks, and the patient turns severely ill when they go; and the treatment for this illness is just as fearful as the one mentioned before, yet we will tell you how to treat it according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you have the patient sit on an elevated seat, then tie the testicle support below your thumbs to all the vessels that are near the penis, hold them firmly, and stretch them out forcefully; then cut transversely with a broad cutting spatule through the covering of these vessels until they are exposed; after which skin from each side as we have said when extracting arteries in the temple; insert a needle there where you had the double thread and tie it at the first place where the vein came, and again to the other end; then cut them right down the middle along the length of the body removing the corrupted moist humors; after which cure the wound as with others that one is going to sew up so that no vessel dies on account of one testicle, because through this there comes no harm, and if in all the vessels there is a vein then it is necessary to remove the testicles from all the vessels; so that the urethra does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, dry up, and be unable to help itself.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the fracture of the skull.
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The events of this branch are due to the fracture that occurs in the skull or the extension on the abdomen in the region of the groin, which causes the intestines to descend from this fracture into one of the scrotums; and this fracture is either of the skull itself or its extension, and these two types come about through many causes: blows, jumps, falls, lifting heavy weights, and similar things; when it's an extension of the skull, the signs are that it occurs gradually over a long period without coming suddenly; and the abscesses are formed equally around towards the surface because the skull pushes against the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs when it's a fracture of the skull are that it causes sudden pain at first, and there are various abscesses appearing below the skin close by, which is due to the protruding intestine and body above the skull.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the muscles slip down with the intestine, and they are trapped there, causing great pain to be endured by the patient, especially when pressed upon.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron cure procedures with fear, it is necessary to withdraw from them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the manner of this procedure is such that you instruct the patient to draw their intestine up with their hand into the wound if they are able to reach it; then be mindful of its place on your neck between your hands, and lift their thighs; then stretch the heart upwards, and remove all skin from the upper part of the scrotum; then push in the forceps of the size you need to open up the wound so that the testis may come out; then peel off the white tough skin covering everything; then put your index finger into what joins the testicle where it is between the white skin covering and between the second skin, and separate that which is behind the testicle, and between the second skin; and with your right hand move within the heart of the scrotum, stretch the white skin upwards with your left hand, and lift up the testis along all the skin towards the wound; and command an assistant to stretch the testis upwards, and loosen what is behind it, bind it there. Then look for yourself at your fingers if any part of the intestine has been wrapped in the tough skin, and should you find anything put that down into the belly below; then take a needle with thread as thick as four threads, put the needle through the rear part of the skin which comes after the skin covering the scrotum behind the wound, and cut off the strings so there are four remaining. Gather together these ends one above another in cross formation and bind this tough skin we have mentioned which is below the skin of the scrotum with a strong binding of two parts; then wrap the ends of the threads around and tie them tightly into two parts such that none of the vessels that feed it can enter through, so that no abscess may come there. And put again the bandage as along the first long one for two fingers of this, and after these two bindings leave from the skin which is below the heart of the scrotum a distance equal to a finger; and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part which is below the skin covering the scrotum such that blood may flow out, as we have said before. Then take moistened wool in oil, put it into wounds and bind with thread of which we have spoken above.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white skin we mentioned is cauterized after incision due to fear of blood loss.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens often, and leave the cord until it breaks by itself; and if it delays falling off, let it be bathed in warm water, and apply what we mentioned above until it breaks; then treat the wound with another remedy until it heals perfectly.
de hernie carnouse	Of fleshy hernia.
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to treat it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is done like the branch which bears the fig, in such a way that you bind the vessels lightly beneath after cutting above; then cut into the middle and treat the abscess of what festers until the vessels fall away; and treat it as we mentioned before until it heals.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Some times rupture comes in the groin as we have said and its place becomes visible ; and no intestine descends into the scrotum , but if it does descend , this is little, and it will repair every hour  ; however , if it remains too long at this point , then ulcer grows or fistula so that the intestine descends; and this happens due to extension of the fistula which comes in groin as we have said because it extends , after which the skin becomes soft and swells and its place appears ; and cure is by cautery like we already told you before ; sometimes it can be cured with an iron tool in the following way : sick person lies on back between your hands then cut that swelling of rupture at groin according to size of three fingers; next pull out fistula which is underneath skin , then take a rod or iron bar and put it above place of fistula ; press it against abdomen, then incise two places of fistula over the head of the rod and incise both one after other; next pull out the head of the rod but do not cut anything off from fistula nor extend egg nor any other thing , as I already told you in cure of intestines prolapse ; then cure it by wound treatment
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you treat sons' injuries, clean them and heal the wounds until they are healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The incision is restricted, and has no appearance on the surface, and cauterization is suitable in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	softening of the skin around the joints
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often the skin around the joints becomes soft in some people because the tissue underneath is softened and visible; it needs to be treated by making the patient lie on their back, then cutting away the softened skin above healthy skin; then join the two edges with a single stitch, and if you wish, sew the redundant softened skin together with three or four strong stitches; then cut between the sutures and treat like other wounds until healed, removing the thread.
dou chastrement	Of castration
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Know that castrations are forbidden in our law, and for this reason, I would prefer not to speak of it in this book; and there is no necessity except for two reasons: one is so the doctor can know how to respond when asked about it and know its cure; the other because we often need to castrate some animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, calves and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say that castrations are performed in two ways: either by extraction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the one that we perform by extraction, we make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles are softened and hanging; then grab them with your hand until they are removed and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Du chastrement de taille: you must hold the beast and press its skin around the testicles with your left hand, then tie a suspender, cutting each testicle once with one stroke when they are well skinned; leave some of the coarse fat and fine fat which is on the vessels; this method of castration is safer than that done by traction because sometimes something remains of the testicles through which the animal desires lust; then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	D’hermaphrodites: de those who have both male and female sexual organs.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	An hermaphrodite is of two kinds in men: one is when between the two testicles appears a sort of natural figure like that of a woman where there may be hair and sometimes urine comes out.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And another type of dislocation occurs in women, affecting the wrist as if it were a rod with two joints.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	The treatment for men and women is to join the separated parts together, and treat them like other wounds; in the second case, of men whose urine escapes through the skin of their joints, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	Of stings
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	A sting is a separated part of the body on a natural surface, so ugly to see; some women have them as big as a hand, and that is their treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You must hold the excess of the sting in your hand or with tongs, and cut it lightly; do not go too deep to avoid bleeding, then treat any other wound until they are healed; there is another type that appears on the skin's surface, swells up, and may burst, appearing like a cow, so the ancients called it "cow disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	You must cut it off as we have said for gangrene, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de erratique	Of wanderers
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Wandering is the case when the woman's nature is not perforated, or the opening is small; and it is natural by birth, or an accident due to illness that has occurred; or it is caused by a narrow passage, or a subtle syphon or species, and it is located perfectly in the middle, or on the sides, or below, or wherever; and prevents conception, childbirth, and possibly the flow of menstruation; and knowledge of such a case is obtained through examination of the bath.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the obstructions are close to each other, use your fingers or a rod.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a delicate fistula and close to the two lips, hurry up and do this: place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then stretch the two lips wide apart so that the delicate fistula is rounded, and cover the stitches; then take wool, dampen it in oil, and put it on the spot, and make the woman lie with the man every day until it cannot heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the fistula is hard and thick, you must cut it with a spatula similar to myrtle leaves.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the stitches are made of fresh wood, suspend them with a thread and cut them; and have wound-healing medicines ready such as dragon's blood, incense, mixed with egg white; then bring a wide piece of leaden cloth so that the wound cannot heal; and let it be like this for a long time, and provide him with a dry linen dressing; then treat other treatments until he is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when there is fresh flesh in the wound, it must be cut according to this method, unless there are deep-rooted abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the deep-rooted abscess in the wound, one must not apply any treatment involving fire.
des emorroides	Hemorrhoids.
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins from which blood normally flows, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hard; I have already mentioned their similarities to others, as well as the signs, and now I will speak of those that can be cured.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and hard growths, when they are completely inside the anus and cannot be felt, should not be treated with fire cautery.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the marsh, where one can feel it, they are those whom one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	You must therefore put the woman in a cold house, then extend the ulcer with tongs and cut it at its roots, then powder over medicines that restrain blood, such as dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; next, press her feet against the wall for an hour, then place her in cold water; if bleeding occurs, have her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate peel, galls and similar substances, then take barley flour, mix it with honey and egg white, and apply this as an ointment on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops bleeding, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, have him undergo cupping on his back and breasts without wounding; then take linen, and soak it in juice of plantain or juice of agrimony with old wine, and apply it to the affected area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Once the abscess has healed, treat the area with ointment until it is cured; and the one called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough head, so you must cut it as I said for the thululeh; and then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	abscesses of the navel
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	There are many types of abscess that can occur in the navel, such as cancer, stony abscess, herpes, cysts, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscess, and several other diseases I have mentioned in the classification.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary that I speak in this treatise of the hot abscess which appears on the buttocks, which is not one of the abscesses that fall off; and if you want to know how to treat it with iron, look to see if the abscess is acute at its beginning, full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Do not hasten to pierce it, but let it die until the pain subsides; then have the patient sit on a seat, and place two small seats where he can lean, supporting his back and bringing his feet towards the parts outside the legs; and let his thighs be spread apart, placing his arms under his knees, and bind them well with a good bandage. Then suck it out toward the right side of the buttock, and bring in the instrument used to open the mouth of the abscess, which will then form into an ulcer, and when you use this instrument make sure to gauge its depth first so that what enters from the instrument does not go deeper than necessary, and that it does not hurt the patient. If the instrument is larger, cover the bottom of the abscess with a cloth so that the instrument does not harm him; and have someone hold the handle of the instrument while you use it.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess opens, and it is softened by hand, you must cut at its head, or with a spatula-like tool; and when the bowels are emptied, then you should place moistened bandages soaked in rose oil or dry green oil into the wound; put the bandage beneath the wound onto the bone, and cover over the bone and wrist with clean linen cloth dampened in water or boiled mallow; treat after two days of this treatment to ensure healing; sometimes lift the bone and wound by cleansing with water and honey, and then with water or boiled lily root and aristolochia longa; return to ointment application.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is deep into the bone, then you must be careful of burning with iron, but treat it as we have said in this section.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is necessary first to know the appearance of natural childbirth and its signs which are when you see the woman pressing downwards and wanting to smell things: then the child hastens to come out forcefully; therefore, know that these labours are according to a natural pattern, with the exit being under their head, and the midwife assists them; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press on her belly so that the baby comes out quickly; for when they descend face first, then the midwife assists them, and the husband is delivered of his superfluities by good circumcision; those who come otherwise do not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it sometimes comes out feet first, and the body or head comes out forcibly, or the hands come out first, or it emerges from her belly, or often the child is turned onto its neck, and by other bad presentations; thus it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skilled in these matters, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the presentations how one should assist.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out headfirst due to natural delivery, and the woman gives birth with great difficulty, and her strength is weak, have her sit on a saddle or be held by the women; stimulate her nature with oil from fenugreek which has been cooked, then insert the small spatula provided between her two palms.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	Cut the amniotic sac and scratch at her nail until the moisture which is there flows out; press on the woman's belly so that the child descends; if it does not descend, you must administer an enema to the woman with a mixture of fenugreek and sesame oil; then have her sneeze from snuff and hold her mouth and nose for one hour: now extract the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands come out first, you must gently push them back in a little at a time; and if they cannot be pushed back in, place the woman on a chair with her feet raised above her head; then lift the chair off the ground, holding onto the woman so she does not fall when standing up; and if the hands still cannot go back in, and the child is dead, cut its hands with the knife provided here, extract the child, and reposition it evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	Of the baby's birth upon its feet.
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child is born on its feet, you must push it upwards; and then turn it over and over until it is equalized; then take one of its feet and stretch it bit by bit.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps up to the thighs, instruct them to grasp and make them sneeze gently; if they jump further, may God will it so.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not so as we have said, turn it over and over until it is according to the natural form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is light.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come as we have said, take some mucus from a cow's nose, and oil of sisymbrium, and melted gum, and grind everything together in a mortar; put this on the woman's nature inside and outside the ointment, then make her sit in tepid water up to below her ribs; and when she is moistened beneath, make her a collar of myrrh, and place it underneath, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on a seat, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and press her belly gently, for the child jumps now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	On the birth of the child onto their knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this manner, place a pillow beneath their hands, one on each side; then let her lean over and hang the baby's feet down; let it lie on the bed; bend its hands back, first one way and then the other; then take hold of its hands under the belly, remove the cushions from underneath until she is fully extended downwards; if the child does not squirm, take his feet and move them strongly, then move his stomach upwards, then place both your hands over his head; rock the baby backwards and forwards; and tell the woman to keep still so that the infant can come out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	On the birth of the child, when one hand comes out sideways
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I must devise a way to bring back the hand: if one cannot do it, then have the woman get up and walk; if she can't walk, make her lie on the bed, with her legs firmly extended; next, apply the warm compress I described; and if she does not give birth, sit her on a chair, then try to bring back the hand; finally, deliver the child naturally, have her sneeze, and tell her to push as long as the baby is coming out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the baby's exit onto its neck, spread her arms wide, and turn her face towards her mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I must ensure the nurse holds her hand, then turn it gently back and forth, and move it slightly; once it is even, apply a natural warm compress with oil as we discussed earlier, then instruct her to move little by little; after you have done this, sit her on a chair, tell her to push; make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	Of this same manner throughout all of secondine
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it happens forcefully in this manner throughout secondine, cut the secondine with your nail, so that the moisture is drained; and if the child presents itself on its face or neck, remove it from there, making sure it is not trapped, and turn the child; then push the child inside until you have positioned it correctly, and tell the woman to hold still: then extract it gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the twin's birth
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes even three or four are born; this is not a strange occurrence, but an event that happens often.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Those which are strange things, and do not live at all, if they have a name; I know that they multiply, and are separated by the soft surface which divides them, which is attached to the swelling; and sometimes they also come out naturally like any other, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they come out violently, then treat it as we have said, and let the doctor be skilled, and act quickly and lightly in what he does; and do so as is best for healing.
de plusors enfans	Of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the womb I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and are all shaped like a child by the measurement of the glorious blood, and it is necessary that the doctor know all this, because perhaps similar things may happen to him; so he should act accordingly as required.
de l’enfant mort	Of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman for a dead child in her womb, as I explained earlier, and it doesn't come out naturally, and you have to perform manual work; you must know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or fear of death; the woman should be placed on her back, with her hips inclined downwards, and legs raised; the assistant holds her in two places, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not disturbed during the delivery of the child; then rub the mouth of the deceased with moist oil mixed with a poultice of althea and fenugreek seeds, and linseed; grease your hand with these oils and poultices; then gently insert your fingers into the vagina, while making sure that the child does not descend onto its head; if it is stuck in its eyes, neck, mouth, palate, under the beard, forceps or near the sides, and if the descent is on the feet, use a hook and midwives; you should hold the hook with your right hand, put the curve between two fingers of your left hand, insert it gently into her entire hand, and place the hook in any of these places we mentioned until the body comes out empty; this is the shape of the hook:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then insert it into the other notch or hole as needed so that the extractions are even; then stretch them evenly by pulling from one side and then the other, to take out splinters, and have the notches notched for holding, as follows:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part remains, coat the patient's finger with oil and push it into that area; pull out the other part; and if no splinters remain, place this notch or hole higher up, and do so until everything comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other and it cannot be pulled back due to constriction, you must wrap them in a cloth until they are entirely covered; then cut through at the joint of the palm or with a knife, and do likewise for the other hand and both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is standing on its feet, then the traction is light, and the direction towards the mouth of the womb is also light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	If it is cramped in the belly or breast, you must extract it with the cloth wrapped around your hand; and tear open the belly or breast until the moisture that is inside runs out; and if other parts are delivered but the head remains, then insert your hand as far up as possible into the womb, and pull [it] down to the mouth of the womb; then insert one or two fingers, and draw it forth; and if the mouth of the womb is narrowed due to hot inflammation that has developed there, you must not labor at all but must apply moistening and greasy things; he applies ointments, and these are made with soft and moistening liquids.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is lying on its side, and you can put it in a straight position, follow what we have said for the living child; but if one has no power over it, then tear it limb from limb, leaving nothing of the placenta behind.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	Once you have done this, follow what we have said for hot abscesses that appear in the vagina; and if there is an outflow of blood, let it be put in cold water while restraining movement, and treat with other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose womb a child had died; then another was born on top of it and the other one also died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess formed in the buttocks and swelled until it burst open, beginning to produce great pus.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat [him], and I thought for a long time, but could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a plaster of strong attraction, and from it came out one bone, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly astonished because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it might be the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I felt the wound and drew out several bones until the woman was much improved; she lived for a long time with only one part of her intestines missing, but otherwise healthy; I have recorded this chapter because when masters find an unusual case they should know how to offer assistance.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To bring the marrow back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Here comes the form of the pressure device, for which we have the cords; and again to the heads of these two lines.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the horns should be more refined than those of the pressure device and made of ebony or boxwood; the mouth of the trunk is two fingers wide and its border one finger thick, while it is a palm and a half in length; between these two lines are two adjustments made from this same piece of wood that must measure a half-palm long or a little more. These two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the marrow to open when you turn the horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, similar in its refinement and lighter to the previous one is made of ebony or boxwood resembling a pair of tongs; it has two adjustments at either end that measure a palm long and are two fingers wide; when you want to open the marrow with this whole device have the woman sit on a bed with her feet hanging down and legs spread then insert the two adjustments together into the marrow and hold the head of the instrument underneath between their thighs; move your hand along the length of the instrument as if you were using tongs in equal measure, according to how much you want to open the mouth of the marrow so that it does what she wishes.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all surmounted, and their appearances are multiplied; and when the surgeon has them prepared, it makes his work faster, and more valuable to men for its quality.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despair if you do not have the instrument prepared, for their necessity is inexcusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the midwife is delayed in childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, then make her sneeze forcefully, and hold your hands over her mouth and nose; if she faints from this, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, take a pot and make a hole in its lid, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the sufferer inside, such as wormwood, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia and centaury; cook all these herbs or some of them in water over fire; then place one end of the pipe into the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the sufferer, and hold it there until the vapours go inside the sufferer; then make her sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If there are multiple injuries, treat them as a single wound.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if the second degree remains after this treatment and does not subside, instruct the assistant to moisten her left hand with oil of sesame or muskroot juice, and then insert it into the body, searching for the second degree; once found, she should grasp and extend it little by little in a straight line so that the edges do not tear during extraction; but it must be moved lightly right and left, then pulled; thus it will come out and separate.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	If the opening of the wound is narrow and constricted, we have mentioned the treatment of sneezing and herbal fumigation; and if it does not heal with all that we have said, take care not to tear during pulling; instead, you must tie what is at the mouth of the wound to the thigh of the woman, then administer a clyster of four-fold ointment; this will soften and reset it, causing the injury to heal; but nevertheless, when softened, there may arise foul odor in the stomach and head, injuring the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So, therefore, appropriate fumigations for this are: some of the ancients have tried fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for the retention of flowers (menstrual flow) and the secundines is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is of glass, similar to a cane, and the subtle head (of the instrument) goes into the nature (substance being heated), and its ends are broad over the fire; and let the fumigation be over the coals until it is spent, and begin another.
de percier lou fondement	To pierce (the) fundament(s).
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have their fundament pierced, but rather it is closed with a subtle membrane; therefore, in the bath one must pierce this membrane as they should and not use a sharp spatula to perforate (it), and take care that the midwife does not touch it; then apply moist wool soaked in wine and oil, and treat it with ointment until it heals.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will heal, insert a plug of lead into the hole, and leave it there for several days; remove it when the child wishes to go outdoors.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	Sometimes this blockage occurs suddenly in a wound or abscess; you must cut away the blockage and treat it as described above with the lead plug.
de la fistule dou fondement	Concerning anal fistula, when pus comes from deep inside...
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulae which come from underneath the anus are called nodules, and those that appear on its surface or in between these two areas may be one fistula or multiple; when this nodule is old it opens up and reveals moist white pus or worms, and sometimes these fistulae penetrate deep; they can be recognized by the person who has them either during defecation or flatulence, and occasionally a worm may jump out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that penetrate up to the bladder, and halfway through the penis; they reach as far as the hip joint, and even to the knee bone.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	Thus one can identify whether the fistula penetrates through the anus or not: put your index finger at the anus and insert a fine needle of brass or iron into the fistula, when there is no torsion.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is torsion, insert a slender tent made of lead or horsehair into the fistula until you feel the tent or hair with your finger; and if you do not feel it and no excretion or wind comes from the opening as we have said: know that it does not penetrate; refrain from treating.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula perforates up to the bladder or up to the urinary duct, urine leaks out of it, and it cannot be healed by medication.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is perforated up to the hip joint, then the path goes down there; if there is no tortuosity and the cause of pain is nearby, then one should go straightaway with a knife, and neither medicine nor ointment will work quickly; in these perforating fistulas, there is no cure other than surgery, and it is vain folly for quacks to attempt it.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In those that are not perforating and are not old, there is hope of healing with iron, as I have experienced, and the patient should be lying between your hands on his back; lift their legs up to their thighs, then bend their thighs towards the belly; put in a bronze probe or an iron one if it is tortuous, until you know where the path lies.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around the anus, you must insert your index finger, and if you then feel that the tendon has been pierced; and if you can feel between your finger and the skin or flesh, know that it is perforated; do not labor over it as it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	It is said that one can indeed heal some of these cases, but this happens rarely; and the help given consists in heating the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as described above; and inserting it hot into the fistula until it reaches near the anus; do this twice or thrice until you know that the faulty flesh is burned away, which resembles a bird's feather; then treat with moistened tents in butter so that all the flesh comes out, after which treat with healing ointment joining flesh and sealing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If this method cannot be used to heal him otherwise; and if the fistula tries to enter but does not reach the very bottom of the anus, place your finger between the tent-like fistula and cover it with a thick layer of fat or suet, and you will see the fistula through this covering on the heart side; then cut off from the start of the fistula and push forwards before the tent, and cauterize afterwards until reaching the head of the tent; the tent will be relieved and fall out; then remove those faulty flesh bits that look like a bird's feather, leaving nothing behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood beats you and cuts between your finger and the work, then cauterize with fire or astringent medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For fire cauterization combines two beneficial effects: the burning of adjacent flesh and the stemming of blood flow and drying of moisture; then treating wet wounds with butter or ground substances until the skin puckers and contracts over the burnt area; next treat the wound with healing, softening salves that harden into firm scar tissue.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	Once it is reset, it is healed and will not dislocate again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	If the fistula reaches deep into the anus, and is far from the body's edge, insert your finger into the anus and feel around for it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tumor and find skin or a membrane or flesh that is about to burst, use only methods that offer hope of survival; cauterize as mentioned before, cut deeply, or apply medicine that will shrink it; don't go too deep lest you sever the muscle that holds up the anus leading to involuntary discharge; then treat it as described earlier. Maybe it'll heal, or remove the covering and clean it after cutting near the anus with ointment or sharp instrument; then scrape away bad flesh from the wound as much as possible; finally work on healing the wound and stopping the fistula outside of the anal area: this would be less painful for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are formed in this manner: it is when you insert a tent into the fistula, and it lies on the side of the fundament near the skin above, then take a perforated tent at its head in this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And there insert the thread awry in [II], and insert the tent along the entire thread into the fistula until it reaches its head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it has pierced through the margin of the fundament internally, then withdraw the thread from that hole, such that you insert your finger into the fundament; and pull out the head of the thread, and join both ends together, and press one to the other, and let it sit for [I] day or [II]; and sometimes restrain it, until the thread gathers its flesh which is between them, and excretes; then treat the wound until it is healed and clean.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not burst, make it burst in every way you can, unless it is too deeply embedded.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not fitting to make an incision so deeply embedded, then treat it with a bandage, as we have said, until it heals.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the sharp-spouted spoon which is used to make the fistula is very pointed on one side and cutting on the other; and not on the other part, for it does not cut what should not be cut, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	From hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two types: either they are inside the anus, like grains of pitch, and there are small and large ones, and they flow with blood, and there is one or more of them, and they are outside the anus and at its head; but those which are outside have little moisture, and moreover, they contain a bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and they have the color of the body; and the treatment for those who have them inside the anus is that you instruct the patient to strain themselves in order to go to the toilet, until the anus remains open, and its edge becomes visible; you then hurry up and grasp it with pincers, or hold it at your nail, then cut it at its root; and if the pincers cannot hold them due to their moisture, then take them with a piece of cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamois leather; and pull them out with your two fingers, then cut them, and put some hot powder on top which serves as cauterization; or you can cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cauterization, afterwards treating them with other cures until they heal; and if the anus cannot be opened, then administer to the patient a sharp and bitter clyster in order to wash what is inside the anus, so that it may open widely; when the patients strains themselves, and if the edge of the anus becomes visible, then the treatment is light; and you take them with your nail or pincers, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they heal, and avoid incising with a knife.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: 
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	For drying of feces or from the anus
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often there is drying of feces in the intestine, either due to natural constriction or when the illness is old and medicine has no effect.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Use a spatula or your nail to scrape off the bark-like layer on top, ensuring it does not become moist; then treat it until it hardens as required; if it cannot harden, repeat the scraping more vigorously than before, until it heals greatly and becomes scarred; then treat it until it is healed.
dou fremit	of swelling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	A formix is a small faulty appearance between the body and goes very deep; sometimes it finds coldness, and one feels swelling like death, and it spreads throughout the body, especially in the hands more than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is such that you take a reed made from a goose quill, or a strong vulture feather, and place this reed on the trembling, so that the purple rings touch the trembling all around; then turn your hand over the entire reed until you clasp it all around the trembling, and place it perfectly, uprooting the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you wish, make one from a reed of brass or iron according to this form, and let it be subtle below and straight above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce it, to hold with your thumb and forefinger, and you must compress [it]. And if you wish, cauterize the trembling as we have said before in the chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	Of the form of the clyster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	One time the clyster is made of silver or quicksilver, or melted tin or lead alloy; and one time these instruments are small and large, according to those for whom they have been prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	These therefore which are used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and suffer pain, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the clyster, small and large, is above broad, where the bellies are bound according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And it has an outlet where the bellies are bound, as you see, and the head is pierced inside it; and have on one side two perforations, and on the other one; and be the bellies or what we put the medicine in of a beast's bladder or parchment, and be perforated all around with small perforations, and have between each perforation one finger-width of space, then push into these perforations one strong thread of twisted twine in the form of an X or tied around it; and gather together the belly as if it were a goat's stomach; and when the medicine is inside, tie it with a strong thread to the instrument before you clysterize; and this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the enema with oil or egg white, or something similar, then gently insert it; then have the ministers press his II hands together until everything is visible, then remove the enema, and raise the patient's legs against the wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, hold on as much as you can; and if he sleeps a whole night there, so much the better.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you enema him for a bellyache, and the medicine wants to come out quickly, then start again until he is cured.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if there are hemorrhoids at the anus or abscesses, then let the enema be as gentle as for a child; and this is the form of the subtle enema with which the skin is drawn up.
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already discussed the treatment of wounds; now we will explain the healing process and the medical approach accordingly.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are caused, where they are located, and what has caused them.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	Wounds are caused by various things such as striking with a stone, sword or knife cuts, or injuries from a lance, stick or arrow, or similar objects; they can also be classified according to the body part affected, like wounds on the neck, head, foot, stomach or liver, and so on. I will explain the treatment for each type of wound, starting with simple head wounds since memory will come into play in its own chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is due to a stone or similar objects, and the skin is still torn and the wound is large, and you slightly suspect of an abscess: make him bleed immediately with the cephalic vein especially if little blood comes from the wound, and let the bleeding be contrary to the injured part; and let the patient abstain from overeating wine and fatty meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to bleed, let his diet be reduced, and let him neither drink wine nor eat meat; put on the wound, if hot abscesses appear, a moistened cotton in rose oil alone, or in styptic wine; and if there is no hot abscess, apply to the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and has not been moved by air, the powder which I will mention a little later; but if the wind has moved it, put on some ointments until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	Et if the wound is large like that of a sword cut or similar, and the lips cannot be brought together with sutures, then join them by stitching, as I will explain for wounds in the abdomen, at the suture.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and flaps over, only attached by a portion of skin, then cut it off; then treat the wound with medicine, restore hard tissue in place of leather, and instruct the patient to eat solid meats, such as boiled beef, wheat porridge, poultry, and similar foods.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find putrid flesh on the wound and it does not reach the bone, cut away all the rot, discard it, then treat the injury; and if there is a spurting artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped by medicines, tie off the artery, and should you find it severed, bind it with thread; and if that does no good, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: it consists of applying this powder which seals as soon as the wound has been cleaned.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The way of the powder is as follows: take one part incense; two parts dragon's blood; three parts live alum, and finely grind them all together, then apply to the wound, pressing it firmly so that it dries well and joins with all its blood; then bind it tightly, leaving it unbound if there is no swelling; for the medicine should not be removed until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one uses only the live alum if there is no incense nor dragon's blood available, but the wound should first be cleaned.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the fire has burnt the wound, especially during summer, do not apply this powder, but instead use some digestive ointments, or a poultice made of barley flour with water and honey until it forms a paste; then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is minor, extract it with fine pincers; I will tell you about head fractures later on.
de la plaie dou col	On the wound of the neck:
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound occurs on the neck and it is straightforward, there is no significant difference between this and a head wound, but if the windpipe or artery in the neck is severed...
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerves, there is no other treatment than to leave them alone and put nothing constricting on them, as this harms the nerves and makes them retract; and do not apply anything cold to the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuity is with the brain, which is the highest organ; but let the medicine be soothing, like warm water washed in soft water, and mixed with rose oil, and cucumber also washed in soft water, and other stones of your choice according to this method, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, cut it open and bind with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and filled with hair and pus, cut it deeper at a lower level; and if the artery is severed, and blood flows out, open it up, clean it, and cauterize if necessary; and if the windpipe of the throat is cut, or the heart, and the conduit is preserved so that breath can pass through, then cut the heart above the pipe of the throat, but do not touch the throat itself instead restore it to its natural shape; and then bind it gently, leaving it a few days, before treating with drying ointments until healed; and if the wound has penetrated into the bone, clean it out; and if there are pieces of bone, pull them out forcefully if you can, and those that you cannot, leave for a while until the wound rots, and is relieved and soothed at its exit; and if the wound is fresh, apply the powder as I have described.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has formed a fistula, treat it as I have described in its own chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	Of the wound from a lance or knife.
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a lance or knife and the wound is deep, examine whether air rushes out of the wound when the patient breathes: know then that the wound is deadly; but if it is not deep and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put powder on it nor bind it for the blood should not be stopped from flowing out fully, as this may return to the heart and kill the patient; instead apply an attracting ointment, and bandage twice a day; if you have no ointment, place old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture, and make the patient sleep on their wound for three days or four, or more; then there will be no spasm, nor malignant tremor of the heart or breathing difficulties; and when you see these good signs, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat her with tents and other treatments until she is healed; and if she cannot heal, operate, knowing that there is a fistula; treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	If the wound is from a sword or knife incision and it is simple, on the chest, or back, treat what is in front; if it is large, sew it up; if small, use powder; if it has penetrated the bone, and pieces have struck the bones, cleanse the wound, and pull out the fragments if they are loose; but if not loose, let the wound rot so as to ease the extractions; for wounds on other body parts, treat them as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	If there is a rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The rupturing of the belly can be large, medium, or small; from a large wound, the intestines or intestinal cords may protrude, allowing air to enter; and suturing is more difficult, sometimes a smaller wound is worse than a larger one, because it's harder to put the intestines back in if you don't do so carefully step by step; for this reason medium-sized wounds are better, as you can relocate the intestine to its place more easily than others. And know that there are four types of abdominal ruptures: two common procedures occur in suturing the belly wound, and the procedure for other bodily wounds is also applicable to two other specific cases, though they have some unique features too; I will describe each one and clarify them further.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and something of the intestine comes out, and it is a difficult thing to put back, this can be done in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this way: moisten a sponge or soft cloth in tepid water only, or cook it in water with vinegar and cypress and spike, and pour this over the intestine until the swelling is reduced; and sometimes use restraining wine, which helps to reduce the inflammation.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling start to subside, moisten the intestine with water or cook mallows and let them steep, for this alleviates any blockage; and if nothing can enter, then make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids; and the first treatment is to avoid cutting it open unless there is great need; and here are the instruments to use: they slice inside along the curve and outwards, and this is their shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines are exposed, put them back in place according to their natural form, if you have the ability, for it is best thus done.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large, and it is located below the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on their back, with their legs elevated above their head; if the wound is beneath the belly, place the head and chest higher than the lower parts; likewise, if the abdominal rupture occurs in one of the two halves, ensure that the injured part is positioned higher than the other; thus, you must manage as I say for large or medium-sized wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, apply what is available to you; then have a compassionate assistant hold the wound with their hands and bring its lips together; this is the common method of suturing, where you take a needle or several, according to the width of the wound, leaving two fingers' breadth at its head, threading into it a good strong thread; pierce both sides of the skin and subcutaneous tissue simultaneously with the two points of the needle, until that part has been pierced, then bring together the two ends of the thread in fours; twist one end of double-threaded string around the needle from either side, then approximate the two edges of the wound accordingly, leaving two fingers' breadth and inserting another needle; knot the thread as you did with the first needle, continuing this process according to your need for needles until the entire wound is closed; the needles must be medium size between fine and coarse, because very fine ones cut through all tissue while those too thick cannot enter well: so they should be medium-sized; do not insert the needles too far beyond flesh and skin, lest they cut and open the wound prior to healing; then clip the ends of the needle threads to prevent discomfort for the patient when lying down, and place tenting or dressing over their points to hold them in place until the wound is healed; this method using needles is more suitable for small wounds, since it requires only one or two needles; the second kind of suture is common, where you approximate both edges of skin with subcutaneous tissue together onto a needle holding medium-strength thread; when you have pierced these four parts together, return the needle to the point at which you began, like sewing cloth; leave between each stitch the thickness of a little finger as space; this kind of suture is suitable for humans, and I used it on a man with a wound in his belly, sliced open by a knife, more than a palm wide, exposing intestines measuring two palms across, and located mid-abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned the intestine after it had been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound healed within fifteen days, I treated him, and he was cured.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	The physician had judged him to be dying, but it was a miracle; I did not treat him with ointment because I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicines; instead, I applied old cotton twice a day on the wound and washed it with water and honey until he was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching: take the needle and pierce from the outside part to the inside; when it has pierced through the heart from right to left, leave the siphon or skin where the needle entered, and make it pierce from the other side, from inside to outside; the understanding of this stitch is that you sew like pelters do with furs, leaving a fold of the siphon on one side and taking it up again on the other until the stitching is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of stitching, as Galen accurately describes it, is done like this: Some physicians bring the two parts together naturally and apply one head of the wound to the other, in such a way: they pass a needle through one head of the navel nearby, and make a hole only there, leaving the two heads of the navel; then turn the needle and pass it through from outside to inside, to the two heads of the navel; then pierce each part from outside to inside in two other heads of the navel that are on the opposite side. This is the method of stitching and the most common one.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen says this word and some bear witness that one should sew the belly with two needles, each having a thread; and you must pass one needle from one side and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who stitch leather straps; and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the stitching is more difficult than for other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgments of the wound are such as those for other wounds: and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, unless the fire has moved it, then let the intestines dry out and heal; then apply a powder promoting flesh growth, and if the fire has moved it, apply any present ointment until the wound heals; and cauterize the sinews, and close up the orifices; then treat the wound as with the others, until it is healed; and if you don't have medicines, apply old cotton immediately after it starts to heal, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you don't need any other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound may affect the principal members, then you must wet a light linen cloth with moderately warm oil or rose oil, and place it around the armpits and under them; and if there is pain or inflammation in the bowels, which often happens, then administer a tepid wine enema, especially if the inflammation reaches the intestine; pierce it inside, and know that when it's the large intestine, it is lighter to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines which are called "jejunum" cannot heal when they are torn, and this is because of the small veins that run through them, as well as their delicate nature and proximity to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the serous membrane tears away from the wound, reset it like you would with the intestine while it is fresh; but if it is old and has turned green or black, then you must bind the blackened area to prevent bleeding since veins and arteries are present there; next, cut what lies between the two ends and attach the two shoulders hanging down on either side of the wound so as to facilitate extraction when the serous membrane falls, and the wound bends.
de la routure dou boueil	Of mouth rupture.
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is round and the wound is small, one can restore it in some men, for I saw a man pierced in the belly by a lance; and the wound was on the right of the stomach, then it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, from which issued excrement and flatulence. I treated him according to my best ability and did not cease to clean until he was healed and his flesh re-joined
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him healed, I feared the patient might have pain in his belly; and there was no pain, but he remained in better condition, eating and drinking; and some experts said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be bound this way: take large-headed pins, then gather together the lips of the wound, and when the pin has opened its mouth, put it on the two lips so that it clamps its mouth shut; then cut off the head, and this remains such that it cannot come undone, then place another pin in this manner after the first one, until the whole wound is clamped together; and stitch up the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	Cil chief si s'aerdent en l'intestine,
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it heals, is universally called a "fistula", especially when it has healed and narrowed.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is indeed an erroneous and hard nodule that is white in appearance where there is no pain, it is also as narrow as a bird's feather; sometimes it jumps outwards clear, and other times it is thick; sometimes small, and at other times quite large; and I have already spoken of this in the division of wounds when any wound has not healed completely and meat has not grown over it. This is due to one or more of nine causes: lack of blood or pus; its malignancy; hard flesh inside and on the lips that prevents new growth; too much mucus; rotting lees, and matter of poor quality; bad medicine in the cure; a manner of pestilence; tardy digestion due to natural disposition in the region where it occurs; presence of veins or bones. I have previously shown all these causes with signs and cures using medicines in the division on this topic
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now you must let me inform you of the treatment for fistula, which is performed by manual labor.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistula occurs in all body parts; for there are fistulas that come to the major veins, and arteries, and nerves, or on the skin surface, or in the intestine, or bladder, or any of the ribs, or spine of the back, or any joint of hands or feet; and so it comes about at the particular part of a limb, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	All fistulas of this kind are difficult to cure and require hard work and expertise; if there is a fistula that does not reach the level I mentioned, and you have faith in its treatment, and know how to recognize it, then take a tent of brass or iron if the fistula is straight, but use a subtle silk thread if it is twisted because silk moves with twists; and if the fistula has multiple openings and cannot be properly explored by tents, then syringe-cleanse through one of its openings as moisture seeps from one opening to another, and clean the area; then probe carefully with your fingers to identify bone or nerve, and whether it is hairy inside, and ask the patient about any pain they feel when you press with your hand, and where that pain is felt; and once you truly know where this is located, and if it is distant from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in one of the places I mentioned to you, then treat it as follows: cut away unhealthy tissue and remove all corrupted flesh inside; then heal until cured, and if the fistula is deeply embedded at its true location, then excise perfectly, as far as possible, then insert tents moistened with medicine made from frog spawn, pushing them in up to the head of the fistula, so that the medicine eats away any remaining excess matter at the bottom; finally apply stimulating ointments until healed; if not cured by this treatment, cauterize as we have said and excise bone corrupted by the fistula.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If the wound or abscess doesn't bother your principal members, as we said before; and if the bone is exposed, with signs of decay and blackening, then wait until all the corruption is gone, then treat the new flesh so it becomes sound; but if it isn't healed yet, and the bowels come out again like they did at first, know that you haven't gotten to the bottom of it: uncover and search thoroughly until you find the root cause, remove all decay, then restore its place; if it is thus healed, this is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the corruption is too deep and you can't get to it; there are other means left by nature instead; if there's some small corrupt bone, and you can grasp it with pincers, then extract it using suitable instruments for this purpose, and if there are many bones, pull them all out completely without leaving any behind; but if moisture is making things difficult for you here, and there’s no error or fear in your approach, cut away the moist parts along with the flesh, until you deliver the bone.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, apply a rotting substance to the wound, and let it rot the flesh around the bones; then they will more easily extract the bones. If it is a large bone, such as that of the leg or thigh, scoop out only the decayed matter until all blackness is gone, then restore the wound. If much of the flesh has corrupted and reaches to the marrow of the bone, you must carefully remove and cut away everything up to the corruption; then cure it so that it fuses. I shall tell you about a fistula which happened in a man's leg, from which you may take example and aid your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man around thirty years old who suffered pain in his leg due to an internal cause which led the matter into his limb; it swelled with a large abscess, but there was no external means of opening it. However, the surgeons, out of folly, worked on it so much that they opened the abscess and discharged much pus, causing it to become a fistula, with many openings through which all bowels and bodily moisture flowed. Many surgeons treated him for two years without any skilled man in medicine; eventually I was called upon, and saw his leg as well as the medicines being used, observing that the matter flowing from the holes was of great volume and body. The young man's skin turned red and took on a yellow tone.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I placed a tent in one of these openings, and then examined all the openings, and found that one came against the other from every part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I quickly hastened and cut into one of the openings until I exposed a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and perforated, with the corruption reaching deep into the bone; I cleaned what appeared to be the corrupted bone, assuming there was no other corruption beyond what I removed; and I began to treat the wound with soothing medicines over a long period, but it could not heal; so then I started again, exposing the bone as before, and found that the corruption had continued into the bone, so I cleaned it and then removed it, trying to close the opening; but I was unable to do so until I cut around one palm's width of the bone, which was entirely soft, and then I restored it with medicines; and it healed swiftly, requiring no further treatment except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure more, and my fear of their death.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation he often bled, but he was entirely healed, and in place of the bone, a hard tissue grew, which was well-formed and caused no harm or discomfort whatsoever, neither at rest nor during movement.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated as follows: take a linen thread and wrap it around the head of the exposed bone, and have someone pull it upwards; place another piece of thicker linen thread over the flesh that covers the bone, and stretch out the flesh so that you can remove the corrupted tissue below, and uncover the site where you wish to operate, being careful not to injure the flesh; use a red-hot iron or a knife underneath the bone in order to cut away the corrupted flesh; it is necessary to go as far as possible to see and feel all of the corruption, and then operate again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover all the flesh; then place a red-hot iron underneath, and then with the same length of the corruption make an incision as we have mentioned; and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut off the corrupted joint, and saw through the bone on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation between two joints, there is no need to cut anything else; and if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand or ankle of the foot, it will be very strong, but nevertheless you must inquire about this corrosion, how it opens up for you; and clean it in every way possible without harming the vein or nerve; and know that there are many tools to saw these bones depending on their position, appearance, thickness, subtlety, size, smallness, and hardness; and for this reason it is necessary to match each type of work with its instrument; and know that the work will show you the instrument needed according to the knowledge of this art and the indication of the types of diseases; so consider the instrument required accordingly.
dou feu	Du feu
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	Les parties affectées peuvent être endommagées soit à l'intérieur du corps, soit par des causes externes; et lorsque tu auras traité cette corrosion avec les remèdes médicaux appropriés, mais que cela n'apporte pas d'amélioration, il faut alors amputer ce membre jusqu'à l'endroit où la corrosion commence, afin de sauver le patient de la mort ou du handicap grave causé par la défaillance du membre; et les signes de cette gravité sont que le membre devient noir, comme s'il avait été brûlé par le feu, et peut ensuite se noircir davantage, car cette corrosion progresse d'un membre à l'autre et affecte tout le corps; il faut donc agir rapidement pour l'amputation, et si la corrosion est due à un venin d'animal toxique comme une méduse ou un serpent de mer, amputer au-dessus du doigt, sans laisser aucune partie entre le poignet et la main.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding occurs when you operate, cauterize the place immediately, or apply some restraining powders; then return to your treatment until it is complete, then bind the affected limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in his foot: he had a blackness that looked like a burn from fire, and this corrosion first appeared on his toe, spreading across the entire foot; and when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to cut off his foot, and was healed; long after, the corrosion returned to his finger, and he came to me, I applied some repellent substances after purifying his body, but the corrosions could not be stopped; then he wanted me to cut off his hand, which I refused, as I had hope of repelling the matter; also I feared that if I amputated his hand, he might die due to his weak constitution; and so he became desperate, returned home, and hastened to cut off his hand, and was healed. And thus is my tale finished except that for this reason one may act otherwise should need arise.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	A fistula sometimes occurs in a fleshy place and remains there for so long that it forms a large gathering of pus; then it ruptures and breaks open, and the pus escapes, just like from a vessel; and the skin above is as thin as delicate cloth, and does not go all the way down to the bone or nerve. Such an ailment is called a "sore" and is not called a "fistula"; but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone completely, then it is called a "fistula"; and you must cut away the skin around it entirely, especially when it is thin like cloth; take care of its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you are worried that the skin will rot and the corruption is not deep, but rather thick with flesh, treat it thus: first look at whether the breast is large or small and the pus inside smells putrid; then use this Egyptian medicine prepared as follows: take equal parts resin, oil, and litharge. Melt them together in a vessel over fire until they become red and acquire the consistency of honey. Then mix according to your needs with water, honey, and make an enema from it for the breast, compressing the orifice; leave this medicine inside for two hours then remove gently by pressing; repeat as many times as needed until the breast is cleansed and all foulness removed. In some cases you can use a mixture of water and charcoal if no other options are available; in this case take powdered wood ash from grape vines, add water to it and strain the liquid through a filter and make an enema with this fluid so that you know the breast has been thoroughly cleansed; should the patient be unable to withstand the procedure or refuse the Egyptian medicine then use only honey mixed with water for the clisterization in which case there will also need to be some pulverized litharge included. In another instance one can substitute a mixture of wine and honey, both of which have properties that cleanse as well as act antiseptically; when this has been achieved proceed by using emollients which encourage tissue regeneration such as Diaphoretic Ointment made from rose oil mixed with red wine or other balms described earlier in the chapter on ointments. If the fistula opening is small, use a metal probe to enlarge it slightly before applying Egyptian balm or Basilicon (holy) ointment until there is sufficient room for the enema tube; if however this injury presents itself as being overly large simply excise enough flesh from around its perimeter so that only necessary amount remains where our equipment can gain access through while still providing coverage against infection below surface level.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bowels are perfect, they do not allow flesh to be engrained; and if you cannot cut the sinew beneath as you wish, arrange it in such a way that the bowel moves to the lowest place where it is, for when the bowel is perfect, it does not allow flesh to be engrained, and if you cannot cut the sinew beneath as you wish, prepare it in this manner: let the bowel flow gently downwards, and leave nothing of the bowel behind; take consolidating medicines to put on the wound, and extend over linen cloth covering all the wound; then cut at force in the right place where the breast is a hole more widely than before, spread ointment softly onto another piece of cloth according to the size of the hole and lay it on top of the wound so as to alleviate the bowel, do not remove the large outer layer of linen for many days once. And that which is over the opening in the chest, often remove to take out the bowel, and note what runs from the bowels, whether it be poison or little or enough, digested or undigested; and note if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been spread this way and you see nature emerge from the wound opening, then know that the sinew is healed already, and approach the saints. Then unbind it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you untie the wound, change to another piece of cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast ejects undigested food after many days, know that the breast does not heal.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons take effect after long periods of time, do not despair of health, for recovery is near.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are men whose wounds take a long time to heal, and some who do the opposite; and if undigested food comes out of the breast after many days, know that the breast does not heal; and if the breast takes a long time to dry up, and is far away [from healing], then apply medicines that are moist in substance and dry in nature, such as a definite ointment, for it contains a large amount of vitriol, and this is the last medicine; take the definitive ointment, and make it with rose oil, and add equal amounts of old wine to it; then mix it and use it; and this same one made thick with fat does better when ointments diaphoretic are not available, or you can take myrrh and aloes and incense, grind them, and powder them on honey when it is over the fire; then glue a cloth to it, apply it on the breast, and sometimes administer long aristologist [?], and roots of celestial lily, which is like flour of fenugreek and centaury; and use either simple or compound remedies: grind them, make a powder out of them, and put them on the honey that I said, then use them; and if the cure takes too long, and is not healed by this treatment, know that corruption has reached its peak, and has caused an impression in the bone, or hard tissue, or ligaments; so treat it like the treatment for fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	On an abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	A panaricium is an abscess that forms beneath the nail of the hand or foot, or it may appear elsewhere; and when it becomes old and neglected, it turns into a deep abscess, discharging pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and sometimes eroding the entire nail; leading to corrosive bone damage, causing intense painful swelling and discolouration.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have described in the division, and the treatment is ineffective, then you must excise any remaining excess tissue from beneath the nail, followed by cauterizing the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cauterization is a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail intact; but if the nail presses down on the flesh, pricking it and causing injury, then you must place an iron rod beneath the nail that pierces the flesh, pushing it upwards, and remove this flesh carefully and gently, applying caustic and corrosive medicines to remove all of it; followed by a cure of oils until it heals.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, scrape it off, and treat with hot oil, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, healing cannot occur; and if you see the finger becoming rotten, cut it off following what has been said before, then cure it so that it may be healed; and if it is lacerated, punctured, and causing great pain, you must first treat the wound; then remove the nail with a sharp spatula by cutting across above it, being careful not to slice into the flesh underneath the nail as this would cause too much pain for the patient; should this occur, apply something soothing.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain in the back of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	Some people are born with overly fleshy fingers; sometimes they even have tiny bones and nails, while others may not develop any nails at all, which happens in some individuals' joints.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; 
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In one who is born or must be at the last moment, you should first cut away the round flesh until bone, then cut the bone to an appropriate depth for it, and finally clean it until it heals.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints that come together arise either by birth, or the healing of wounds, or burns from fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	You must cut this joint so that the bones can be restored to their natural form; then place between them two moistened cloths soaked in rose oil, so they do not stick together; or you may insert two pieces of fine lead, until the joints are healed as they should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If a joint comes to anyone of their hands with the palm, cut this fusion as it is needed.
des vils	des villes
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Les veines sont souvent enflées et remplies d'excès de mélancolie, provenant de différentes parties du corps ; et cela arrive surtout aux jambes de ceux qui marchent beaucoup et travaillent, plus qu'aux autres.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Tu dois donc lui administrer un purgatif à base de chaux, suivi d'un bain dans une église ancienne.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	Iron treatment has two methods : the first is to make incisions and drain out black blood ; the second method involves opening a vein and draining all of its blood.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The incision is done in this manner : first immerse the leg of the patient into very hot water until blood capillaries burst and blood circulation becomes apparent ; then lift the limb of the patient above hip level to below the knee, stretch it, and make an incision on one of three locations - either I or II or III - , do a wide cut then lift the vein and drain all black blood by hand from one end of the wound to another until as much blood has been drained as the condition of the patient allows ; afterwards bandage the wound, instruct the patient to refrain from eating meat for several days while taking a purgative with black chaux; then repeat evacuation and healing once the veins have refilled and the patient is not in pain.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The treatment of the injury is as follows: remove the patient's leg, if it has a lot of hair, then place it in a bath, and rinse the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and the veins swell; and if you have no bath, heat it over fire, and then cut along the vein from the knee to the top of the foot or below the ankle; then work the skin with an axe, and remove the vein from each side, until it appears when touched; and it will be seen as red and black, and as it enters the skin it resembles a white cord; then push the end underneath, so that it is raised away from the skin, and then cut it lightly with the axe, then make another incision three inches above; then remove the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it up with the thread, as you have done before, and tie it to another axle, as you did previously; then make another incision, or several if necessary, then lift it again, and cut at the toe joint, then pull it and lift until you reach the second incision; then remove it from one incision to the other, until it is completely removed, then cut it off; and if you cannot pull or lift it, insert a needle with a strong double thread, tie it together, push underneath the thread, turn your hand from side to side, until it comes out; be careful not to cut it, because if it cuts, it cannot be pulled or lifted, which is harmful for the patient; and when you have completely removed it, place moist wool soaked in wine and rose oil onto the wound site; treat it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is constricted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it twistingly, but do not sever it; and treat it as we mentioned before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron used to cut the vein is curved, and it does not slice but instead cuts into the vein; it has a thick curvature because if it were thin, it would sever the vein. Let it be thick as we have said, and this is its form:
de la voinne civile	Of the civil vein.
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the legs, in warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and on land with no moisture; it may occur elsewhere besides the legs, this happens due to putrefaction that forms beneath the skin as snakes and worms do inside the body, engendered between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the sign of the beginning of this vein is that a great inflammation comes to the leg, then the color changes, and the vein starts to protrude outward like a plant's root.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the vein opens, you must wrap it with a piece of lead that is 3 and a half to 2 inches wide, tie it, and leave the lead hanging on the leg; every time it begins to come out again, rewrap it around the lead and retie it; if it's too long, cut off a part and wrap the remainder, but don't cut into its root, until it is completely removed; for if you do cut into its root, it will retract into the flesh, causing abscesses and rot where it was, and a bad illness; therefore, it must be treated little by little until the whole thing is gone, leaving nothing in the body; sometimes this vein can be 5 palms long or more, there was one man who came to me with a vein that was 10 palms long, and when you cut into it, it sprouted 1 branch or hole, and pierce through it until everything comes out; then empty what's inside of it, apply medicines that stop rot for some time, then treat it like an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes this wound is less severe, especially when it appears in the ankle or foot joints, and a lot of pus comes out, which must be cleaned up; treat it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Maggots that hatch between the flesh and skin.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called "ox sickness" in our land because it often occurs with oxen, and it's caused by tiny maggots that hatch between the flesh and skin and travel throughout the body up and down, moving from limb to limb until they tear open the skin where they were and fall out; these are produced by rotting bodily fluids just as flies, serpents, worms, and intestinal parasites come from decaying matter in nature. The sickness is feared because when the maggots move through the body and reach the head, they may enter an eye and destroy it - this often occurs.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see him cure and treat it, one cannot be hasty as when he walks: therefore, you must bind the place above and below with a strong tight bond, then cut over it and draw out the venom, and if the poison is deep in the flesh and you do not find it, cauterize it with fire until it dies; and the greatest harm that it does is to run into the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming towards the head near the eye, firmly tighten the brow below it, then cut over it, and draw out the venom; and the patient must be treated with bodily cleansing medicines for purging harmful humors, and beware of engendering meats causing putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from windiness.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that affects certain limbs, and can move from limb to limb; I have seen what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and soon after, it seemed to move up like a worm to the shoulder, more quickly than anything else, just like live silver when it runs from place to place; the pain left that spot and fixed itself in the shoulder, and then a little later spread throughout the body, until it came into the other arm; then she told me that it now turned around her body, as I had seen.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly astonished at how it moved thus from limb to limb, because I had never before seen this disease behave in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Toutevoie, I had wanted many that it was good to move the pain from one place to another, but I did not want it, just as I saw in the woman; and I thought it was because the woman had a dry body, and the veins were exposed, and thus this constrained windiness appeared; and they do not appear according to this reason for those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see the treatment of this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, bind it above and below tightly, then press on it until that constrained windiness leaves its place; cauterize the spot; and if you do not see it with your eyes, treat it with what stops windiness, such as fetid pills, serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	from arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows vary according to their appearances and the parts of the body they hit.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of arrows is such that there are those with large points, and small ones, and some are barbed, and others soldered; and then there are those with two edges, or tongues, and those made in pieces; and the arrow that hits any member does so according to two methods: either it pierces a vital organ, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestines, bladder, and similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When an arrow pierces any of these organs and the sign of death appears, as I will tell you later, then it is necessary to avoid extracting this arrow, for in many cases death follows; and when this evil sign does not appear, and the arrow has not penetrated deeply, then draw it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when an arrow falls and pierces the bone, and lifts the membrane that is above the brain, is when there is cutting, burning, swelling, redness, and dizziness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting bile; and perhaps it flows without blood from the nostrils or ears; and maybe they lose speech and voice; and from the wound white moist matter comes out resembling pus, and also like bruised flesh; and if these signs appear to you, then proceed with caution in your treatment, and extract the arrow if it is still inside.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The signs of the arrow when it pierces the heart are that it is close to the left nipple, and there is a sensation as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty; and maybe the pulse changes like the arrow, and black blood flows out, and coldness and cold sweat appear, along with fainting: then know without doubt that death descends.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that has not perforated is when the wound bubbles with froth, and the throat swells up, and the patient's colour changes, and they sigh deeply and seek cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow falls on the chest covering, it is near the small ribs; and it causes great pain and great distress, and they sigh deeply; and all their shoulder members move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow falls on the stomach, perhaps something of undigested flesh jumps out from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow falls on the belly, and no faeces emerge from the wound in the intestines, there is no hope for a cure or for extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and flows away, and the patient feels severe pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, like the face, neck, throat, shoulder, armpit, spine of the back, forearm, thigh, and legs, as well as similar limbs, are safe according to various positions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not poisonous, as I will tell you it happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man that an arrow fell on his arm at the root of the elbow: I grasped it and drew it out from beneath the ear's fat, and he was healed without harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And thrust into the eye socket with a stick until it penetrated beneath the cartilage and struck the arrowhead which was buried within, but he could not reach more than its point towards the shaft of the arrow; this arrow was as large as a Turkish bow, all made of iron without feathers; the wound was healed and no evil followed.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I extracted an Arabic arrow from the throat of a Christian man; I carefully shaved his beard and drew out the arrow until it was removed completely, after which the patient recovered.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I extracted an arrow from a man's stomach and assumed he would die because of it; after thirty days had passed since the injury, his condition did not improve so I decided to cut open the wound and extract the arrow in this way; no evil followed and he survived.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you have a man with an arrow lodged in his back or shoulder, and the wound has healed over it; yet the arrow remains inside, not having changed its natural position, nor causing any harm to any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And consider another man, with an arrow lodged in his face, the wound has healed over it as well; yet he remains without suffering great pain; and many others like this.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And treat an arrow wound for the king's man, where the arrow had pierced his nose and was slightly leaning to the right; the arrow was completely embedded within him. I was called upon to treat this wound after it had been there for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	The wound was very narrow indeed.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I sought it throughout all its subtle tent, and I did not feel anything; and he felt pricking and pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of the arrowhead. I applied an attracting and digestive poultice there so that the flesh would not swell, and the arrow's location became apparent to me.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the poultice more often, and the wound healed quickly, but the patient remained unwell for a long time until he felt the arrow inside his nose one day; and this is what he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied a corrosive medicine frequently to the wound until it opened up, and then I probed it; and felt the arrowhead that was exposed in the wound, then I inserted this corrosive medicine into the opening of the wound so that the arrow's head became visible; and more than four months passed, and then the wound enlarged enough for me to insert some forceps inside. Then I grasped it from one side and another but could not extract it. So I did not stop using my ingenuity and devising methods with instruments until one day by using well-made forceps, like those described at the end of this chapter, that I finally withdrew it and closed up the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the doctor judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored; then I restored it, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or I have told you about the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you focus your care on what I do not say, for books cannot cover everything; but wise masters compare well little to great things, and for what is present and lacking, they find new work, and new instruments, in order to treat strange occurrences within this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows are extracted from the members in which they are stuck according to two methods: either by the place where they enter, or from another part; and those that come out through the same place where they entered, these are arrows lodged in fleshy parts, and sometimes this can happen immediately.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not come out now, let it remain until the flesh is thoroughly decayed around it, and the outlet is eased; and also if it is fixed in the bone, and cannot get out, leave it so for a few days, moving it every day; then it will come away, and if it does not, pierce all round with a fine awl until the tissue around is loosened, and then draw it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is fixed in the bone of the head and goes up to one of the membranes of the brain, and any of the accidents that I have mentioned appear in the patient: do not draw it out, but leave it until it becomes even after a few days, for if the arrow reaches the pia mater, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not stuck solely in bone, and does not reach the surface, and the patient remains a few days without ill effects, devise a means to extract it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot be removed through the skin, administer astringents around the wound, as I have told you; then treat the area until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is buried within the body where it cannot be seen, search for it throughout the wound; and if you can feel it, remove it with an appropriate instrument; and if you are unable because of the tightness of the wound, or the depth of the arrow, or there is no bone, nerve, or vein involved, then cut open the flesh until the wound is wide; extract the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs which hold it in place, remove the tissue that surrounds them from two sides to where you can, then break or bend these barbs so you can draw out the arrow; be careful not to snap the arrow as this would make its removal more difficult.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, leave it until the surrounding flesh is rotten, then draw it out, for its extraction would be eased.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the loss of blood opposes you, so manage that which we have said about the cure in its chapter; and beware of cutting into the nerve and opening a vein, and use any means to draw out the arrow without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to how they were positioned when the arrow struck them, for it is the greatest help there is, and if you cannot, then do as the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	If the arrow has come from another part of the body, or if it appears that something of it is missing, or the skin is swollen in the area where it can be seen or felt obviously: cut above until the tongs can grasp it, and then draw it out; now it will leap out.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, rotate your hand circularly until it enters the bone, widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	If it cannot come out, leave it again and then restart the extraction until it comes out completely; and if there is a piece of arrow shaft inside, push into all of the shaft; and if it is lodged deeply, you need to apply force using an instrument with a pointed end so that the tip of the arrow enters the hollow of the instrument; then push it forward, and if the arrow is stuck on its point, insert the instrument's tip facing inward in order to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	If the arrow is contaminated with poison, you must cut away all of the flesh around it if possible, then treat the wound as necessary.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow falls in the foot or thigh or abdomen or bladder or side, and it is near, and you can cut above it, then cut; take care not to cut a vein or nerve, and then extract [the arrow], and close the wound if necessary; treat until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the pincers used to treat arrows is similar to that of a bird's beak, and you can see its form here: [A sketch or drawing would be inserted at this point.]
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many types: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the wooden handle is also like that of a bird's feather, to push against the point of the arrow, as shown here: [Another sketch or drawing would be inserted.]
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of pincers to extract is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are thirty-one veins in the body from which one may bleed, sixteen of which are in the head: two jugulars behind the ears called "herbech"; and the two arteries visible in the temples; and two veins in the eye sockets called "aspires"; and the vein in the forehead; and the vein at the top of the nose; and the two carotid arteries in the neck; and the two veins above the lips, known as "augeherich"; and two veins beneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins commonly used for bleeding are five in each arm: one is the cephalic vein, which lies on the left side and lay people call it "the head vein"; the middle one is called "faste", composed of both the cephalic and basilic veins; lay people name this "the heart vein"; the basilic vein lies on the right side, named by the laity as "the belly vein" which sits above the elbow and is the most prominent when bleeding.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the salvetelle is the vein that lies between the ring finger and the little finger, it has two branches; in the leg and foot there are three veins: one lies beneath the curve of the left pouch side, the second sophene which is at the right ankle side; and the vein called "nesse", which is located in the other ankle; and on the other leg are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The bleeding of the veins behind the ears aids in cases of chronic catarrh and migraine; and as I told you about the qualities of bleeding, it is that you raise the patient's head, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then strap the patient's neck with a bandage so tight that two veins appear at the back of each ear in two places depending on the head: grasp them therefore with your finger, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, make an incision there; then take the lancet, and insert it below the vein until it reaches the bone, then lift up your hand to cut all the vein above, and cut both skin and vein quite through two fingers' breadth, allowing as much blood to flow out as you wish; then draw the thread and bind it tightly so that it be healed; and I have already mentioned incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The bleeding of the two arteries located in the temples is beneficial for treating long-standing migraines, persistent otalgia, and habitual lachrymation from the eyes. The quality of this procedure I will explain as follows: have the patient hold their neck tightly so that the two veins are clearly visible; feel the pulse beneath your finger, then bleed afterwards; raise your heart above the vein with your index finger, insert the lancet underneath, lift the vein upwards and incise it like you did for the other two veins; let the blood flow according to your need. Then release the patient, put your finger on the wound for an hour, apply cotton, bind the wound tightly afterwards, and leave until healed. We have previously discussed their cauterization and extraction in the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bleeding of the vein in the forehead is just as valuable as the bleeding from the cephalic vein for ancient diseases, and for migraine headaches, and redness [of the face]; and its qualities are such that the patient must strain their neck by twisting it, until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called a "fosseur," of which here is the form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Place the point of the instrument over the vein, and press it down with your hand or another object, allowing blood to flow out according to the desired quantity; then release the patient's neck and bind the wound so that it is tight but not too tight, and never use a wide flame for this.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, the flame should not be too sharp, and do not bleed across the grain [of the wood], as there is bone nearby, and perhaps it might break the flame when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The bleeding of the two veins that are in the two armpits helps the eyes, and for tinea, redness, swelling in the eye, and diseases of the face; and the quality of this bleeding is such that the patient must twist their neck with some cord, as before; then bleed them, and let the bleeding be across, a little from the length of the flame, a little wide, because there is no flesh there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, they may break; then make an incision for the blood, as much as you need, and then bind it with cotton, binding it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The bleeding of the vein in the nostril is good for fever and sudden madness, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that appears on the face, especially when it is old; and the quality of this bleeding is such that the patient must twist their neck, then grip your nose with your left hand, take a subtle long flame, and insert it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open easily there, and the blood will now begin to flow; do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then bind it for one night, for it is quickly restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The bleeding of two guindeges aids in the treatment of neck dislocation, and at the beginning of surgery, and for many illnesses, impetigo, caries, herpes, and abscesses; and the quality of this bleeding is such that the patient must press his neck below one another as we have said; and let the masters be above the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a seat, then open the vein from end to end quite widely, then remove blood moderately or as much as necessary; then do likewise in the other wound, then untie the ligature, and press gently around the wounds so that the patient does not choke; let it be until morning when the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	The bleeding of lips.
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The bleeding of veins on the upper lips aids in ulcers inside the mouth, gum corruption, chapped lips, and around the nose.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Make the patient sit in front of you and hold their neck firmly as I've explained; then turn back the lip and look at the two veins, one on the right upper lip and the other on the left, which are recognized by being black and having small dark veins around them; so cauterize each one, and if you don't know or are in doubt about which is which, simply burn the larger of the two on each side, and do likewise for the upper and lower vessels since they must be treated alike.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	The cauterization below the tongue.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The bleeding of veins that lie beneath the tongue is beneficial after bleeding from the cephalic vein, and it treats the narrowing of the throat, and diseases of the eye, and mouth ailments; the quality of the bleeder should be such that the patient lies between your hands facing the sun, and you lift their tongue, and look under each side for a black vein: bleed both, but do not go too deep, as arteries lie beneath.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the neck that are commonly bled are bled in two ways: either by incising with a wide martin flame, or with an olive-shaped subtle point like a sharp knife, and this is called "anesil"; they are broad and thin according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame martin is very renowned, and it is broad as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the deep veins filled with thick and visible blood, and those containing thick and cloudy blood; this is the form of the olive flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more pointed and slender, and is used for bleeding delicate veins where there is subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The bleeding of the basilica, which is one of these veins, aids in illnesses that are below the throat, and on the neck, and in the lungs, and in the stomach; and it is important for the bleeder to bleed carefully, and to beware of the artery that lies beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it cuts the artery, and bleeding occurs, you must stop it, as I said; and the wound should not be gripped but cut like a vein.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	If the basilic vein does not open clearly, you must expose it, and change to another one; or take a part of it, or treat in its place the vein in the arm: it opens clearly; and cut it like a vein, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you want to know the place of incision, it is better that you stretch out the arm and feel for the pulse; then mark this spot, and tie up the arm, and cut the vein like a vein; beware not to wound the artery when you see swelling, as that is the artery: avoid it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it protruding upwards like a child's urine, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is arterial blood: therefore hurry and apply pressure with your finger for a long time, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, as this often happens; bind his arm, and let it be, and do not move the patient; be cautious, and do not move him until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the bleeding is not staunched and you faint, and a physician is not present, then sever the artery if it is exposed, for this will stop the blood flow from his head; staunch the blood.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take a piece of fig bark, split it in two, and take one half and apply it firmly until the next day; if the bleeding stops, that is good; if not, then treat him as we have said, with powders that staunch blood; and let the staunching not be grievous in many ways due to the small size of the wound, and the strength of the arm's binding.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The draining of the vein in the middle helps to draw out blood from the head above and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said; and it is necessary for the surgeon to beware of the nerve that lies beneath, and if he pierces too deeply there, and finds the nerve, and it swells and the incision is grievous, and perhaps cannot heal; and this nerve appears often, and if it does not appear in some men because of its subtlety, then you must treat it with a small instrument; and avoid the nerve to your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then make an incision lengthwise.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The incision of the cephalic helps, as it draws blood from the head and aids the eyes; and it is necessary to incise by pricking with an olive-wood splinter or a myrtle splinter, for this is the safest of all veins, as there are neither nerves nor arteries beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Nevertheless, one must seek the lightest place, and do not worry if it is wrong the first time, just start again; and perhaps some people's places swell when they make a mistake the first time, but this does not matter.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the discharge is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about bleeding is that it is not done for the sake of bleeding but to maintain health and avoid future illnesses; and let this bloodletting be performed in one of the three veins: namely, the cephalic, the facial, or the basilic vein; and one must bleed at the beginning of Lent while fasting, and in autumn and winter after eating when signs of fullness appear; and it should be done on the first day or third, two to three hours into the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The bleeding administered for illnesses has no determined time, but it is done when needed, day or night, at all hours and at any time; and one should not bleed children under fourteen years of age, nor a pregnant woman within the first four months until the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	One should not bleed the elderly who have passed sixty years of age.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wishes to be bled, regardless of the method, they should first empty their intestines with a gentle enema, if there is an excess of feces retained, so that the veins do not draw harmful waste from the intestines and affect the principal organs; one should not bleed those who are overly full from eating, or drunk, until they have sobered up, nor those suffering from dropsy; furthermore, refrain from bleeding after a bout of colic, vomiting, abdominal pain, excessive intercourse for women, fatigue, lack of sleep, fasting, and any exertion of strength or body. Then purify the humors if the blood is thick due to food, drinks, or medicines, if you have the means to do so; then take a bath, if nothing prevents it, to thin out the blood, and bleed from the vein on the inner arm below the elbow, as we mentioned earlier; guard against any exertion, pain, lust, and similar things that day; be at rest and cheerful, and ensure the bleeder is higher than the person being bled, and rub the patient's arm two or three times, then tighten the cord moderately, for if it is too tight or narrow, blood cannot flow through; then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell and are felt; then moisten the bleeder's flame with a little old oil, then place your left hand's finger on that vein below the bleeding site to prevent the vein from collapsing when pierced.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that escape like ropes when bleeding, and some of them are filled with windiness, so much so that when one applies the flame on it, it withdraws from the flame and cannot open the vein; thus is one in such a situation; if he opens the vein, then the wound is too narrow, because of this, those who bleed must be mindful of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens on the first attempt, it is good; but if not, one should try again a little lower or higher without swelling the site.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the site is swollen and the patient fears it, leave it for one or two days without binding the arm: perhaps hot abscesses will form; do not enter the bath, but start bleeding again if you wish; and if the opening is small, the blood flows out subtly and you doubt that there isn't enough blood coming out as much as you want, then apply a flame directly on this same opening; work slightly above it instead of swelling the site; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the place swollen, do not reopen the wound, but apply a poultice of oil, for it lightens the body's blood and is soothing to this place where the oil belongs; thus administer the oil-based ointment in every dressing that you treat wounds with to staunch the flow of blood; this same action thins and disperses [the blood], when applied on the wound, if subtlely so as not to cause too much pain.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a large abscess forms there, which often happens, especially when it has not been dressed previously or the opening of the wound is small, then hasten and apply to the place a moist sponge in warm water and salt, pressing it for an hour; you must do this after the blood from the wound has drained, and if after some days a blackness or greenness remains there, it will not harm [the patient]; but if you see any redness, apply something of aloe or myrrh infused in calamint juice, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	For many times abscesses and appearance occur in the healing of the basilic vein: so put your hand on it, and if you find the place soft to the touch of the hand, then this is that bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid anything that might impede circulation of the artery; instead apply a dry plaster to harden the area, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	Extract from each person's blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to the colour of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it as thick, let it flow until it is thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for one who is full and healthy, and requires bloodletting, to make a larger wound for them, with wide flames; and for the weak, do the opposite, and you should bleed them little and often, and you must bleed by cutting diagonally, not piercing; and this method of bleeding is safe from excessive blood loss and nerve damage, and it is better than long or wide incisions.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for one whose body requires bleeding, give them bread soaked in pomegranate juice; if they are heated, draw out blood three or four times; and if they are of a cold complexion, feed them before the bleeding moistened bread with musky syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints during the bleeding after losing a great deal of blood, then it is necessary for him to drink broth and subtle fragrant syrup, and to make use of other things that we have mentioned in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to bleed his arm and bleed again, it is necessary that when he is weakened by excessive bleeding, he must bleed a little at a time, according to the quantity of his strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he wants to bleed his arm again after the first bleeding, and he has an illness that is intense, then he should be bled seven hours after the first bleeding or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if he wants to bleed in another place, then he should be bled on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For it has much blood within the body that is already heated and causes fever; thus a great quantity must be drawn out, and enlarge the opening until it closes on its own accord; then attend to all conditions of healing, and place your hand upon his pulse as he heals so that death does not come in lieu of natural closure, this happens many times when healers are negligent; nor should you, when wishing to release an arm, let blood a second time if the opening is already closed, press strongly upon it for fear that it might bend; rather leave it be until it heals the second time, or prick at the tip with flame so that congealed blood may exit through the vein's opening and apply a poultice of fresh herbs soaked in water, then lightly press.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the wound is swollen, leave it alone and do not constrict it, until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to drain blood a second time, draw the blood in that same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein between the arms is drained in place of the vein of the head because it is composed that way.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	The method of draining is as follows: the patient immerses their hand in hot water until the nails are red; then they are bound loosely so that the vein appears clearly, and now you must draw from across it, neither too wide nor too long; and make a large opening, and drain close to the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot flow out, place the hand back into hot water, and let the blood run into the water until enough is drawn; but if this is done in winter, do not re-immerse the hand in hot water, for it is done more often in winter than summer; and draining from this vein is safer than all other veins, as neither artery nor nerve are harmed.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The bloodletting from the vein on the right hand is beneficial for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it is done: extend the hand, immerse in hot water until the vein is swollen; if it does not swell, lacerate it; and if the bleeding occurs transversely, and you coagulate it completely, then there will be no harm. Do not go too deeply because all the nerves lie directly under the skin, which has been denuded of flesh; then immerse the hand in hot water again if the blood is frozen in the wound and cannot flow out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn as much blood as is necessary for the patient, apply oil and lint to the vein in order to suture it; do likewise for every other wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The bloodletting from the vein on the left hand is beneficial for ailments of the spleen; do everything as I have told you to do towards the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The bleeding of the saphenous vein is beneficial for all diseases that are below the body, such as uterine disorders, retention of urine, kidney disease, and similar illnesses in the hips, thighs, old legs, and so on.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of this bleeding is that the patient should immerse their foot in hot water and rub it vigorously over the vein until it disappears, then bind above the ankle joint with bandages; the vein lies at the ankle and extends upwards towards the kidneys; so bleed whichever kidney is larger or at the ankle as you see fit.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you bleed it at the foot, take care of the nerves that lie below and bleed transversely like when cutting; let the flame be small.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot exit, return the foot to water, and allow it to drain fully from the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the first cut fails, begin again a little above it because the skin is salty; do not be afraid of nerves as we have said before, and proceed likewise for the other foot identically.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The skin of the sciatic vein is found at the back of the ankle, and its incision provides relief for hip pain when blood is too hot.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	The qualities of this incision are that the patient should enter up to the bath, and pressure is applied above the ankle for four days by twisting because otherwise it does not open the vein; if it opens, proceed to cut in all ways possible, including across; it is better to be thorough than too cautious since the skin is dry, and veins can often recover from such treatments.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, take some thread from where it appears on the back of the foot, toward the little toe, and be careful of the nerves; and make sure to stop the bleeding that you see, then untie the binding, and apply cotton and press [it]; now it is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	Cupping incisions
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping glasses are made of horns, or bronze, or glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by drawing out blood with suction, or without [drawing out] blood.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping without bloodletting is done in two ways: either with complete heat or without [any] heat; and cupping which involves cutting and extracting blood can be performed on fourteen places of the body, some being found entirely within the head; others are in the neck; two more are in the sides of the neck; another under the chin; there is one over each shoulder; ones over the hips; ones between the two arms; ones for both legs; and ones at both ankles. Cupping extracts only small veins which are spread throughout the flesh, without weakening [the patient], as happens with vein-cutting; it should not be administered either way--with or without heat--in any disease arising from overfullness until the entire body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if it is necessary due to illness or for treatment purposes, we must apply cupping every hour at the beginning of the month, or towards the end, and at any time; because there are some who, when they need cupping, feel heavy-headed; and there are those who experience fullness and redness in their face, neck, and head; and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, have an inflamed tongue, and cough up blood; and there are also those who dream about, and witness during sleep, blood, wounds, death, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially during the middle of the month, we instruct them to undergo cupping after three hours in the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The bleeding of the nose helps with inflammation ... that reaches the eyes, and it should not be done after evacuating all over the body; this venting is in place of bleeding from the head, and those with a cold constitution should not use it, nor should those with catarrh, as it causes them great harm; for these reasons, the elderly should not use it, nor those who have cold illnesses in their head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who bleed often become forgetful, so it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower due to the fear of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	Venting in the middle of the neck serves as an alternative to bleeding from the head and the basilic vein, and it is useful for narrowing of the oesophagus, splitting of the bile duct, coughs, and fullness; it should be done carefully because if it holds too tightly, it can cause forgetfulness or affect the stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventilations at the two ribs of the neck are useful for headaches, eye inflammation, migraines, strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth; it is located in the region where the basilica vein is cut; you must instruct the surgeon to place his hand there so that he does not press on the artery or cause bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The ventilations below the chin are useful for mouth diseases, such as gum inflammation and similar ailments in the mouth; it is located where the two lips are cut open.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventilations of the shoulders are useful for illnesses that arise from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventilations of the armpits are just as useful as those of the three veins of the arm because they draw blood from these large veins; instruct the surgeon not to make them too deep as the place is bare flesh and has nerves and arteries beneath it.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup that is placed on the buttocks is beneficial for haemorrhoids and diseases below, and it should be large and made of copper, as it needs to draw well; and perhaps, if it were thin, it would break; and it causes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups on the legs clearly heal, as they draw blood from the entire body, and are effective for old pains in the kidneys, uterus, and bladder, and relieve swelling; they should be placed at two sophens (a unit of measurement), and two ankles, but over time they weaken the body and cause fainting in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the suction cup is as follows: first place it empty, then suck gently and swiftly, and put it in quickly, moving evenly, and do not stop this action until you see the area turn red and swollen, and notice the redness of the blood; then withdraw, and reapply the cups, being mindful of the condition of the body, as some have tough flesh, while others have delicate pores: one must only strike once, making broad wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to thin out the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very dense, one must strike a third time; and when we want to draw out thin and small quantities of blood, we are content with just one blow.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we should repeat the process often; and if the blood is dense, strike hard enough so that the heart is pierced suddenly, and it is necessary for one who has thick and hard skin, and whose pores are narrow, that you anoint the cups with an apertif and dissolvent oil: in summer use violet oil, almond oil or squash seed oil; and in winter, cress oil, lily oil, camomile oil or similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the surplus is large and cold, take almond oil, or balm oil, or aniseed oil, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one who is healed has tender flesh and large pores, it should not be oiled, but instead it should be washed after ventilation with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin water, or china root water, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And for one who has too much moisture, they should be raised with myrtle water, or sumac water, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And for those with large surplus should be raised with old wine, or sesame water, or aniseed decoction, or chamomile, or others like these; and they should not be cupped before the bath nor during it, but after the bath one or two hours later; and they must not sleep after the ventilation, and he must rise up when he is to be cupped and when he has been cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And beware if the patient is choleric and their blood is too sharp and inflamed; then they should take cooling things like pomegranates, endive, and lettuce in moderation, and similar foods; and eat little pork fat, mutton, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And for one with a cold constitution, give them syrup of honey and medium-aged aromatic wine, which is between old and new wine, and let them eat little, few pork fat, small birds like pigeons; and on the day they are cupped, they should drink more than eat; and sometimes give some men treacle or nutmeg beforehand or afterward to strengthen their principal limbs; and thin the blood carefully, but those who are warm must not have it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are applied without causing injury are those placed over the liver, and on the spleen, podagra, abdomen, groin, kidneys, and hip, as these body parts cannot withstand being punctured; this is not done to cause bleeding from one member to another, but rather to draw blood away from a member, just like when we place suction cups on breasts during childbirth; in order to remove the viscosity that has built up within an organ, such as when we use suction cups on the abdomen and groin to reduce swelling of those organs; it also removes pain when there is an obstruction or stone by its attractive virtue potentially removing the obstruction or expelling the stone from its position; thus they act when placed over the liver and spleen in cases where there is retained wind, and these suction cups are administered empty so as to suck only air; sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with tepid water, such as during pleuresy-like illnesses, or in a way that we fill the cup with warm alone water, or with water in which suitable herbs have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The method of administering the fire cautery is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it should be two fingers wide and half a palm in length, with a small hole at the center just large enough for a needle to pass through, made of brass so as not to injure the patient upon application onto the limb; and it shall have within it an iron or steel rod across its middle, to hold a lighted candle wick, and these cups shall come in various sizes depending on the disease and age of those who use them; for the cups for children are different from those for adults, and for the thin differ from those for the obese.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	One should thus apply this cup in the following manner: take some wax from a candle or use ointment, and place it within the cup at the end of the rod which is inside the cup, so that the flame does not burn the patient; then place the cup on the affected limb, ensuring your two fingers are covering the hole we mentioned earlier, such that when you wish to let out some vapor you may do so, and remove the cup; take some ointment as before and repeat this process often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the cupping glass used for treating pleurisy, which is entirely hollow and has no tube or opening, it is only applied when filled with water, and placed solely on the affected limb; its shape is as follows:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Leeches are only applied to limbs where cupping glasses cannot be used due to their small size, such as lips and gums, or similar areas; also on parts of the body that lack flesh, like the heel or toes, and others alike; and regarding how they should be prepared: you must select leeches filled with clear, pure water without any dirt inside them; place these in a vessel containing fresh water for one night until they are satiated and have nothing left inside their bodies; then bleed the limb using both a lancet and cupping glass until it becomes red, afterward rub the affected area vigorously until redness appears, at which point apply the leeches; and when they become full and drop off, if this is an area where a cupping glass can be applied, do so because its effects are far better afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, raise the affected area with ease, and then use cold water, it works well, and then apply pressure; if the wound bleeds too much in relation to the patient's condition, soak a linen cloth in cold water, and place it on top until the bleeding stops; and if the blood flow is excessive, apply ground vitriol, gallnuts, or similar items until it clots; you can also place half of a peeled broad bean on the wound, leaving them there until they dry out at the site, this will stanch the flow now; and if more treatment is required, take additional leeches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	If the leeches do not want to attach themselves, rub the affected area with fresh blood or prick it with a needle until blood comes out and then place them on top; as soon as they sense the blood, they will adhere; once you see that they are full, sprinkle some powder of aloe and ground sel, or ashes over them so they let go.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with the setting of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that if ignorant surgeons neglect this chapter, they will never turn to any of the old books, nor read a single letter; and for this reason science is lacking in our land, for I have never found any good one; and I know nothing else except through the knowledge gained from ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and through experience, and the custom of my life; and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained within it, and have abbreviated it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I have done in these two preceding chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is necessary, therefore, that we state in the prologue of this book the sum of what has been said and the chapters where the sage puts his understanding; remaining true so that those who are tested may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	When fracture, dislocation, twisting, or rupture occurs in any part of the body, you must quickly bleed the patient on both sides if nothing else hinders it, such as bodily weakness, childhood, or old age; unless the weather is very hot or too cold; and avoid eating cold foods like salads, bird meat, and goat cheese; also abstain from drinking wine, fatty meats, and overeating of any kind that fills the veins with blood until you suspect a warm abscess or an outflow of matter in the limb, so the patient returns to his first healthy condition.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with meats that produce thick nourishment, or have a viscous quality, such as wheat boiled in water, and rice, eggs, feet, calf's stomach, eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For too much nourishment causes inflammation and delays healing of the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the bones of the elderly and decrepit cannot heal or fuse well according to their nature due to the dryness of their limbs, nor can those who are too young, such as small children; but have no fear, place large splints above the broken bone which binds and joins the limb together, until it strengthens like it was before; do not cease your efforts, and for this reason, one must nourish them with thick meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from that of the arm or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the types of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	As there is fracture that goes sideways, another in sharpening, like the cut of a quill to write with.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is fracture with a wound, or fracture with just a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And for each type there is its own method and proper tool for restoration, depending on how the bone remembers its place; and the fracture of the bone is known by the twist in its direction, clearly apparent from outside, sounding hollow when pressed with the hand; and where there is no twisting or resonating sound to touch, and the patient feels little pain, then it may not be a fracture but rather a twist, crack, or small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You must not move it by hand but apply medicines that are listed hereafter and then hold it firmly in place with bandages.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture which occurs in the arm bone and involves two separated parts must be aligned immediately before any abscesses develop so as to avoid them; if an abscess does arise then you should leave it alone for a day until the abscess has healed, then reset it gently and carefully, knowing that the restoration is easier than with cases where pieces are involved. Then secure it, as outlined below
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if the bone is broken into pieces, then extend it in two parts, whether it be arm or leg or a small limb of your own hand, or with two ligaments, or one and also your hand; place the member according to its natural shape so that when the damaged part of the limb has been separated, bring all appendages back into their places as best you can without causing further injury or pain, and align well the heads of the bones according to their proper forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And the patient will feel it with their hand if you think it is not well: handle it gently, and do not hold or squeeze too tightly as those who cause hot abscesses and contractions in limbs through their work, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	When the limb is in place, discipline the patient well to not move it, neither while awake nor asleep, when turning or moving in any other way; and watch closely that the limb remains secure without causing any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when there is no pain felt, it is not yet in place, and you must position it so that no pain is caused; be careful that it is set straight to avoid any twisting once restored; the quality of the broken limb will depend on what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness, size, and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For smaller limbs like arms and fingers, wrap with soft and fine linen cloths; for larger ones such as thighs and legs, use wide and sturdy bandages, for broad bands embrace the entire large limb and constrict it evenly from all sides, so that there is no strain; then bind with light padding, three or four turns depending on the limb's size, and tighten your hand a little over the whole bandage; then go above the fracture and tighten less, allowing some movement at the break; gradually loosen the band slightly until you reach a large portion of healthy tissue, then apply another bandage, rewrapping it onto the broken area; return to the part below the fracture, tightening moderately, neither too tight nor too loose as mentioned earlier; place linen pads or cloths between the bands for even distribution; bind everything above with a bandage; and finally, put your well-made splints on top if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, apply soothing poultices to the abscess that are hot and reduce the swelling. Leave them like this for a few days; then bind with your splints, and let them be half of a narrow cane, cut into lengths from wood used for cleaves, or from palm ribs. Let these be shaped in such a way:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	but the splint that is placed on the broken bone must be a bit thicker and wider than the others; it should also be as long as necessary for the size of the limb, small or large; then bind tightly over the splints just as you did with the first binding, then tie above it with a suitable thread, like in the first bandage on the fracture. The higher up it is, the less narrow; and the thread must be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft flax; for if the threads are too thick, as I have seen some foolish workers do their bindings with twisted linen cords, this is a great error, because the bandage cannot be even if it is too fine, and there should not be less than two fingers' width between each splint.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the tips of the ribs after being constricted in their chest, place sterile pads made from linen or wool beneath them so that they do not wound themselves further.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by a fracture, and the heart is ruptured, I will speak of its treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not advisable to constrict the ribs of limbs with fractures on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limb is large, it is not necessary to apply ribs before five or seven days have passed, or more depending on the severity of the abscess and its rate of improvement; and here you will find the ancient method of using plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and torsion: take flour that has been kept against the mill wall, mix it with an abundance of egg, and apply this mixture - neither too runny nor too thick - using it in a manner common for many plaster applications designed to treat fractures across various contexts, especially those involving women and young children since it is not overly hot or cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of making an emollient plaster to restore fracture and dislocation and sprain: take З abareis and ladani and enule and asafetida and gum arabic and mugwort, each weighing X З; myrrh and aloe, each weighing V З; alchiloa weighing VIIII З; grind all this into powder, mix it with egg white; if the complexion of the man is warm, then use this plaster, for it has a good composition, restores broken bones speedily, and suits many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way of making an emollient plaster for sprain: take mugwort and viscose mallow, each weighing X З; myrrh and aloe, each weighing VIIII З; acacia weighing VI З; Armenian bole weighing X З., grind well, mix it with water or egg white, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another manner of plaster for joints and dislocated bones from their sockets, to ease the arising pain, and for wear on the bone, and breakage: take new wool, soak it in water and oil until cooked, and place it on the site.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not restore, but it is good to soothe hot abscesses, and properly remove pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another manner of plaster to restore broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth-pea leaves, grind together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another manner of plaster for the restoration of broken bones and to reduce the remainder of abscesses.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; 
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another type of plaster, even stronger than the first, is used when treating a severe abscess on the limb during restoration.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of marshmallow, and flax seeds, pomegranate peel, melilot, mallow, and plantain leaves, along with violet and chamomile flowers; use equal parts of each. Grind them together, then mix them with salted water or regular water, or even wine, depending on the warmth and condition of the limb.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, Hippocrates says not to apply anything else but a mixture of wax and oil to the broken limb during restoration; he says it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	Galen agrees that to treat a broken limb one should apply dry things slightly warmed up like myrrh, aloe, and incense as we have previously mentioned.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another type of plaster that is beneficial for injuries and pain: take mugwort and chopped human hair, or feathers from a bird, and viscum, and equal amounts of flax, grind them all together, make a plaster and bind it in place.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then remove the binding a little while later, and take care to ensure that the patient feels no pain, and check if the bone has not moved from its place; do not remove it by hand after two days. If there is pain at the site, or itching, lack of rest or swelling, then hurry and release them, and remove the plaster now; take light cloth, and a sponge from the sea moistened, dip in water, and lift up the site until the itch ceases and the pain is soothed; then let the member rest for an hour, then apply dry wool, dampened with water or rose oil, and bind it carefully overnight until you are sure of warm abscesses; and bring down the inflammation of the limb, and remove all pain, then recommence gentle binding, and a little plaster but do not bind so tightly as before; gently treat until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess has cooled, turned red, caused pain, and swollen are all gone, and you need an ointment and bandage, start over by applying them as before equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	If nothing from what we've mentioned affects the limb, do not undo the dislocation for three or four or five or seven days; sometimes it is left for twenty days, as observed, until the fracture heals and the flesh closes in on it; then restrain it more than before, and thicken its flesh, as I said previously; if you see the area drying out excessively, know that nourishment cannot reach it; therefore, warm it with lukewarm water each time you release it, every three days, and slightly loosen the restraint; through this practice, nutrition reaches the limb, and corrects what folly does to restore the limb crookedly: this is harmful, and such work is fearful, and I see nothing else but to leave it be and treat it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of the various kinds of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many types of fractures exist, with diverse forms and distinct causes. There are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, where the blade removes all bone down to the soft tissue beneath it, as if hacked away; this type is called 'hachure'.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword chops through the bone without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called 'absolute'; the wound from these two types of fractures can be large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded impact, or a fissure caused by a stone or blade, or falling onto stone, or similar occurrences.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating fracture that reaches the periosteum, whether it be above or below the bone, and this wound can be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound that penetrates the bone as subtly as hair, and the crack is small, thus this fracture is called 'capillary'; and if the wound is caused by striking stone, or by falling, or similar, and it drives a piece of bone inward, with the hairs bent like those of a cauldron maker when hammering on cauldrons; in such cases the stone enters within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	It occurs more often in those with moist bones of the head, such as children; and it happens for all types of fractures that small fragments are detached like stars; I will speak of them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	We know all kinds of fractures by their reduction on them, examination at the site, and through the corrupt flesh that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The bone's appearance is known for when it has been exposed, and one rubs above it, then the black fracture opens.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In treating the fracture, take heed of the patient's accidents and mishaps, and if you see no ill accident such as vomiting bile, loss of wit, stiffness, numbness, feverishness, eyes issuing forth fire and reddening, or other similar things in various constitutions, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see no frightening accident and hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the fracture first occurs to you, and it is in winter, you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day so that you can do this.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest the flesh beneath the bone become corrupted and bring about the accidents we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the bone fracture reaches up to the membrane covering the brain, you must split the affected part thusly: take hold of the head of the wounded patient and uncover over the bone in all ways possible to you, as well as on the shape of the wound gently. Should there be any discharge of blood or abscess formation upon uncovering the bone, apply this appropriate treatment method, filling the place with cloths dampened in rose oil; let the wound rest until the hot abscess has subsided and you are assured that bleeding stops; then begin to remove [the foreign body] from around the bone, doing so as follows: one method is to cut a narrow incision at the front of the site.
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then he makes another cut larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	The second method is that you have several different blades, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, made of iron or steel; use them lightly so as not to injure the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	If the bone is hard and dense, you must pierce it around rather than using blades with trepans, not too deep so that they do not penetrate beyond the skull bone, and each should have a margin or circle at its tip to prevent it from passing through; you need several of these, ensuring each fits into place according to the type of bone, thus providing trepans for all areas of the skull.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities required to drill around the broken bone are that you place the auger on the bone, and turn it with your hands until you know the bone is pierced; then move the auger elsewhere a little afterwards, and do this all around, then cut with the incising tools the space of the bone between the holes, and do this as finely and lightly as you can, as we have said, so that you draw out the bone by hand or with any instruments like pincers; take care not to touch the brain or the membranes.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and extracted the bone, it is necessary that you reshape what remains of the bone with any other instrument similar to an incising tool, but it must be more sharp and fine than the other incisors; if there are small bones or scales remaining, remove them lightly with some instruments; then clean the wound with tents and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of work is that which Galen describes, which is safer; he praised it greatly, and these are his words.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	You must first uncover a portion of the bone, where the fracture is visible, so that when you have uncovered that part, place beneath it the head of this lenticular chisel, which is shaped like this:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side only, as the blade is sharp on two sides, so that the cutting edges face towards the bone; then strike gently with a small mallet above it, so that you lightly chip away at the bone all around, and be mindful of the membrane beneath; if it adheres to the bone, remove it carefully, for it can be removed without harm or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not pierce through to the marrow, and the bone is merely clipped from above, with small pieces present, it is necessary to remove this roughness, and scrape off the flakes with a fine rasp that you must have in various quantities, to suit each place most suitably, according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Use large rasps first, then finer ones, and do not cease until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair-trimming and fine scraping operations, you must adapt accordingly to its location; this is something that has not been fully addressed by those who have studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	If the wound is uncovered, you must take a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another cloth, doubled over twice or three times, dampen it with wine and rose oil, and lay it atop the first cloth; do this lightly so as not to burden the wound, then apply another bandage above it, but do not tighten too hard, only enough to keep the wound in place; leave it like this for one or two days until the hot abscess is alleviated, then untie it and treat with non-biting medicines such as lily roots, oat flour, incense powder, aristologist preparations, and similar things; make a powder from these and apply to the wound, then use gentle non-biting remedies; ensure that the wound remains clean, neither leaving ointment nor letting pus accumulate, for when pus accumulates on the brain's membrane it corrupts and can cause great harm to the patient; when biting substances are applied to wounds, they corrode.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take heed therefore, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is undoubtedly doubtful.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if redness does not come from the medicine that has been applied, but because of its properties, then you must take some honey and three parts rose oil and glue one cloth with it, and place it on the afflicted area; then treat it in the manner of treatments appropriate until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes both parts of the nose are broken, or just one, for there are two bones; and the lower part is cartilaginous, which does not break but may bend or twist instead, then it will heal.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, you must insert your little finger into the nostril and place the break evenly with your index finger inside and your thumb outside, until the nose regains its natural shape; do this gently, and be sure the patient does not feel pain from your treatment.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the part above the nose, and the two parts cannot come together, then you must place them equal to the head of a rather thick nail.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the fracture is in two parts, make another one like it, and try to restore the first one on the same day, if you can; if not, after seven or ten days, when the abscess is healed, place a linen bandage over the head of the nose, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Where you place another one from the other side, if there is a fracture there; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the holes of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some restorers say that you should wet the bandages with butter, and change them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It seems not to be good to me, but it is necessary that they are moistened in the concoction of egg white and flour powder; then leave the tent so that the bone hardens and the cartilage toughens.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes goose feathers are put in place of tents, and if you have soft cloth around it, and the patient holds their breath, and blows through it; now do whatever you wish.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess opens up in the nose while you are working on it, put some ointment or cotton moistened with rose oil, or a piece of diachylon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess does not appear there, apply a plaster outside made of flax seed flour and incense powder mixed with egg white, then place light tow on it, and do not bind the nose; and if the fracture in the nose is small, and the bone is broken into small pieces, extract them with appropriate instruments for this purpose, then clean the wound, cure what protrudes flesh, and seal it, as with plasters and suitable ointments; and if there is no internal wound inside the nose, treat it with tents, and place thin canes of lead until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	From the fracture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is fractured from below, and there is no external wound, and the break is only outside, not split in two, or bent inside, it can be recognized easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the break is on the right side, you must insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; if the fracture is on the left jawbone, then place your right-hand index finger and gently push the fracture inward, while adjusting it from outside with the other hand, until they are aligned.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jawbone fracture is separated into two pieces, you must apply traction from both sides until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if movement of the teeth occurs, or they are broken, bind them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk, then place crushed cerote on the fractured mandible, and cover it with a double piece of cloth; put over the cloth a large well-made starched pad, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the mandible, and secure it as best you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the shape changes, release it on the third day, and then reset what has changed; apply an ointment over it, of flour from the mill with plenty of egg or sesame seed flour, after removing the cerote; cover the ointment with a light woolen cloth, and if the ointment hardens and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until they are healed; often this takes three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if hot abscesses arise, apply what we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is both fracture and wound together, remove no part of the bone; carefully extract it with suitable instruments for that purpose.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains no more, then sew the wound, if it is wide, and apply suitable dressings to it, to generate flesh until it heals.
de la forcele	Of the forearm.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forearm can fracture in several ways towards the shoulder, and this fracture occurs according to three methods: either it is broken and disjointed into two, with pieces, and this is the easiest to repair; or there is a break accompanied by a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is such when the break happens without a wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder where the bone is broken; and the other extends the neck towards the affected part; then align the break with your hands, so that its form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor end to it.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need more assistance, place under the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or wool, and make it thick according to your needs; extend and lift the broken bone, and press the sphere with your hand, so that you align the break as required.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the broken bone out due to it being in too deep, then the patient must often lie on their back, and place a medium-sized pillow under their shoulder, and have assistants push the shoulder down until the bone of the humerus is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then direct the fracture to your hands, and if you find it fragmented, you must split above it; and pull the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join for any reason, you cut it with one of the knives that you have; but put them under this instrument, in order to protect the soft part:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and it looks like a spoon, and is not sharp, and be as wide as it should be, according to the size of the bone and the strength required; and have two heads, as you see, with one wide and the other narrow, just like the opening of the wound you made when you pulled on the bones; and when you are sure that there is a hot abscess, sew up the wound, and if the tear is small or you suspect a hot abscess, fill the wound with lint and dressings according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if a hot abscess appears, wet a cloth with rose oil, hazelwood oil, and wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	You must bind the bone when it is damaged or bruised and place the plaster made with flour powder and egg white on it, cover it with light swabs, and place a rod under the armpit if needed; then take a very wide bandage about one palm in width, put double cloth over the swabs and plaster, then wrap it around with a thin strip of fabric three fingers wide and long enough to reach from behind you, so that the head of the strip hangs down. Place this on the fracture, and roll the bandage up towards your neck and under each armpit; tighten the bandage on each side, checking to see if the splint sits well over the break and that it doesn't shift from above the broken bone. If you see this, then check it every day, tightening when the wrap loosens. Let the patient lie on their back, placing a small pillow under their armpit at night so as to raise the shoulder; thus will lighten the fracture's pressure by aligning the shoulder, or bind his arm against his neck until any bad accident occurs for up to twenty days; then reapply plaster if you see it is needed. Bind and leave this way until they are healed; it takes about 28 days for most people but some less so.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Before it happens that the shoulder breaks or leaves its place in the middle, and is not pushed by force through touch; if you repair it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in every way possible for you; then apply over the place mill powder with an abundance of egg, and light dressings, and put a double cloth on top; then place a broad and thin silk fabric slightly wider than the shoulder, and if there are any gaps under the silk fill them with strands of linen dressing so that the silk sits evenly; and then tightly bind it all firmly with a large bandage so that the silk does not move from its place, and check the binding each day; and every time it loosens, tighten it again, and adjust the silk to make it even if it has moved out of place, and let the patient lie on their side; and the shoulder is healed in twenty or twenty-five days. And when these numbers are completed, you can release them, and be sure, for this is not an easy bone to displace.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a part of the bone projects forward and pierces below the heart, push it up, remove it, and do as we have said for soothing an abscess in the case of a broken rib.
de la brisure dou pis	of a broken breastbone
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The breastbone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; it often breaks on the outside.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it inclines downwards and the patient feels great pain, lacks breath, coughs, and may even vomit blood; the bone ends are visible through the broken bone, which can be easily felt.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	The restoration is done by having the patient lie frequently on their back, and place a cushion between their shoulders; then press the shoulders together and bring the ribs of both sides closer with your hands, delicately arranging to all sides so that the bone structure is as it should be; then apply plasters and cover them with fine salt poultices or other light material, wrap everything in cloth, and bind it securely to the broken bone, making sure it does not move; go around the back with the bandage in a circular motion, tightening suitably, and release every hour if the plaster becomes loose; if you need to loosen it due to corrosion, itching, pain or abscess, do so quickly, remove the plaster and treat whatever may have arisen; then apply new plasters and tighten until the wound is healed.
de la brisure des costes	Of rib fractures
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	You know that rib fractures only occur in the back and in the upper chest area near the neck, and they only bend because they are thin; one can feel it well during the examination of the patient.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And its restoration is that you set the fracture evenly, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the plaster, and hold it with a stick if needed.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	If the rib fracture is displaced inwardly, the patient experiences great pain, pricking and wheezing sensations as the bone pierces through tissue; they also suffer from suffocation, intense coughing with copious bloody sputum production, immediate treatment is required, and older texts suggest extensive medical intervention for such cases.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And there are those who say it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, in order to push the rupture outwards.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not cause this, for hot abscesses to come, if they have already arrived.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has arrived, then drain it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some of you say to apply cups to the area, to draw it out forcefully, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the cup may attract excess to the area due to its weak nature.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some of you say to cover the area with moistened wool soaked in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to equalize the pressure around it; then be cured by a treatment for pleurisy, involving meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear due to the bone piercing the flesh, and there is doubt about their condition, then it is necessary to cut above the place of the broken rib, and one must place an instrument underneath to protect the tissue; thereafter, one should cut into the bone, extract it gently, and then sew the two lips of the wound together if it is large, and treat it with medicated plasters until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscess becomes inflamed, apply moistened bandages soaked in rose oil onto the affected area, and place it there; treat the site as needed for an abscess, and keep it constantly covered with poultices where it should be, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	Regarding the broken neck...
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes fractures occur at the neck bone, and then it bends; also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you wish to know if they will recover or not, take note if their hands are soft, swollen, and numb, unable to move or extend, and when pricked with a needle, there is no sensation.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is fatal in many cases, and if they experience relief when moved or prodded, know that the bone joints are safe, and the patient will recover with proper treatment.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if something similar happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know their chances of recovery, observe if their feet are weakened, and if there is an accident involving hands, and wind or involuntary defecation on the back; and when placed on their stomach, if they have involuntary defecation.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is reminded of it on his back, he cannot mount.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is mortal; do not labor in vain in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not befall him, the matter is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	The cure is thus: if there is hot abscess, apply oil of roses or fresh egg yolk until it is soothed; then place a drying and comforting plaster upon it, bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; let him not sleep on that part which pains him, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone has been torn asunder, one must cut above the heart; remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it be large, with a suture, then treat it with ointments that encourage flesh, until it is healed; and should the head of the bone be broken, which is called "the cow's head", let him thrust his fist from your left hand inside, and equalize it to the other hand in strength, then apply plaster and splint as needed; bind it tight, and if there are dislocated bones, do so above, remove them, and treat the wound until it is cured.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the broken bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	When the hip bone is broken, and it happens, there will be only a little lessening of motion at the head; and it hurts along the length, declining towards the rear, and the patient feels pain in the place, piercing pain, and swelling where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is such that you extend your hand above it, so that you are above the break; and know what type of fracture it is and its shape; and if the break is only at the head, make sure this fracture is even, so that it has a natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is along its length or it declines inwards, make the patient lie on their belly so that the restoration of this fracture appears to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it equal, apply the poultice, then place a stick of wood or horn above it, and hold the fracture firmly, so that it does not move; use support under the armpit, ensuring the joint is levelled.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if a hot abscess forms there, do not touch it until the hot abscess has cooled down, and then apply what we have mentioned before; return to restoring the dislocation, holding it as required, provided there is no ill event; this is the way of it.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	On the fracture of the shoulder joint
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, and if it is broken you must restore it according to one of the two methods. One is that you take a piece of wood of medium thickness, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And bind the two joints of the arm with two bindings, and bend them upwards, then place the patient on a seat. Then throw their broken arm onto the piece of wood until it reaches the elbow, and put in a wooden wedge underneath; then lift the weight or have the assistant stretch the limb downwards. Then bring both sides of the break together equally with your hands so that the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	The other method is to turn the patient onto their back and tie their hand to their neck; then order two assistants to hold each side of the break with their hands, while another holds below at all joints, stretching each part in its direction.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is stronger, hold the rope below the fracture and above it, and extend each of the assistants to their assigned area.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	If the fracture is close to the head of the shoulder, you must place one rope midway under the armpit and another towards the arm pit, beneath the fracture; likewise if it is toward the arm pit, a light strap should be placed gently such that the fracture aligns with the joint and the arm; then align the break as required, and hold it, unless an abscess forms.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess forms, do not hold it for seven days; instead place a moist bandage made of soft cloth and rose oil until the abscess is healed; then secure it with emplastrum over the fracture, positioning the arm on the support and placing your hand on their shoulder or chest; apply the cloth and hold down on the support as well as the arm to keep it in the correct position for healing, unless something prevents you from doing so, or if the bone is moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone will not move, use splints, and place on the break a splint wider and stronger than the others, with two inches of space between each one; let each splint be so large that it passes three inches over the fracture on either side; then strain upon the splints as I have said at the beginning of this chapter concerning fractures, more strongly but less distantly.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see that the splints are not seated and tight as we have said when restoring a broken limb, and doubt about infection being hot, leave it bandaged until the seventh day, as we have mentioned; then look every three days at the bandage to ensure no itching or swelling occurs where there is no drainage or nourishment can reach the member because it is too constricted.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the addressee, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if none of these accidents occur, let him be unbound only after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back with their hands on their stomach; place beneath the shoulder one cushion filled evenly with wool, and watch every hour during the day or night that the broken limb does not move nor its ligaments soften; if he is cured by the virtue of medicine, give him the food we mentioned before, in such a way that this food should be very soft at first; and when he begins to recover, let it become thicker.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg must be reset after forty days in total; then he should be unbound and given baths and medicinal ointments to straighten his position.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the fracture is bad and swollen, it takes one day or two months to heal.
de la brisure du bras	Of arm fractures
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the 'foscile', one small, attaching to the wrist, while the other is larger, situated beneath the little finger; at times only the large bone breaks or just the small bone, and sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bone is fractured, treatment and healing are easier; but when the large one breaks, healing is worse, more difficult than if both bones break together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small bone is broken, it should be gently extended and aligned.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the great pit, you must restrain him more firmly; extend him onto the cushion, and hold the wrist of his hand higher than the others, and his small fingers lower than the other fingers, and let the patient be crossed over themselves, and the cushion in front of them higher, so that the patient does not suffer any effort; then have the ministers stretch out their arms to the part below his hand or the ligament, and another minister above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	Then place the mirrors equally according to their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the broken pieces, place each one back into its position, and if there is any part that cannot be put together with the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut above and remove it as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with a broken wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; so take its cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of restoration warm abscesses appear, then glue with a cloth made of rose oil and white wax, that is neither too hard nor too soft; bind the cloth above subtly, so that the warm abscesses are eased.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	Then remove the wax, and apply the plaster made from the mill powder with plenty of egg, then place the splints, and let the splint for the fracture be closer and slightly wider than the others; know that there should be six splints or arms in many arrangements: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; bind tighter above the fracture than elsewhere, and always less so when moving away, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; let the cloths placed over the fracture be soft and moist, not hard nor rough; and let the thread used for binding, be made of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have mentioned.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And return the member and the tendon after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident occurs in the member, as itching that comes to the member, you must spray the member with warm water until these itches are soothed; and let the member rest freely.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then resume the binding, and if the tendon is softened and the bone loose, or similar, treat it accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you take note that the nourishment cannot reach the member due to it being too tight, then you must soften it a little and leave it like this for some days until the nourishment flows through it, and then bind it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said come to pass for the patient, do not release them until 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	If around this area, then bind their hands to their neck, and let their necks be even, guarding against movement and disturbance, and let them sleep on their back; know that this fracture is healed in 30 days or 35, perhaps 20 days, depending on the ingredients and the constitution of the person.
de la brisure de la main	On the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and at the knuckles there are few fractures, but rather dislocations happen many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is fractured or dislocated, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back, and sit upright in front of them evenly; then place their hand on an extended cloth, and extend the minister's broken bones, putting them equal to each other until they are well-joined; apply a plaster and bandages if no abscesses appear, then put a splint according to the size of the place; it should be wrapped in one piece of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is around the front of the thigh bone, make a ring out of cloth and instruct the patient to tighten it onto their broken thigh; then take a long strip of cloth and let the heart-shaped knot be as large as the palm of your hand, and tie it tightly, just as required.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is on the outside, then you must place a knot above and another below the break in the bone so that the hands are open and straight, then bind everything around the hand and fasten the binding between the two hands.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture comes to either of our hands, be it the thumb, make it even as required and tie it with the broken bone; and if you see that a small straight knot can lift the fracture without movement, then do so; and if the fracture is in any other finger, such as the index or one of the others, then straighten it and bind it with the healthy finger next to it; or tie them all together as one, whichever works better for you, or place a knot above like on the thumb; and be careful during restoration and the treatment of hot abscesses, relieve those who come, just as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh/hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The bone of the thigh/hip is often broken, and it can be clearly seen when it turns forward and backward; and its restoration is achieved by tying a bandage above the fracture site, and another one below it.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	The patient lies on their face, then each assistant stretches out their bandage to their respective side equally; this is done when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is close to the hip joint, then one of the bandages should be towards the armpit, and the other bandage below the fracture site.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	Also, if the fracture is close to the knee, then place the bandages around the knee, and ensure the stretching goes downwards; have the assistants hold the bone in its natural alignment with both hands, until it's levelled properly, then apply the plaster cast and bind it tight, taking care not to cause an abscess.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	If there is hot abscess, let it cool down first before returning to your work and treatment; the binding is done in such a way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You should wrap above the fracture with I hard bandage doubled in II or III layers, leaving the excess, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the groin, and pass I long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and bring the end of the thread on top; then return the bandage over the leg and the thigh, then place stars above the fracture, and put a star above the bone of the leg; then fill the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to even out the tightening, then start tying firmly III twists or IIII over the fracture; and as you go up beyond the fracture, tighten less; then take hold of the two ends of the thread that you passed between the leg and the thigh, and tie III stars which are above, then return to below at the end of the thread until you reach beside the foot; and tighten so it cannot move from its place, then leave it like this for some time, so no abscess or swelling or other similar thing occurs.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, release the dislocation and address what caused it, as we have said many times; and if there are broken pieces of bone caught in it, they must be removed if possible; and if not, then one must split the place open and extract it forcefully; and treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	Sometimes the thigh is broken and fixed with pins, like in the shoulder or arm; however, despite this restoration being carried out as such, the patient does not fully recover.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in about 50 days or a little less or more, depending on the variations of constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	From the hollow of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that there is little fracture in the knee joint, but it bends frequently.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is but a crack or a hole, which occurs in any wound and without a wound, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	One must restore it by putting something equal to what is round on its two sides until they are aligned as far as possible; then apply a plaster cast, and if necessary, insert a rounded rod, and secure it accordingly, then follow all the arrangements we have mentioned for other fractures, like hot abscesses and similar cases; apply appropriate treatment for each injury until healing.
de la brisure de la jambe	On fracture of the leg.
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, one is rightly called "thighbone", and the other is called "shin"; they both have similar fractures as in the arm, so the restoration process is equal to that of an arm, and all procedures apply here just like with the arm. If both bones are broken together, then the leg will be deformed on all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bone is broken, it turns forwards.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the thick bone is broken, one feels great pain, it is easily seen; and it turns downwards.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	So apply an extension and make it equal, and bind the bones equally; however, if the fracture is ugly and there are many fragments, then let your extension be less intense and lighter; adjust as per your discretion.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, and le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the broken bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, no fracture occurs, but in the bones of the foot, fractures may happen and to both toes; there is often dislocation in many different ways.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, have the patient place their foot on the ground, as if they are about to walk, and then put your foot on top of theirs, where the bones are raised, press them until they return to their original positions; then apply a plaster cast and bandage it securely, place underneath the belly of the foot a small plank with two handles, then secure it to the foot appropriately, wrap it with linen cloth and other materials as needed.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, untie the binding, for you will find the bones equalized, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	If there are any of the toes broken, restore them as we have said for fingers; then place in the broken toe a rod according to its length, and somewhat wider, then put beneath the foot that board I mentioned, and strain it properly; if there are two or three, or more, broken, then place on each toe a rod according to its size, wrapped in a piece of linen cloth, and secure the board underneath the foot; and let it rest upon the head of the table from outside the foot's belly, so that it holds it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things I mentioned for other fractures as we have said; and treat each accident accordingly.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Of the broken bone of the wrist
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's pelvis is broken, make her sit with an enlarged posterior, then incline her to the back part and have her held from behind; then fill the vagina, which is the nature of the patient, with cotton until it is as full as it can be; then help the woman stand up straight and gently lift her by her shoulders a little at a time until the cotton wool pops out through the vagina's opening; when this happens, the bone will return to its proper place along with the stool. When she wants to urinate, remove the cotton wool and after she has done so, replace it again. Continue like this for seven days or thereabouts: you will have healed the fracture by then. If you want a more efficient method of treatment, take a goat's bladder, tie its neck around a stick and push all of it into her vagina; then blow into the stick very hard until the bladder is inflated inside: in this way, the vagina will return to its proper place along with the fracture; after that fill it up again with cotton wool for a few days until it has healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the wrist of a man or woman is broken, repair it as we have said for the hip bone; and these breaks are not hidden from those who apply their study and practice to them, and read my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break signifies to many the correct way of restoration: understand this then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's windpipe and insert it into the penis; then wrap it with fine cloths around, and leave it for three days there, and it will quickly heal.
de brisure avec plaie	On la brisure qui est avec plaie, covient ouer et estrare les saiettes, s’il i adent; puis la voinne que li sanc en fuist a l’evacuacion dou malin sang, et quant tu as fet ceo, laisses l’aire par dedens faire sa cure.
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a broken bone with an open wound, especially if it is large, such as the thighbone or humerus, that they be bled now, so that the bleeding we have mentioned will attest to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, secure it with copper sulfate, unless you have nothing else; then repeat the resetting of the fracture that very hour or day, provided no hot abscesses arise.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	If hot abscesses do occur, delay the resetting until the ninth day, waiting for the abscess to subside, and don't touch it on the third or fourth day, as this will bring about an unfavorable outcome.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is exposed on an open wound, it is fitting that you gently align it by hand, with minimal manipulation.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not equipped for you to make it equal with your hands, use this instrument made of iron which has VII or VIII fingers in length, and its width depends on the size of the wound; and for that purpose, it is necessary for the surgeon to take III or IV according to what he needs in each fracture treatment; and let it be round and a bit thick so that it doesn't bend under compression when applied over the limb you are treating, and let it be sharp at the end and thicker from the middle onwards, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	It is called "palainche", so it's necessary that the curved head be placed on top of the protruding bone; push it down once until it returns, and make sure they are equal to each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is delicate, and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, you must cut away the top of the bone until the instrument has enough purchase.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, cut it away with an appropriate instrument, either a chisel or a saw, whichever is at your disposal; then remove what remains in the bone of roughness and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone has been reset, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	Do this in such a way that it is in its proper place, then moisten a cloth in black styptic wine, and properly apply it if it is on the bone; do not put any oily ointment or other such thing upon the wound, for it will cause suppuration and corruption; then administer stents once you have restored the bone, leave the wound uncovered, and cut away all covering around it according to the size of the wound, taking great care that the wound is not constrained by the fracture; many a time have foolish surgeons done this, bringing about the death or maiming of the patient; and be the binding more loose and gentle than for other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear an adverse outcome as we have mentioned, and find pain in that place, it should not be bound with splints; instead, wrap around it thick cloth, in place of splints, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when after one or two days you see pus emerge from the wound, remove what you have placed on it and apply healing ointment, such as Tetraconion ointment and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at night, until it is healed and rejoined.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the limb should be bandaged in such a way that the pus flows out easily downwards.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many die, and it cannot heal but returns immediately, know that there are small bone fragments present, which is why you must carefully examine the wound, and remove all these troublesome pieces causing this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula develops in the same place or any other form of corruption occurs, you must treat it according to what he states in this chapter.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, such as the thighbone or shoulder blade, and other similar large bones, do not extract it, for many times this leads to death, but leave it until it rots; perhaps it will fall out by itself after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you can; if you cannot, just leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	scabs which form over a wound
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come across the condition of broken bones, especially when it is close to a joint, and it is an ugly sight to see the state of the limb; sometimes, the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care therefore if it is fresh: administer styptic medicines such as aloe, incense, and myrrh, sarcocolla, galbanum, and similar others, so that you take any of these substances, or all together, and mix them with a styptic wine or with egg white or with isinglass; put this on at night in lint, and hold it tight, and do not remove it by hand for several days; then remove the lint and apply another one, until the swelling has gone down; or you can spread it over a well-prepared piece of lead; for the property of lead is that it reduces all swellings above the limbs; and if the swelling has already become hard like stone, and must be removed, scrape off its surface, and cut away the excess matter which appears; or remove it with a scraper until it is gone, and treat it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	Of the member which is weak after treatment
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is healed, and afterward the limb remains weak and sensitive, it occurs due to many causes: one of which is that it was bound too tightly, and was not tied as it ought; or because there were too many bindings, preventing nourishment from reaching the limb; or due to excessive draining; or because of great movements, not at their proper time; or because they have little blood in their body, thus remaining weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and soften their body so that blood multiplies within them; administer a bath to them, and bring joy and lightness; then place a poultice on the limb such that it draws great nourishment to it, and often wash with warm water until nourishment reaches the limb; and return it to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	Of a limb twisted after the injury
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone appears clearly, and the form of the limb is ugly, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function: do not believe those foolish people who say that one must break the limb anew; many fools have done this in our land; these practices are condemned, and great harm can come from them, even death. However, if the swelling and pain are fresh, then they should be treated with warm water, or softening herbs boiled together such as mallow leaves, roots, and honeysuckle flowers, and other similar things; and make a poultice of this, for instance out of daucilon well prepared, and take the mucilage of mallow, and mix it with goose fat or sesame oil, then apply the poultice; alternatively you can use soaked figs which have been ground together with bran, along with other medicines that soften swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the swelling is removed by continually and thoroughly rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	Be moved gently every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the stiffness is removed and hardened like stone, and it needs to be taken out with an iron tool, then you must cut carefully up to the bone, using a fine incision instrument; place a stitch and focus on the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs to anyone, you must reset it immediately without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the joint swells, and it may be reset with difficulty; therefore, one must not move it while swollen: often causing spasms and other pains; nevertheless, when this occurs, make the patient bleed, then leave him alone until the abscesses are soothed; then bathe the limb in hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each limb as it returns to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged the chapters on dislocations from head to foot.
des mandibules	of the jaws.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the jaws become dislocated on both sides, and there are two types of dislocation: either they are slightly out of place and softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging downwards, and saliva runs from the mouth which cannot be contained, nor can they close their mouth, and speech is impeded.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns through various movements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete and full, you must reduce it quickly without delay; in such a way that the assistants hold the patient's head, and push one of their hands on the mirror under his mouth into the root of the dislocation of the jaw, if the dislocation is in two parts; and the other hand should be outside to apply equal pressure; and instruct the patient to relax and move his jaws from side to side.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the assistant puts it back in place so that it returns to its position.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is difficult to reduce, especially if they are both jaws together, soak them in hot water and oil until you can gently reduce them; do not delay the reduction as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	When they are returned evenly and the patient's mouth is well closed without softening it, apply moist cloths in a cerate made of rose oil and wax, then lightly bind them with soft bandages; let the patient sleep on their back, and place two cushions under their head so that it does not move to the right or left, nor should they strain themselves to chew but take light food until the pains are gone and jaws healed; then they may eat what they want gently, without straining to open their mouth for eating or drinking until the jaw is fully mended.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	If the two jaws cannot be set back in place at once and are not restored to their proper position, fevers and swelling usually follow, along with possible diarrhea and maybe vomiting clear mucus.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, know that it is ruinous; and often the one it befalls dies within nine days.
de la forcelle	On the fork.
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The collarbone cannot be dislocated from within during its course from the side and below, but it can sometimes be dislocated outwardly and this is easily felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the treatment is as follows: have the patient lie on their back often and extend their arms; then press the place firmly with your palm, and it will return; next apply a plaster and bandage, and secure it; and the head near the neck cannot be dislocated; but if it is, and if it dislocates again, reset it to its place as we have said; then put on the plaster and bandage, securing it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed; likewise, the shoulder head is treated when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	You know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: thus one is that it dislocates to the side below; and the second is to the part of the back; and perhaps it dislocates above, and this happens rarely; and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inside towards the nerves; and many times it dislocates beneath towards the side, especially in those who have little flesh, because for these it dislocates quickly; for those who have enough flesh, it dislocates with difficulty, and returns with difficulty.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And perhaps there are some men who experience a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	You must therefore test it until you are certain; then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	The dislocation is recognized when it falls towards the armpit, creating a difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, with an obvious disparity; there will be a hollow at the head of the shoulder, and beneath the armpit where you touch the head of the shoulder, like a hole; the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose or move in any way; if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden as you can clearly feel it upon touching; this type of dislocation is not difficult to reset when it is recent, or if the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	The method is for the minister to lift the patient's hand upwards, then place your fists beneath the armpit, and raise the joint with force into its position; the minister lifts the hand and stretches it upward, then places it underneath; this will cause discomfort.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come about as we have said on ordinary days afterward, then the patient must be bathed in warm water; and bring them soothing and softening emollients, such as a decoction of althaea, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and let this be administered; then remember to place the patient supine, and put beneath the stool a pile of woolen cloth equal [in thickness], neither too soft nor too hard, then place the patient's heel on the stack, and lift the head of the shoulder virtuously, and pull the affected hand; and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it does not move downward; this shoulder will return immediately, and if you wish to reset it according to this manner: and have present a man who is stronger than the patient; and be directly facing the side, push their shoulder under the stool of the patient, and lift the stool upward, such that the patient hangs in mid-air; and another minister pulls the affected hand downward towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, attach something heavy to them, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And one resets it in another way too: you stick a long pole into the ground, so that the shoulder is as taut as a bowstring, and it should not be too thick or slender; then place the patient on top of it but have soft cloth underneath, and let the patient rest their length along the pole; then extend their hand far to the other side in front of them, and the joint will return to its place immediately; if it does not want to go back for all these things that we have said, do this cure: take a pole two arms long and four fingers wide, with a rounded end so you can easily insert it perfectly underneath the armpit, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lie on top of the head with a soft cloth so the wood does not hurt the patient, then place the wood underneath the patient's armpit; extend their arm over the long piece of wood, and tie the shoulder to the wood, and the arm to the head of the bed; then put the arm across an inclined bench made from a board with width, and let the hands be extended downwards, and leave the rest of the body hanging on one side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, no matter how, you must put underneath the armpit an equal-sized wool sphere, then apply the plaster prepared with mill powder, incense and egg white all over the shoulder and around it; then wrap the strap under the armpit appropriately, and turn the ligature back onto the plaster, and embrace the hand on his neck, and let the hands remain like this.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And one should eat little, so that the limbs are strengthened, for he will heal faster; then eat more after five or seven days and move around; if it is firm and not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture or any other reason, you must apply cautery to three openings, as described before in the chapter on cauterization.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this and it dislocates again after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and one cannot lift their arm upwards, know that the nerve at the shoulder's head is cut or stretched or weakened; know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that occurs near the armpit, and in the chest area or behind, is caused by a pushing force, and stretching of hands, and it should be treated elsewhere; and treat it until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing, the limb develops cracks and moves sluggishly, let the patient bathe frequently until the cracking is relieved and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of shoulder dislocation:
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the shoulder joint is repeatedly dislocated and returns partially; if it is dislocated from all sides, especially front and back, and the dislocation is not fully corrected because one can see and feel it; and it dislocates according to each person's anatomy.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick man's wound with the healthy one, you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	Because the joint is dislocated, and he cannot bend his arm or reach his shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	You must reset it before abscesses form, for if an abscess forms first, the resetting will be difficult; and perhaps it cannot be fully reset at all, especially when it is at the back; this type of dislocation is worse than others, causing more severe pain, and possibly death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is such that you can reset it with your two hands holding his hand; stretch his arm outwards, and place your hands around his wrist according to the wound above, below, and beneath, and push the joint towards its bones or at the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is forward, it returns when he bends his hand towards his hand, and pierce with a knife from the root of the palm which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	If it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension; and let two people extend the arm, and the other two hold it so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from side to side, then wrap a long and wide double cloth around it; when you see that the joint has met with the hand, anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then put the joint back in place firmly until it returns; and once it is in its place, apply dry poultice on top using egg white, secure it tightly, and bend the arm onto the patient's neck, leave for a few days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in place, untie the bandage and leave it; but if you see that the joint does not hold well, start over with the poultice and the bandage, and let it be for a few days, until it is securely set; then untie it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels pain and swelling after resetting the joint, and it changes, bathe and gently rub it, pressing until it is soothed; or place over the joint some fat sheep's wool, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and put him in the bath; when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then apply the wool again, and put him back in the bath; do this two or three times until it is healed; if you see any discharge, place warm moist cow manure mixed with butter on top, and bandage it up; it will return to its proper condition.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The wrist dislocated and its return is light, more so than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be reset immediately after the dislocation, unless the place is swollen or an abscess forms there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the reset is done as follows: you place the injured hand on a table and have assistants extend it, and you watch to ensure its alignment so that he places his palm over the appearance of the wrist and presses until it returns. Nevertheless, one must check if it is in proper place; then the patient can place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reset.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, let the patient place their wrist on a table and you put your hand over that appearance of the wrist.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that's good But if not, apply a strain of emollient plasters for hot abscesses, and leave it like this without re-starting.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, the joint remains deformed; and this causes no harm to the patient as long as the limb is weak, and unable to grasp anything at all: then know that the nerves or arteries are severed, so there is nothing else to tighten except by cauterization near the wound, perhaps nothing else will help.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the limb is in place, apply the plaster we mentioned, then a strain and leave it for five days, then release it and leave as such.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is any graze, then bathe it with warm water, and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	On the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the finger of the hand is dislocated on both sides, sometimes on the back of the palm or on the belly; then extend the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns, then hold the head of the finger and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated; leave it for two days, and then make it equal that day; at night bind it, as we have said, and untie it during the day, and make it move, and tie it at night; do this often until it becomes narrow, and do likewise if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before until it is healed; and do the same when it is dislocated on another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	For the dislocation of the spine's back.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine's back or neck is dislocated, and there are multiple dislocations, there is no treatment as death quickly takes the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that feces come out uncontrollably, unable to be held in, and often certain members become weaker, either both thighs or both arms or one; and often the spine curves into four parts; the one which curves backwards is called 'gilbositez': its treatment is that you straighten it if the gilbositez came from childhood: there is no cure nor total healing.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And the one which comes from falling or blows or similar things, ancient ways of treatment say there is not much benefit in all this; but I have shortened it according to my intention and designed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the curvature that affects the front foot, neither a physician nor anyone else is able to cure it; and likewise with the disease that directly attacks both sides, one cannot heal them except for those that properly affect the back side of the leg as I have said before; thus, let the patient be laid on their face on an even surface, with something under his chest so he does not hurt himself; then thrust a pole into the ground at each end, one at the head and another near to the feet, tying a cord over the buttocks of the sick person, another around the hips, knees, and ankles, and two assistants should hold these cords on either side of the patient between the poles. The stakes must be firmly fixed in place as we have said before; then let the surgeon put his palms onto the spine with force until it returns to its proper position.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return to its place with this treatment, take a board three arms long and place it under the wall, have the patient lie on their side, insert the head of the board under the wall, then put the middle of the board over the spine; have the surgeons put their feet on the other end of the board, pressing hard until it returns to its place; if you wish, do it with a machine that turns in the direction of your hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	Insert two posts into the ground one arm's length apart from each other at the patient's head and another pair of posts an arm's length distance away near their feet; allow for a span between each post, both above and below, and drill a hole in each post to accommodate the winch which should be firmly anchored in place so as not to move; install on either side between these two pairs of posts one turning-post with another pair of smaller posts, one arm's length long, inserted into it for cranking; then attach the rope that runs through the eyelets to the winch at the patient’s head and another rope from the other end to the opposite winch near their feet so that each assistant turns their respective crank until the spine is aligned as we have described.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, apply a drying plaster with an abundance of egg, then pack with gauze, and insert a wooden splint three inches long to prevent bowing at the site of the kyphosis and healthy vertebra; then bind with a bandage as we have said, and feed the patient nutritious food until healed; and if anything happens towards the end of healing, administer softening and soothing medicines along with the splint we mentioned earlier; sometimes a piece of lead is inserted, and at other times the swelling appears behind the last vertebra in the back, and it is thought to be dislocation; but this is bone protruding, therefore one should not presume: perhaps it would cause death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the recognition of dislocation is as follows: when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it appears longer and the diseased knee is more apparent than the healthy one; the patient cannot bend their knee fully to the ground, and there is swelling due to hot abscess near where the thigh bone comes out, because the head of the femur has come loose.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign for him to whom it comes out of place is as follows: this mishap is contrary to those mentioned previously.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs for him in whom it occurs previously are as follows: he stretches his leg according to its completion; nevertheless, he cannot bend his knee without pain, and if one wishes him to walk, he cannot do so forwardly, and he holds back his urine, and his groin swells, and when he goes to stool, he does so on his heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who has dislocated his hip are that he cannot bend his knee or double over, and one leg is more twisted than the other; the groin area is softened, and the head of the thigh bone is located under the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	We reset this type of dislocation by restoring the joint if it is old and remains in its displaced position without treatment, but we must avoid causing further damage.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	In the case of a fresh dislocation, there are four types of dislocations; you must act quickly and return the joint to its proper position by stretching it both inside and out and moving it from side to side, perhaps it will go back into place without further treatment being necessary.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, you must prepare a strong assistant and have them grasp the leg firmly with both hands, or bind it tightly with a bandage above the knee; another assistant should place their hands under his armpits, then secure him with a soft bandage around the thigh; another holds the head of the bandage; they all stretch in an upward and downward motion simultaneously until the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to the four similar cases, and if the dislocation is corrected, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, you must treat it similarly when the dislocation is within. You should have the patient lie on their healthy side, then place the bandage around the root of the thigh and below the hip joint, stretch the bandage upwards towards the hip joint, and also towards the groin; another assistant takes his arms, embracing the thick part of the affected thigh, and stretches it outward forcefully: this will restore it to its proper position now; and this type of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot secure it in this manner that we have mentioned, then it is necessary for you to bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft bandage over their heels and knees; let the affected leg be extended twice as much as the other one; then hang them by the head from a wooden pole so that they are suspended above ground at around 2 arms' length. Command one assistant to embrace the top of the thigh, while another assistant is hanging with the patient who embraces the thigh strongly, for the joint returns now hastily.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	When the dislocation is outward, let the patient lie as we have mentioned in the case of curvature; tighten the bandage on the affected leg properly and also on their foot; then place two red-hot irons, one by the head and another at the feet, then insert an iron rod between the thighs of the patient into the joint; ensure there are moist cloths placed around it so that it does not burn the patient, then stretch each minister towards him, and let the physician hold their hand level with the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place them on a board, i.e., table, and press it as we said for hernia, and let the patient lie on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it's necessary to stretch the affected leg until the point I mentioned; place your knee against their hip, then press with the other hand, and extend it downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	If the dislocation is on the outside, it's not necessary to stretch the affected leg upwards or lift it off the ground; instead, position it as if the hip were dislocated outwards, as we said about lying on both hips; let them lie on their face, and extend the tie as mentioned earlier, pressing on the joint against a board; when the patient stretches out their legs and they're even, adjust the thighs, apply an ointment and strain with a bandage so that the hip doesn't move; rest for three or four days, then remove it, reapply the plaster, and if you see that the legs are even, bind as before, and leave it on for three days; then release them again and let them walk gently until the limb is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of knee dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, from within and without, and behind; and it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend their leg towards their thigh, and if it does not reach their thigh, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all such is that you make the patient sit straight, and stretch their leg if they can, and place your back on their face, and put their foot on your feet; then take their knee in your palms, and pull it between your two hands, then bend the two sides of the knee sharply; and another minister stretches their foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that they lightly touch their leg to their thigh; and apply a plaster cast over it, and make them rest with their leg on their thigh, and bind them tightly together for three or four days, then release them; and do not let the patient walk, until their limb is strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not broken, apply strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	Of the dislocation of the heel.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes bruised, and sometimes fully dislocated, internally and externally.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and mostly in front of the dislocated part; the reset should be done gently, and when it is only bruised one must extend it lightly by hand.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is fully dislocated, you must make the patient sit upright, and have an assistant hold them by the leg above the ankle; then pull the foot towards yourself with your right hand, and twice more with your left hand, then stretch it upwards, and firmly push the foot upwards; do this two times as we have said, pulling and pushing on the foot; if it comes back into place, that is good; but if not, begin the work again, for it will come back out; and if it cannot be reduced thus, make the patient lie down on their back on the ground, and firmly fix a stick in the earth between their thighs, tying the cloth around it so as not to hurt the patient; then have an assistant hold the thigh, and another assistant stretch the foot by hand or with a cord tied above the ankle; next stretch each part equally, and let the stake be placed close beside the patient's thighs to support him when they are stretched; then place your hands evenly over the dislocation, while another assistant holds the sound leg underneath, and the dislocation will quickly return.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is ready, apply the plaster and packing on top, binding it firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, being careful that the ligaments behind the ankle are not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the binding loosens, bind it again; then untie it on the third or fourth day, and prevent the patient from walking for four days; and if he walks before this period is over, it is not safe that he will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if hot abscesses arise there, it is necessary that you soothe them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
des dois	twice
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the wrist is dislocated, it should be gently stretched without effort; this is a simple matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any joint of the foot or back, you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a table, straight up, and place your foot on what protrudes from these joints, then press firmly with your foot until it returns; when it is equalized and nothing appears out of place, put a two-legged table under the sole of their foot, then stretch it forcefully, and leave them like that for three days, then untie (the bandages); and make him rest until he heals.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wounds and dislocations together.
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound occurs with dislocation and you wish to restore it, often the patient dies: do not be presumptuous in your cure if you are not wise in this art nor have practiced it long, and if you lack compassion and mercy; nor too bold; and use cooling treatments for abscesses at first, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of health; but when there is some hope, restore the limb to its place despite the heat of the abscesses; and when the limb is back in place, administer cooling treatments again, and treat the wound as it requires with drying ointments; and should there be a break along with dislocation, bones displaced, remove them, and do what we have said for simple illnesses; and beware of falling into fear, as I've said, for your Creator will guide you according to His will, and for the safety of your soul and body.
Amen	Amen
