O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, most dear sons, I have completed this book for you which is the last of medical science together with its fulfillment, and I have made an end by its explanations and through its elucidations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forbidden in our region and is alien to all, so its knowledge has been lost and diminished, and nothing remains of it but small descriptions in books from ancient times that have been passed down by hand.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	From this has come error and vanity, and intentions have become closed off, and knowledge is far away.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I should revive it along with the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and explanation and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of cautery instruments, and other tools for the work, along with their arrangement, as required by necessity.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good master of surgery is found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for one who undertakes this to surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that they know the judgment of limbs, and their forms and connections and separations, and have knowledge of bones, nerves, arms, and their number, and movement, along with moving and resting veins, and where they emerge.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And so Hippocrates says that a name with the (right) name is powerful, and with work is small; especially in the art of medicine.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that one who is not knowledgeable about the aforementioned things should beware lest they err and harm people; as I have often seen many of those who involve themselves with this science, yet abandon reason and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a mad surgeon cut into an abscess of scrofula on a woman's neck, and he cut the arteries of the neck; so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another surgeon treat a stone in an elderly man's bladder, and the stone was large; he carried away with it a part of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it were cut, he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another surgeon who treated the Duke of our land for a broken leg, and with the break there was an open wound; and the surgeons, full of ignorance, set the fracture on top of the wound with strong bandages, leaving no room for drainage, and left it like that for some time; they ordered him not to untie it; and he remained like this until his whole leg became swollen, his foot too, and came close to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to go to him, and I hurried to come and loosen his leg; and when I undid the bandages, he found peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But however the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and I could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the limb was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And then I saw another ulcer that burst and then inflamed due to the malignancy of its nature.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a cancer, when it is purified of melancholic humour, one should not touch it with an iron tool unless it is in such a place that everything corrupted can be entirely removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son, you must know that manual work is divided into two categories: one where there is danger in multiple ways; and I will show you in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For this reason, it is necessary for you to be cautious, so that the foolish doctor cannot speak ill of you. Take up your weapons with prudence, approach your patients gently yet firmly, and employ the best method so that by God's grace you may bring them salvation and praise; leave aside those diseases which inspire horror due to their severity; cast off your weapons in places where they cause doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can journey from this world to the next with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take up the treatment of any serious illness unless you are called a foolish doctor.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise in three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauterization and medical treatment of acute diseases, and this chapter is arranged from the head down to the feet; it includes information on instrument forms, instruments for cauterization, and everything else necessary for the procedure.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and the use of cupping glasses and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar procedures; and this chapter is arranged with instructions on the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar issues; it is organized from the head to the feet, with instructions on the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Let us recall the work; it is necessary that I speak of the quality of aid and harm of each temperament.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of aid and harm is the longest speech and most subtle science and secret response; and many sages have spoken of this and agreed upon it; I will suffice with little of their words, for I fear length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cauterization aids universally in all constitutions where it is applicable, unless two constitutions: namely a warm constitution without matter and a dry constitution without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the combination of warm and dry constitutions with matter, some argued that cauterization is greatly beneficial; while others said the opposite: that it has no value in illnesses caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so warm, and it should not be considered a treatment for warm illnesses caused by heat or dryness; and he who says otherwise argues that cauterization provides great relief to warm, dry illnesses occurring in men's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the constitution of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree to these words.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in any case, let no one interfere except those who have experienced it, and who know by long practice the chapter on cauterization, and the diversity of human constitutions, and their dispositions and the causes of their illnesses, and their occurrences and the course of time; for other constitutions we have no fear, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the surgeons assembled and agreed on the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my son, that fire cauterization is one of the secrets of healing, and of greater benefit than burning medical cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not burn beyond the member which it heats, and harms no other part if properly used.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Caustic medicines spread from member to member in their operation, and give rise to diseases which are difficult to cure; and sometimes the fire kills the patient, not for its intensity nor for the goodness of its substance, but if there is any superfluity.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found through experiment and from long service and study in the art, and it is based on truth; And for that reason I excuse myself for being so lengthy, since I do not wish to take away your knowledge of the secret which lies within fire, and the quality of its work, how it cures diseases of bodies, as the philosopher says in demonstrating. Now receive this into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, my son, they agreed on when the cauterizations should be performed and chose careful timing.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	I say that cauterization is suitable at any time, for the harmful effects are mitigated by its help; especially when cautery is required to ease pain and prevent further damage or complications in a limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think so, dear son, as some foolish surgeons do; for the illness that is healed by cautery has no relapse; and they say this thus: but it is not as they believe, because cauterization is a medicine which changes the complexion, dries out the humors causing pain, and is better than other medicines due to its swift action, its strength, and its effectiveness.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is a remarkable fact that the disease may come sometimes according to the complexion of the patient and the place where the disease is located as well as its virtue; superfluities are combined in him by the acquisition of food and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered at this place or where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as dental cauterization for pain, and similar things, and that kind of pain does not come back; but it happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauterization follows after medicine, their intentions are false, and cauterization is indeed the last resort of medicine because when we administer various methods of treatment for a disease and they don't work, then we apply the cautery, and it succeeds.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterization with a golden instrument is better than with iron, and they claimed this was due to the quality of gold and its elevated nature; and they said that the site of cautery does not become infected, but this is not true as I have proven it myself, and found that in some people it does indeed get infected; and cauterization with gold is better than iron, just as they stated.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet when you heat a golden instrument, you do not know when it is hot by looking at the color of gold, and it cools down so quickly; and if one heats it too much, they damage their own eyes; thus there are enough reasons to refrain from using them.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we employ fire cauterization which we have adapted to our practice.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Here we have ordered this chapter from head to toe so that the information is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	Olive oil cauterization.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauterizations are beneficial for moisture and cold affecting the brain, and there are two types done due to a disease called "soda", and because of excess humors descending from the head to the eyes, ears, causing numerous dreams, toothaches, sore throats, and especially all diseases arising from cold such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The procedure for this cauterization is as follows: the patient is first purged with a solutive medicine that acts on the upper gastrointestinal tract, three or four nights according to their constitution and ability to tolerate it, then they are bled from the head.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on top of yours; after that, put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and leave it there until blood comes out, afterwards heat up the cautery called 'olivare', which is shaped like this:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	Place him on the spot marked with ink, and move your hand up and down while squeezing it repeatedly in a twisting motion; then lift your hand slightly, and check the spot if you see any bone there even just a little bit; if you don't see any, repeat the cauterization until you do as I told you; afterwards take a pouch of fine woolen fabric, put some soft cotton inside it, place it on the spot, and leave it for three days; after that apply softened butter-soaked cotton; keep it there until the burning sensation is gone; finally treat the wound with an ointment called 'tetrafarmacon' until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients said, that the longer a wound remains open, the more it purges; and for this reason it heals quicker.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said one must leave the cautery in place until a part of the bone is burnt, and then remove that which has been burnt from the bone, and it shall be healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say one must leave the cautery in place, pushing it as hard as you can until some bone is knocked out, just like the wide needles women use for their seams so that the humours come out faster; and one must let the wound remain open for a long time; afterwards, it shall be cleansed and sewn up.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me good at all in any way, except for some men where there is a chance of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave the head alone; because the head is weakened by continuous natural processes, as we show with other limbs; and even when the patient's head is naturally weak, and the first method of cautery appears more suitable and expedient to me, and so I use this in my work.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	From the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When in the entire head there is chronic pain that lasts a long time, the patient must use herbs and pills called 'cochie', as well as purgatives for the head, oils, and plasters; if one applies the cautery we mentioned earlier to them, and it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care if the patient's shoulder is of a strong nature and not too cold; in that case, cauterize beneath with a small cautery other than the one we mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	Afterwards, make a cautery on each corner of the head up to the bone, as we said before, and make one at the place called 'vasselz'; there are places where leeches are applied; lessen your hand's strength so that you do not go down to the bone: the patient will feel much more pain in this cautery than in others, and I shall speak of it later; and the cauteries on the corners must be gentler than those used for the middle part of the head, and here is how to do them:
dou cautere dou chief	For cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in a part of the head and extends up to the eye, and the skull is cleansed by purifying medicines, and other treatments I have mentioned for dividing illnesses are performed, but none of these help: then you must make cauterizations according to two methods, that is, with medicine and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	Medicinal water cautery involves taking a fresh almond and removing its skin, cut it into two pieces, then make an incision in the temple where the pain resides in such a way that you can place the almond beneath the skin; when it is placed, bind and press it well, leaving it like this for twelve hours; afterwards, release the binding, apply pressure with the fresh almond, and leave the wound for two or three days; then apply cotton soaked in butter until it heals.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment, make sure it is healed; and if you wish to do so, apply some of the combusting medicinal substances that I have described in my twelfth treatise on combusting medications.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is performed according to this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery, which has this shape.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	It is called a 'clos' due to its head being shaped like a claw with a slight curve, and having a small appearance at the middle; place it on the painful area, and handle it so as to turn the iron slightly such that half of the heart-shaped edge is burned; lift your hand so as not to burn the artery which lies outside, and let the blood flow abundantly.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After put cotton in aw of flax, and place it over the spot for III days; then apply moist cotton in butter, and subsequently cleanse the area of ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare," use all its pointed edge, and be cautious not to cut the artery during this operation on a fresh headache.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine as we mentioned before in the division of illnesses, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauteries previously described by medicine and iron do not suffice for him, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it becomes white; and cauterize over the spot with a line half an inch long, and remove your hand once, ensuring you avoid cutting the artery and reaching the bone; and be careful of the mandible's movement when one chews, so that the jaw doesn't move nor spasms appear in the patient, and watch out for bleeding from the artery if it is cut, which has great risk especially for those unfamiliar with this procedure who are not students or experienced; and stop the work halfway. But I will tell you how to staunch blood when an artery is cut, and I shall show where it occurs in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauterizations are not sufficient for the illness, and the patient is still suffering, cauterize him near the head as we have said before, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you wish, apply the cauterization method we mentioned in the chapter on arterial extraction, using the double-bladed cautery instrument; this type of cauterization is better and more effective than the previous one.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	From the pain in the ears due to cold.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ear due to cold, and one has applied solvent medicines and other treatments as we have mentioned before, but the pain persists, then heat this cauterization point called "poin", which takes the following form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After prick all around the sick ear, or both if the pain is in both ears, and move away a little above the root of the ear once you have marked the place to incise; and make ten pricks around each ear; then treat the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	For the torture of the mouth...
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be treated with cauterization is only for those caused by moisture, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not use cautery on similar cases arising from dryness and nerve spasms.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this similar case of torture caused by moisture from water and head washings, and gargling, and it does not improve, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, another slightly outside the temple, and a third at the junction of the two lips; place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery towards the head of the ear a little below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a thumb; leave the cautery until half of the heart's duration has passed; this is the shape of the cautery...
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is similar to the surgical knife we mentioned earlier, but it is a little more delicate and requires a slightly thicker blade; treat the wound as I previously stated, until it heals.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is an old condition and you treat it as we have described, but there is no improvement, and the patient has no fever, then perform four cauterizations: two on the two corners of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one at the location called "vessel" as previously mentioned, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; treat them as we have said before.
de litargie	Of lethargy.
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, give the patient large herbs and pills to cleanse the brain; afterward, rub the entire head of the patient, and apply a mustard plaster on the occiput as written in the treatise on plasters; and here is how you perform the cautery: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healed like this, it is good; and if not, apply three cauterizations to him from within the head down to the neck, with two finger-widths of space between each cautery; treat it as you would others, and if you see fit to do so, and the patient can tolerate it, apply one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two corners, treating until it is healed; and let the cauterization be that which is called "olive oil," as I said before.
de la froidor dou chief	From the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	The head must be cleaned of hairs and other things we have previously mentioned; then scrape the patient's head, followed by a cauterization in the middle of the head and on each corner, one behind, and three on the spine of the neck; if you need to do more, and the body is moist and the patient can tolerate it, and the illness is severe, apply four cauterizations on the spine of the back; let them remain until the greatest part of the heart is burned, then lift your hand away; treat until it is healed, and let the cauterization be that which is called "olive oil," as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptic should not undergo fire cauterization unless they are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first modify the brain with herbs and other treatments as we have mentioned in the section on treating severe patients who cannot tolerate medication.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot endure this, perform gargling and chewing while modifying the brain often with good meats; then raise their head in the middle, and perform the cauterization as we have mentioned before, and cauterize on the vessel and each corner; and if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, perform cauterizations as I said for one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterizations be with olive oil as I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, apply the subtle cautery as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause is due to melancholy, stemming from excess or corrupted moisture and thick phlegm, then apply cautery with thin irons as we have mentioned for those suffering paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause is melancholy arising from excess descending into it, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink so that their brain is cleansed, according to what was mentioned earlier in the classification.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, bind the patient's head with a well-made linen cloth, like a cap, placing it in the middle of their head; have them sit cross-legged and be securely held on all sides; then apply the liniment, using old sheep butter instead; heat it over a gentle fire so that its warmth can be tolerated by the skin when applied; then empty out the cap from within the head, let it cool down; perform this procedure once weekly with another good treatment until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	And if you wish to cauterize with points, make many points throughout the entire cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This manner of cautery softens the brain greatly; then apply moist cotton soaked in butter and goose fat.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes' awe
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awe first comes to the eyes through the signs I have mentioned in the section above, then begin and give the patient something cleansing for the head, protect it from all moisture, and make them sweat in a bath many times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After, instruct them to cover their head, and perform a cautery between the temples, performing two cauteries if the descent of awe is to both eyes together or one if it is only to one; take care to avoid all veins and arteries beneath the heart, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple; guard against excessive blood loss, and should you see too much blood escape, staunch it with such power as you are able.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will instruct you in the extraction of arteries and the incision, being cautious of how to staunch it; sometimes cauterization is performed beneath the two hind bones.
dou cors des larmes	The body of tears.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When tears from the eyes are ancient and accustomed to flow along the veins, or near the arteries which appear outside the head; and one can see that these are cold phlegmatic superfluities, then one should perform the cauterization as I mentioned at the beginning on the eye: I cautery in the middle of the head, II cauteries over the two temples, and II cauteries beneath the two hind bones; and if more is needed, carefully cauterize above the eyebrow with several small cauteries.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	From the body of tears through the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat him according to what we have said in the division, and he does not benefit from it, then give the patient to drink three nights with cock's meat; after, raise his head, and cauterize him in the middle of the olive-shaped part; make two 'clavilis' cauteries on the two wrists, a little below the hairline; be cautious of the artery so as not to cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the 'clavilis' cautery:
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the pupil of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery which is called 'olivare'.
de coi ci est li forme:	from which this takes shape:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see fit to make two cauterizations on the two joints as long as the hair is; and do not remove your hand until a third of the paper has burned, according to the manner I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair which pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	At times it happens that the hairs of the eyes turn inward and prick the eye, requiring cauterization according to two methods; that is, with fire or burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are equal in length, then place the patient on your bench; afterwards mark above the paper of the eyes a figure that is similar to the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs; then apply cotton moistened with egg white and parsley poultice onto the eye, then heat up the following cautery:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the marked figure several times until the heart of the sore is burnt out; and the sign of a successful operation is that you see the paper withdrawing, and the hairs rising at the tip of the eye; then remove your hand, and leave it like this for three days, then apply cotton moistened with butter until the scald is gone; afterwards treat with ointment until healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs grow back and the skin is softened again, then resume the cautery on that same spot as you did initially; but if the hairs are gone, cauterize it until the skin rises to its natural level, making sure it's even and doesn't prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cauterization of medicine is when you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow large and even, then make a parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf; take French soap and live coal, each weighing 3 ounces, and grind them together well; do this quickly so it doesn't cool, then spread it onto the mold you made like the myrtle leaf, placing it on the skin around the eyes; if the patient's ailment is only in one eye, operate on that one, but if both are affected as well; place under the eye cotton moistened with egg white; keep the patient's head steady and place your own finger over the medicine, pressing gently with two fingers every time the patient feels a stinging sensation from the medicine, for it will sting like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, remove the medicine with your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the coagulation has passed, lift the edge of the wound, and observe if you see the flesh raised as it was lifted by the cautery or incision; and if it is so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, apply more medicine to the place where it has not worked, until your work is even, and your eyes are precise; then put moist cotton wool on butter until the burning feeling subsides, afterward treat the wound with an ointment called 'dyafenis' or another, until it heals.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to, be careful in your work with great vigilance so that the medicine does not touch the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterward, and the hairs prick in the eye, then restart the medicine on that softened area with the paper specifically, just as you did before; after curing it until it is healed; and this is the shape of the myrtle leaf:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this, let your treatments be determined; and do not neglect the correct path for one who studies this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	on the treatment of fistula by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit it, then you must perform cauterization in this way.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	For the sick person, command that he place his head on your palm; hold his head firmly between your hands so it does not move or slip away from you; then apply moist cotton wool soaked in egg white or parsley juice to the eye; afterwards heat up the following cautery tool: a quill-shaped piece with a pointed end like a feather, and also a tent shape at one end, although both are suitable for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Then press the fistula if it is open and remove any pus, then dry it; if it is closed, operate on it and draw out whatever matter there may be inside the bowels; afterwards apply a hot cautery in this form, and hold your hand over the cautery at the knuckle above the eye so that your hands do not move around excessively; place the cautery on the eyelid's fatty tissue and burn it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you reach the bone with the cautery at the beginning, it would be beneficial.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, restart the cautery again and repeat if needed, leaving it for three days. Afterwards, apply moist cotton soaked in butter, and treat with a drying ointment until it is healed. If forty days pass without healing, use corrosive medicine to expose the bone; and proceed according to what is outlined in this chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	There is also a method of cauterizing a fistula, which none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	In the case of a fistula, pierce its location, then insert into the opening one fine camel-hair, which matches its shape.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	et they make it to the quantity of one third of a pound; and hold your hand or arm firmly, and do not let the patient move at all, so that the molten lead does not flow into his eye; and be sure you place on the patient's eye moist cotton in egg white or milk: the lead will quickly close the fistula, and the wound will heal with wonderful health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, you must administer the perforation to the nail, and restore the fistula to the body of the nail according to what is necessary in its proper place.
des crevaices en levres	Cracks in lips.
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often occur cracks in lips called "hairs," especially in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as described in the previous sections, and the treatment is ineffective, then heat a small knife-shaped cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	Place it on the cracks with pressure until it reaches the bottom; afterward, treat the area with wax until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	on abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess forms at the root of the throat or in the uvula, palate, or tooth roots, it causes decay and becomes enlarged, festering, and turns into a fistula; you treat it as described previously, but if it doesn't heal: then take a cautery according to the size of the fistula; next, dilate the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the hot iron reaches the bottom and back of it; do this once or twice, afterward treating it as described in wound treatment, until it is healed; if it heals thus, it's good; if not, then you must uncover the area and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in its respective chapter.
dou movement des dens	Through the movement of teeth.
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it is not effective, then place the patient's head on your lap; afterward, heat the cautery which will be formed as follows: put a stick over the tooth; insert the hot cautery into it until the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth; then remove your hand and repeat the cautery according to your desire; afterwards, have the patient fill their mouth with salty water, and keep it there for an hour, rinsing frequently.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	In this way, the moving tooth becomes confirmed in its place, and the softened gum is restrained, while any corrupt moisture dries up.
de la dolor des dens	From toothache
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from the cold, or there is a chill in the air and medicines do not help, then it requires cauterization done in two ways: butter cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Butter cautery is done like this: take butter from a cow and place it in an iron or bronze spoon; afterward, take cotton and wrap it around the point of a needle, then moisten the cotton with boiling butter, placing it on the aching tooth for as long as necessary until it cools down. Do this frequently so that its healing properties can reach the root of the tooth. You may also dip wool and cotton in cold butter and place them on the painful tooth; put an iron rod to heat over fire until the flame reaches the tip of the needle, which will be placed on top of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cauterizations done with fire are such that you take a cane of iron or copper, and it should be thick so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth; afterwards heat up the cauterization tool, from which its shape will come afterward, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand there until the cauterization is cooled down; do this often, for the pain shall be removed that very day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And the patient should fill their mouth with good butter during the urgency of this cauterization, and then let it cool down afterwards; and this is the shape of the cauterization tool:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make the cauterization of whichever cheek you want to, and according to your ability; and this is the shape of the cane:
des scrophules	Of scrofula.
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is caused by phlegm and cold moisture, and it does not respond to digestion through medication, then heat the cautery with a chimney from which smoke emerges, and make two openings for the smoke to escape from the other side of the cautery; place the hot cautery on the abscess once or as needed until you reach its base; if the abscess is small, apply a cautery according to its size, and leave it there for three days; then apply moist cotton with butter until the burning sensation subsides; afterward, treat the area with ointments and bandages until it heals.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture overcomes the channels of the lung, especially when it arises from cold constitution, then the patient should be first emptied by means of dissolving medicines; afterwards cauterize at the root of the throat, and take care not to reach the throat, but burn just a little above the heart.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards apply another cauterization at the junction of the neck and skull along the spinal column, let it be a "clavicle" type as described earlier in this document; treat the area as mentioned above until it is healed.
de la toust	Of the cough.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When any lung disease is caused by cold moisture, and the patient lacks fever or dryness, especially if it is an old illness, then apply two cauterizations over the clavicle in sight; another cauterization between the breasts at the sternum; let these be "clavicle" type according to what was previously mentioned.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see fit, perform the fire cautery by pricking with a 'point', as previously described for ear ailments; and let there be thirty or so points, or slightly fewer.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the site as previously stated, apply three-row cauteries in this manner:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And for these cauteries to be lighter, do three at a time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Of the shoulder dislocation:
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the heart until it pierces right through to the ribs, and this would make up the shape of four cauterizations; and for this reason cautery is performed with a cauterizer that has three blades, therefore the figure of cauterization consists of six cauterizers; and these are the nerves according to their delicacy and this is the form of the cauterizer which has three blades:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	and at times it is adjusted on this one nerve so there are eight cauterizers.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Afterwards apply the cauterizer and crush the blisters with salt; then let the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well-supported.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated again soon after, then immediately perform a cauterization on the thick part of the collarbone, or many cauterizations at once with intensity.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joints are closed, and moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When cold and excessive moisture arise in the stomach to such an extent that they remove it from its normal state, and catarrh is multiplied within him, and with usual treatments he does not improve, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back, and extend their legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	After that, make three cauterizations with a spoon-shaped instrument below the heel for the size of a thumb, let each cautery be fixed, and two cauteries outside both sides so that the shape of the cauterizations is triangular, and there should be enough space between them such that they do not join together when suppurating; and may the cauterization be so thorough as to purify both parts of the heart, and may the figure of the cauterizations follow this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you want to cauterize with a large cautery in the stomach according to this method; and for those who fear this cautery, cauterize by pricking and bleeding on the stomach at one point according to the amount you wish to add; then cauterize with the entire cautery which is called "point".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the previous condition, once it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver experiences pain due to cold and moisture and excessive gas, as it has become displaced from its natural state by superfluities; and the patient is treated as we have said in divisions, but it does not help them, then the patient must be reminded of their condition; apply three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, outside the hypochondria, where the flank of a man lies; leave a space between each cautery equal to the width of a finger; let the cauteries be as long as the body, and do not press too hard with your hand during the entire cautery process; only burn half the depth of the heart, and have the patient stand upright on their feet; if they cannot, then let them lie down, extend their legs, and lift their arms; this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your wish is to cauterize these cutellary cauteries, being skilled and wise in the art, be careful not to burn through the entire heart (muscle), for it would desiccate all of the body; nor that it reach the mouth (of the wound), since the heart is very delicate there, and you know this well.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess on the liver, and you wish to know if it lies within the flesh or membrane of the liver: if it's in the flesh, the patient experiences pain that is not too intense; however, if it's in the membrane, they feel excruciating pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And so when this wound should be examined, it is necessary that the patient is reminded of their condition on top of their head; then bleed heavily from the site where the abscess is located, and subsequently heat a cautery resembling a thorn for which this (form) is made.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	Et cauterize the fire cautery until the heart is burnt, and it reaches the bone marrow, so that all cartilage is destroyed; after the cure, treat it according to the treatment of wounds until it is healed; and no one should use this cautery other than those who have studied medicine for a long time, by whose hands these illnesses have sometimes been cured.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then one may operate boldly, yet it seems to me that leaving [the wound] be is better.
dou cautere de pleuresin	The cautery of soft wax
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients say that one must make soft wax cauteries from the roots of aristolochia, and in this way: take a long root of aristolochia, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, also as thick and as long as your finger; dip it in oil, then take it to the fire, and cauterize with one cautery between the throat and neck, and two small cauteries just below on the part that is under the beard; two more cauteries between the fifth rib and sixth rib, sloping slightly behind; one cautery at the navel, another above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, plus two on either side of the navel external to the cautery between the shoulders; do not press your hand too hard, but rather be gentle like when perfuming.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And some ancients said that any man should use a fire cautery like a razor, heating it and placing it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; if it burns away the pain, just as we have said for an abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work, there is fear that the patient may die now, or a fistula may form which cannot be healed.
de la mice	From the mouse.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the sections on treatments, and it does not improve, then there are three types of cautery which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	The first method is to perform three or four cauterisations in a line along the length of the mouse, following the shape of the liver cautery we mentioned earlier; do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and have the patient lie prone on their back; another cautery method is to heat the two-nerved cautery as we showed for shoulder dislocation; raise the heart which is near the mouse, or from where the patient's pain comes towards the left, and let the elevation by which you lift the heart follow the heart's axis along the body's length, and let the cauteries follow the body's width.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, 
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has gotten rid of the inflammation over a long time, and this is better than the other treatments mentioned above.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not useful for treating dropsy, except in the manner known as 'ascites'.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods we mentioned earlier in the division, and your treatment is not effective, then you must apply four cauterizations around the navel, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back on the spine, and one at the bottom; and let these cauterizations be close to the point of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	Afterwards, leave the open cauterization for a long time to get rid of the inflammation, and do not let go of the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and their recovery would be hastened, and these two intentions will come together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly shall be the clavicle which we have shown before; and that for the back shall be olive-shaped, according to what has been set out above.
de l’enfleure des piez	The swelling of the feet.
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and are full of yellow water, it is necessary that you cauterise on the back of the foot between the little finger and ring finger; lift your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not go in too deeply, lest you puncture the yellow water, and let the cautery be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After that make two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the spur; and let the cauteries be of medium length, one below the knee in front and the other outside, in the middle of the leg; leave the cauteries open for a long time without treating them, until the water is gone; after this treat the other treatments we have mentioned.
de la menoison	By the house
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the abdominal ailment arises from cold and moisture, such that the retentive and digestive faculties which are in the stomach and intestine become weakened, and cannot be cured by ordinary means; and you see the patient suffering greatly with a strong constitution, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been discussed previously regarding the stomach cautery or circular cautery; four small subtle cauteries around the navel with each one subtler than the last, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, perform a cautery on the wrist, one cautery on each arm, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	For the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are at the foundation, either one or multiple, and they are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and they are treated as we have said in divisions, but it does not help, then perform cauterizations: three on the spine of the back, which is entirely outside of the lower back, placed close to each other in a triangle shape, and one cautery underneath the navel two fingers away; and if you think that their stomach is cooled down, and the meat is not cooking, and you see the face swell, then place one large cautery on the stomach as it has been said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with each cautery being clavi-shaped; and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, let the wound heal.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Of fleshiness which is named 'thelul'
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you treat the 'thelul', heat up the cautery which resembles a razor, and then place it fully ignited on top of the treated 'thelul'; leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the base of the wound, from which blood will flow; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of 'thelul', cauterise each one as we have said; afterwards treat with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterise with a large cautery on top of 'alchatim', it will be more helpful.
de plaie mal curee	Of a poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When a patient cannot endure any cutting or opening, as we will explain in this place, then such an illness arises that can only be cured by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When someone has a fistula and it is filled with pus and corrupt moisture, you should treat them with great care and ensure that you know the entire extent of the abscess.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cauterizing iron like a razor, push it into the fistula according to how much of the abscess was reached, and repeat the cauterization as many times as necessary - once or twice or three times depending on how much is needed; be careful not to burn any nerves that may be nearby nor large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; 
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and there is severe flatulence, and it does not take on a feminine temperament, then you must apply cautery to the kidneys on one side and the other at the clavicle that we have mentioned before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a line, and they will provide greater relief.
de la vessie	On the bladder.
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, such that the patient retains urine, then apply cautery outside on the part where the hair begins on the forearm, both right and left, each cautery should be as long as a one-inch finger; also apply cautery outside the back, two if necessary; and let the clavicle cauterizations be according to the form mentioned before.
de la marris	Of the marsh.
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the womb is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are late; and when they come, there is great pain: then it is necessary that we apply three cauterizations around the navel, as we have said in the bladder cautery, and two cauterizations outside the back; and let the cauterization be clamped, as we have explained.
de la hainche	Of the hip.
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moisture descends into the hip socket, and due to this it moves out of place, and the signs are that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the place where the separation occurred can be found, then you must cauterize the patient on the hip socket with one cautery similar to a circle, and make an incision in front of the joint around the socket so that the socket falls within the circle; and let this cauterization be like the one used for the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauterizations are not present, make three large olive-oil cauterizations, and let the cauterization be as perfect as all his hearts; and treat him until he is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain in the hip.
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip socket, and it is due to coldness and dampness, and the patient has been treated as we have said before in the division but the treatment is not effective, and the illness is long-standing: then you must purge the patient of thick humors with foul-smelling pills or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After carrying out the cauterization; and the manner of the cauterization is according to two methods: that is to say, together burning medicines, and cautery by fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Cautery with fire can be done in many ways, and one such way is to cauterize the hip bone with three triangular cauteries in this form, making them deep and large, with the thickness of a finger between each cautery, and let them be olive-shaped; sometimes one is made in the middle on top of the hip bone, for which there are four in this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see fit, use the circular cautery we mentioned earlier for hip dislocations; but make sure the circle encompasses the entire hip and all the heartwood is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	This is the method used for sciatica when the pain is confined to the hip and does not extend down to the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	Et if it comes down to the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations where the patient says the pain is located, and one cauterization above the ankle four inches, a little more on the left side; let the cauterization be with a knife-like instrument, and burn off the fatty tissue of the heart; and if the patient feels that the pain extends down to two toes of the foot or close by, cauterize where they feel the pain three points for soft tissue or four points for harder tissue on the cauterizer called "point".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if necessary, do more; and if it is known that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make a cauterization with either a knife-like or circular instrument, and be very careful with all your cauterizations not to leave them so long that you burn nerves and large arteries, and cause greater harm and contraction in the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who had a fire cautery performed on their ankle, and they let it be until the leg was completely swollen, as well as the foot, and all of the feet were pierced and corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an abdominal operation in which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, apply a fire cautery to one part and then the other, following this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	The wise men said regarding the cauterization of the hip, that this is how it should be done. Make an iron tool like so, and at its head let it also be as big as a quail's egg, or just a bit smaller, and between the two ends there should be space of about one thumb's width; and they shall be pierced through in two places, and also be knotted like a noose, and have an iron handle well made. This is its form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be heated until it is all red and throw out sparks, then put it on the hip of the ailing side, and turn onto your healthy flank; cauterize once with one cautery rod and leave it for three days; then apply an ointment plaster, and leave the wound open a long time; afterward cure with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasis says that we use this cautery rarely due to the fear of its appearance, and because we see it used little; yet it is a good cautery, which can be tolerated by those who are able to withstand it.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cauteries of burning medicine are made such that you create one instrument with crossbars where the edge of the door is lowered, and it should be made of brass or iron in one piece, and it has two sides, each side being as thick as a finger's width; they are open on top and bottom, and join together like this:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After place the wooden box on the hip of the patient lying on his healthy side, then press your hand firmly over the wooden box and the hip; next pour between the two circles hot wax that has been heated by one pound of fire for an hour's time, and let the patient endure the heat and burning.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For if it finds blisters there, like the one caused by fire; and when the blistering is passed, lift your hand with the instrument and gently raise the hip out of wax, then leave for three days, and apply butter until that which has turned black from the burn is removed; let this decay, then wait another three days, as if to ripen; this would be the final aid after the cure of ointments once it shall heal.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or the leg, make an instrument for him that holds salt according to what you have done for the hip similarly; and this is the way of the hot salt compress, and I have written about it in the treatise on medical correction.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, equal parts of each, grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	where it has a small opening for the tip of a razor to enter; place above this pot another well-sealed one, and put alkali, chalk, and warm water on top, so that there are two fingers of liquid above the powders when you firmly grasp it by hand; leave it like this until water and moisture have descended into the sealed pot, then take all that water and pour it back onto the chalk and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be very hot and is administered in many medical procedures and cauterizations of other body parts. For it does the same work as fire, and so has other medicines with which one can cauterize well the hip thus as thesesy and honey of anacardium and heat with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a treatment in which a man was cured of hip pain and sciatica; he suffered greatly, and says that no other treatment was used, and that he was healed immediately after this cure was performed, and he bathed as follows: as it is taught hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says in this way: take fresh and dry green litharge, grind it very well with one pound of grease, and put it on the hip, thigh, and leg where the pain is, and bind it; leave it for three hours, or until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then have him enter the bath until his body is a little heated, and make him get into bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such medicinal cauterization unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's fat, it helps greatly; and the cautery must be done in this way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take woolen cloth and grease it with old oil, and place it on the hollow between the big toe and the one next to it, which is called the "fossa".
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After that, take dry goat's fat and hold it to the fire until it becomes charcoal, then put it on the woolen cloth and leave it there until it is extinguished; repeat this process again, and keep doing so without ceasing until you perceive by sensation that it reaches up to the hip, and that the pain has ceased; and this type of cauterization is called a "goat cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	From the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether due to falling, being struck, excessive strain, or similar cold substances spreading through it, no type of cautery is suitable except for that which comes from an influx of cold material.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	The patient should then be purged with foul-smelling pills or similar remedies for the back where the pain is felt. Three lines of Indian ink are to be marked there and in each line, apply five cauteries or more depending on their strength and the amount the patient can endure; these cauteries are to be done according to the type called 'point', and if you wish, make three or four with an intermediate type called a 'claw'.
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this illness occurs in young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a narrow chest when rising up, and fear; and you find on the last vertebra of the spine and under our appearance what appears over other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this one and cure it, cauterize with the clean cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery touches every part of the vertebra evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see it, cauterize around the vertebra with the cautery making two or three lines, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treat the place until it is healed according to what we have said, and take care not to apply cautery on a hump that is over a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	Of the pain of joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of joints is caused by moisture spreading to every limb of the body, and when the pain comes in the foot, which doctors call "podagra" properly, and when it is due to coldness and medicine cannot cure it, then it is treated with cautery in this way: make a row of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a need to apply it to the front of the foot, perform a cautery at every point where one would make a "dot" cautery.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains extend to the knees and other joints, which happens many times, apply three or four cauteries on each knee, using only the olive-shaped cautery; and if you need more, make more, but do not hold your hand there longer than it takes for the heart's iron to burn.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, apply the cautery as we described in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make two lines of points around the knuckles; and if there remains any pain in the fingers, make points on each joint and above the hair of the hand; and if the pains come down to the wrists or up to the shoulders, cauterize each affected part, and ensure good care for the patient and administer medicine.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you provide good care and cleanse the humours, he will be healed by God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	On fractures of the jawbone
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When a fracture occurs in the angle (of the jaw) and the pieces descend towards the ears, and it is recent, then on the day you treat it, ensure he does not eat; and let him take things that empty the belly so that the faeces descend from his abdomen; afterwards make him sit upright between your hands, and instruct him to hold his breath until the bones are realigned, and pull them towards your fingers, and draw blood below the fracture onto the bone of the wrist, and any other place resembling half a circle above the body; then heat the following cautery for use:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as they are white and cast no shadows.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Bring the balls to their place; and the assistants hold his hand so that it does not go back; and manage well the patient's thighs, and put a cushion beneath him and a strap on the thighs, and another one on the lower part which holds the hands; then apply the cautery with your whole hand, and keep it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not succeed at first, repeat again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the ball does not jump when you perform the cautery; lest you burn it; and thus cause the patient's death or other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And the cauterization for children should be subtle according to their size, and for adults it should also be large according to their measurements; after three days treat the place of the cautery with butter until the burn is healed; then treat other ointments so that it heals, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well-healed; and make sure his nourishment is adequate for a long time, so that he does not strain when he tries to get up and walk around.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	After forty days, when he wishes to get up, provide him with a well-made bandage, and wear it for another forty days; let him have good rest, not overexerting himself and guarding against too much overindulgence in eating or drinking, and from shouting loudly; and once he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will now say after this the treatment for cutting, in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Of the rupture of the belly.
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, make the incision of the cautery according to its quantity, and burn one-third of the heart; afterwards, treat it as we have said; and some ancients say that it must be cauterized with a three-angled cautery in this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But first mark the place of insertion and make a line across the width above the rupture, then another one outside, and hold your hand in the middle throughout the whole procedure of cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and medical treatment is ineffective, then it must be cauterized with a cautery called "point", and the cauteries should be applied according to the length of the limb, its size, weakness, strength, location of torsion, and the severity of the pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the first cauterization is sufficient, that's good; if not, apply another cautery over the previous one, as it is customary to move on to the adjacent limb, which is why you should continue with cauterizations until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	surgery
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The month is aided sometimes by cauterization for great help, especially the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	If you see the need for cauterization, pay attention if the patient is in the early stages, and whether it has been treated according to what we've said earlier, and that it doesn't descend or remain there, and if you doubt that corruption might spread through the entire patient, then make five cauterizations on their head: one in the middle of the head at the crown; another towards the forehead at the end of the hairline; two more on both temples; and a final one behind, on the occiput; leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the bone, so that it penetrates enough for the scabs to come off such that vapors from thick humors can escape; then cauterize the mouse as previously described.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	Et si le méchanceté est partout éparpillée; et elle perd manifestement, alors il faut que tu la cautérises avec ces cautères que nous avons dit pour le chef, et un cautère sur le nez, et deux cautères sur l’épine du cou, et six cautères sur l’épine du dos, et un grand sur la croupe et un autre à côté, et deux sur les deux épaules; et deux sur les côtes, et deux sur les tendons du pied, et un sur chaque joint des mains et des pieds, et sur les fosses des mains; et prends garde aux nerfs qui sont sur le talon arrière, que tu ne les brûles; et parfois fait on cautère sur l’os du poignet, et un autre sur l’os de l’estomac, et un autre sur le foie.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	Et sache que plus tu en fais de cautères, plus tu lui apportes d’aide, et cela lui profite; et sache que les malades ne ressentent point de douleur au cautère comme les sains la ressentent, car leur corps est déjà tout corrompu.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cautery be large and small depending on the limbs and joints, according to what you find in the handling of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, apply flour paste to the wound with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices but does not heal, then make a cautery on the member according to its size; let the cautery penetrate slightly into the bone; afterward treat it with ointments until it heals.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	Sometimes cautery is made on the hand and foot, as well as on the back along the exit point of a nerve that moves the limb, thus removing the swelling; but one must be knowledgeable about limbs and the paths of nerves moving through the body before proceeding with such treatment.
de albaras	Of erysipelas
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the illness called "albaras" is lingering, and medical treatments are ineffective, then cauterize it with a strong cautery, according to the size of the heart's species, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changes; then treat it with a mixture of barley flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and pigeon blood and sparrow blood, each in equal parts; mix everything together, bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the site until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of cancer with cautery.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When cancer appears at its beginning, and you wish to stop it, cauterize it with a circular-shaped cautery, all around the circumference of the cancerous growth.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And yet the wise say that a cauterization should also be performed in the middle of the chancre; and yet this does not seem good to me, for I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, as I have already seen happen once before; rather, it is more proper that it be cauterized around the edges with the cautery known as 'circulating', as we have said many times about cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has an illness called 'adubelati', and it prolongs their death either because of the excessiveness of it or due to the patient's condition when they are decrepit (that is, very old) with little blood, or because of the weather; and you wish to hasten their death: then cauterize them all around with many small cauteries by pricking; afterward leave them be.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierce through the entire cautery, heat up the cautery with what it is made of:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	Place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the heart, and let it be such that the patient feels the cautery externally so that the course of corruption is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Afterwards, treat until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The fire cure with iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than the wasting away of limbs, for it eats away at the limbs just as fires consume dry branches.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this illness in a place that can withstand fire cautery together, then heat the small and large claw-like cauterizers according to what is suitable for the location of the illness; afterwards cauterize it from all sides until you eradicate all corruption, leaving nothing behind so that everything which is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Leave it for three days, then apply to the cauterized areas a soft ointment with oil until all scalding from the fire and corruption is removed.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	Afterwards, treat it with an ointment that produces flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that healthy flesh has not grown, it is good; and if not, then resume the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted areas.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this treatment has sometimes been cured with medicine instead of fire cautery; however, the fire cautery is still more helpful, and I have already described the cure using medicine in another section: take it when you need to.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	boils that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times there occurs in the foot a disease that is called "claws" according to our understanding, and it is a faulty bulging thing that wounds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterization for this disease has two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cautery, and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Cautery of fire is when you heat a cauterizer like a dove's feather, and it should be made of good iron to fit the nail tightly from all sides, with fine edges; after putting it hot on the nail, turn your hand around the nail until it reaches its base; leave it there for three days until it begins to produce pus; then make an ointment of wild mallow crushed with salt, and apply this ointment at night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wounded place with an ointment made of fat until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by force into the body, and often occur in hands and feet, you should apply hot water cautery; it is done like this: take a copper or iron rod, or a dove's feather, and place it on the nail and wart, that is, warts; put the rod so that it covers all around, then pour some hot water over it, hold your hand firmly, and press your hand turning it so that the edge of the rod reaches the root of the nail, allowing the hot water to penetrate deeply into the root; let the patient endure the sting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it be, and they will uproot all at their roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another until you eradicate all those which are within the body, then treat them with ointments that produce flesh.
li cure dou trembler	The doctor for shaking or trembling disorders.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some tremble from coldness of nerves, or quartan fever or other illness, you must apply four cauterizations or five on the spine of the back, one between each spine; and one at the foot, and one on the stomach with an olive-shaped cautery; it will cease the trembling, and hasten recovery from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	Pustules that stink or smell foul.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes one notices breaks in the body with baths or stinking pustules which come from large corrupted substances.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes they cauterize at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and it prevents them from growing again, but the surplus from which they come is removed, and they are healed; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is severed.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	There are often great outpourings of blood from the severed artery at the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cauterization of a limb, and similar things; it is very difficult to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet when this happens to someone, quickly place your index finger on the wound of the artery and squeeze it tightly so that blood is diminished beneath your finger, and no more drops appear; then take multiple small and large olive oil cauterizers, all red hot; then take one, either big or small depending on the wound and where the artery has been cut, and place the cauterizer upon this vein where you are holding your finger, and hold the cauterizer there until the bleeding is staunched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it sparks when you lift your finger above the wound, and the cauterization is complete, then quickly take another of the cauteries from the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	Do not stop doing one after the other until the blood is stanched; and be wary that you do not burn the nerve nearby, and no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be well staunched especially if the artery is large, unless it is by one of the four methods we have said: by cauterization, or extraction if it has not been treated, or by tightly binding with thread, or by applying medicines which have the power to stanch blood; and let it be bound accordingly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	That which will bring about stanching by binding tightly with bandages or applying hot objects, or other similar things, is of no avail unless it be done promptly.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this occurs to anyone and they have neither mirror nor medicine present, then they must place their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said before, and stretch it out so that it is placed over the wound and over the vein; do not move the finger, but moisten it with cold water often, very cold, until the blood becomes frozen and thickened and clotted; and prepare beforehand those things which are necessary for cauterization and medication.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book on surgical procedures.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all about diseases that require cauterization with fire or burning medicines, and we described the indications, causes, instruments, and types of cautery; I placed this chapter on the head down to the feet, and I will follow the same path in this chapter so that what is sought can be found more easily.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, as I begin this work, dear child, it is important for you to understand that in this chapter there is greater danger and fear than in the previous one about cauterization, thus requiring even greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For there are many ways in which people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from such as are so sickly with their illness that they die easily due to the madness they find in their sickness and in the enormity of their evil ways then one should fear it.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these there are those who give you their sense, and say: "Wait, I am healed"; but the sickness is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	You must not consent to those who come to you with such behaviour but put greater concern in your honour than in your greed and do not operate foolishly but wisely over that of which you are certain and from which you can gain reward and profit; and use prognosis and diagnosis in treating your patients towards what is best for their recovery, this will help establish a good reputation, glory, and memorable praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Tres chier fil, Our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and may he wish to inspire you with the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or je vous ai ordonné ce chapitre en le divisant par chapitres, selon qu'il est présenté avant celui sur les cautères, que je vous ai déjà décrit du haut de la tête jusqu'aux pieds, afin que vous trouviez plus facilement ce dont vous avez besoin.
dou chief plein d’aigue	tête pleine d'eau.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness often comes to children at birth, when the midwife holds the child's head too tightly; and sometimes it arises from an unknown cause.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this illness occur except in children, and death was swift for all those I saw afflicted by it; thus, I think it best to leave such treatment to others more skilled than myself.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose shoulder was full of water, and the head swelled each day to the point that he could not bear it; and the moisture grew so much that he died, and this moisture had gathered beneath the bone above the scapula, between the heart and the bone; and the treatment is such when the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make an incision in the head a width of two fingers; and it should be as long as two inches, so that the moisture flows out; and see here the form of the spatule:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscesses are larger, then make two incisions in the form of a cross, according to this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see that the sutures of the head are open on each side, and the water gushes out when you press it with your hand inside, but this has not relieved [the condition], then you must make three incisions in the head according to this method:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After applying compresses and powders, bind with wine and oil, leaving it thus for five days; then release the binding, treating the wound with cloths and ointments, keeping the head equally constricted, and feed the patient dry meat free of moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another manner of incision is to observe where the swelling of the abscess appears, and the gathering of pus; for sometimes it presents in front, at other times behind, on the right or left side.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut there where the abscess appears, and extract the pus, opening it according to your ability; be careful not to sever an artery, for if blood flows out, the patient may die from loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of rheumatism
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When someone has a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or throat, and it is an old illness that does not benefit from medical treatment, then the last resort is cauterization along with cutting the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	You must therefore, when you are about to cut the veins, make the patient bend their head back; then rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, and have the patient squeeze their neck tight against this cloth; next look where the vein beats, and observe that the pulse on one side is the same as the other, and they both respond equally; then mark these pulses, and cut each of them with a sharp spatule in two parts, so that the incision reaches down to the bone, and let it be done across the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see it, push the spatula under the artery and cover above it, cutting as deep as necessary across the wound.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is cut open, blood spurts out continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the artery does not open to touch, you must measure the depth of three fingers and cut up to the bone; what is needed for blood to flow freely is six fingers deep, perhaps a little more or less depending on how much the patient can take and the fullness of the artery; then check the wound: if there remains above the bone any bit that could form an abscess, remove this piece, stretch the wound open and bind it, treating with ointment until healed.
de emigrainne	Of migraine.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine comes with a cold and due to the moisture of tears and heat in temples and an old persistent headache and similar things, and it is medicated through various medical treatments but nothing helps, we remove the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of their extraction is such that the patient should shave the hair from his temples and focus on the artery which appears in the temple, for it shows clearly through its beating, and it may be more recessed in some men who are too cold; if it is recessed, then the patient should tighten his neck with some cloth, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and warm the place with hot water until the artery appears distinctly; then take the spatule which has this shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then draw it upwards with pincers, and clear away well the membranes that are underneath on each side; if the arteries are subtle, twist them to the point of a hook, then cut off that part according to the quantity of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut off, the blood cannot flow out everywhere all at once.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out the blood from six fingers to three; and if the artery is large, you must bind it in two places with a strong double silk thread, so that no rot comes before the wound heals and blood flows continuously; then cut off the superfluity between the two ligatures at the same time, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with the knife cautery until the bone is reached, such that the fingers are severed; this is a dangerous operation if the patient has no fever and is of a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cauterization is aid to dry out moisture, thus it is of greater help for moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries, one should fill the space with old cotton and place well-made bandages on top; and when you release them, ensure they are treated with dry medicinal substances that promote flesh growth, and with bandages, until they are healed; and if there is bleeding from the artery while you work, quickly cut it off with a cauterizer, or use vitriol and squeeze it in your hand to stop the blood flow; and if these aren't available, place your finger on it until the blood clots, then wash the area with cold water until the bleeding stops, and ensure it is secured as necessary; what is more important during arterial extraction and cauterization of the wound is that you make two deep incisions, but they should be thick to retain heat for longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too thin, they retain less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there should be a thickness of one finger between the two knives, and then when you have clamped the two places together, place the hot iron on top until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein into two parts; they should be separated between the two shoulders because this cauterization is not complete from end to end; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	Tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes flow down over the veins that are on top of the head near fire, and it does not help to treat with medicine, and you see the patient's face turn red, and feel trembling at their forehead; and their eyelids are thin and moist so that the hairs of their eyelashes fall out, and their eyelids are scalded by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	Et l'apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is below the temple up to the second incision; scrape out all the core that is between the two slits down to the bone, then do the same from the middle incision to the other second one, and then remove this spatomile.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Insert into the first slit the instrument which is called a 'cultellarium', and it is very sharp on one side, but soft and not sharp on the other side, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	Place the sharp edge towards the flesh near the core and the soft edge towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle slit.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And scrape out all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as long as the incision is continuous up until it reaches the core; then do the same in the middle slit down to the other exterior one; and then drain the blood evenly, and express the place for the blood clotting; then insert in each slit a tent made of old cotton, and apply wet swabs soaked in wine, oil, and eggs, and ensure that no hot abscess forms there; on the third day remove the bandage and irrigate it with a great application of warm water, then treat it with basilicon ointment mixed with rosehip oil, as well as other treatments used for wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	Of eye rheum.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When to someone comes acute accustomed catarrh, and you see the eyes sunken and small, and weakened sight, and burned sclera; and the hair falls out, and in the head an aching pain, and the patient sneezes; then know by these symptoms that these discharges and this catarrh come from many veins, and to heal it use this method.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you should instruct the patient to lie on their back, then make a big incision in the middle of the forehead, and another from ear to ear.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	Beginning from the incision of the left temple towards the right one, let it be cut up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move with eating; and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then sew between the two lips of the incision an old cotton pad, and linum bandages; then bind above moistened cloths in wine and oil, and be aware of hot abscesses; once it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow there, then treat it with drying substances that promote healing.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this way: take two parts wheat flower and four parts colophony to make a plaster; administer it on these wounds in order to generate flesh all over.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Cleaning of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Anything that falls into the ears is one of four things: grains, insects, rocks or similar metals; seeds such as nuts, beans, peas; or flowing substances like water and oils and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When a stone or any other object that does not fit the ear falls into it, and cannot grow in the ear, place the ear under sunlight.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, drip a few drops of violet oil or sesame oil and administer an extraction; have them sneeze often, then block their nostrils when sneezing comes on, and place pieces of fine cloth or wool around the ear; keep the ear elevated.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Often fire comes forth through this cure; and if it does not come forth, one must apply extraction with subtle pincers, of which the form is thus:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it fires with the pincers, it is good; if not, apply extraction with a subtle curved hook of small size; and if it does not fire with this, make a pipe of copper and push the head of the pipe into the ear canal forcefully, stopping up what is around the pipe with soft wax so that air cannot enter along with the pipe; then pull strongly on the ear, for often it fires as we have said; and if it does not fire in such a manner, take birdlime and put some instrument with a point onto it, wrap a bit of cotton around this, then press the birdlime onto the stone or whatever it is, and draw out the fire.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she cannot be cured of all these things that we have said, then hasten to split the ear rather than let a hot abscess come, and spasm; and the way of the incision is such that you first bleed the patient with a cephalic vein cut, and extract blood according to its measure and virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn their ear upwards, and make a small incision in the root of the ear at the fat where it depends; and let the incision be like a crescent moon, so that you reach the stone, then remove it as best you can, and suck it quickly to your mouth; and treat it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that has formed and it swells, then administer an extraction; and if it cannot exit, then apply a very thin spatula in this way...
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	And bring about an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think the grain is moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many incisions; then extract it with subtle pincers and sucking, as we have said, so that the extraction is eased.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case of water that falls into the ear, the patient should first sneeze and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let them lie on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it should jump out because of this, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, take many pebbles according to the length of your thumb, thin and light, and warm them slightly over fire; place them in the patient's ear opening, and jump on it with their feet from another side, pressing down on the stone that is in the ear with another pebble; do not stop doing this, stone by stone until all the water drains out, and thus let it drain entirely; if you wish, take a single reed, insert one end into the ear, and light the other end on fire until most of the reed has burned away; then repeat again with other reeds until all the water is drained as we have said for stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is small like a flea or similar, treat it as we have mentioned in the division; but if it is large and can be felt, use tweezers for extraction; this is the lightest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When extracting worms embedded in the ears, if you treat it as we have said in the division and use remedies for distillation but the treatment is ineffective, then examine the ear in sunlight; if any worms are visible, remove them with fine tweezers, and if none appear, use a small stick to search.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is narrow beneath and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Insert the finest point into the ear according to the extent of the patient's suffering, then suck strongly with the entire stick; do this often until all the worms emerge.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey and come out, plug the canal with cotton as I have said for stones; and if they do not exit as we have mentioned, administer distillations that the ancients have tested in worm occlusions, and you will find them in the treatise on distillations; and so distil your oils and medicines into the ear for all these instruments, this is how it looks:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	Let it be made of silver or copper, narrow below at the small openings, and wide above for distillation; and to press within the distillation into the instrument of well-made brass for this purpose, and if you wish take a shaver and wrap around its point appropriately with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and what you wish of your medicines into the canal, and let the canal be in the ear; then put within the shaver all the cotton, and press your hand steadily so that the oil is distilled to the end of the ear; and the patient will feel it inside, and let the distillation pot be heated over the fire until you distil it into the ear; and take care that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stuffing of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without holes in their ears; and the same happens to men due to blockage from a wound or growth inside the ear, and this blockage sometimes becomes embedded in the ear, so it cannot be seen; and sometimes the hole appears outside the ear, and can be well observed.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which is embedded and cannot be seen requires prompt treatment in many cases, and for this visible one, you must place the ear of the patient towards the sun; look inside: if you see any opaque appearance, treat with all these medicines which follow.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And it should be sharp and pointed at the front and back, but not harming the ear; if the opaque appearance is from a growth or flesh of the ear, take subtle pincers, and gently remove all this flesh.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the suppurations are complete in the ear, take a delicate, lightweight razor and warm it slightly over fire, then place it on the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you detect suppuration that causes itching for the patient when they hear sounds, pierce lightly and be mindful not to damage the ear nerves; then insert into the ear a tent according to the width of the hole, and soak it in Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this every day until the wound is healed, take a tent and dip it in rosewater, then sprinkle crushed vitriol on top; if you see swelling in the ear, remove the tent and insert another one soaked in cerate made from almond oil and wax, until the swelling subsides; then treat it until it's completely healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is loss of blood, immerse a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and employ other remedies that stop the flow of blood as described in the chapter on distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the paper flesh
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	These eye ailments that come about due to moist and dry papers, you should treat with tongs and forceps, scraping the root bark of a spindle tree; then apply crushed green vitriol to the site.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if there is no discharge, then apply a subtle lenticular cautery; the cauterizer should be applied after the incision and moved around; often repeated until nothing remains of its root; for when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned away and do not return.
de la gresle	of the hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times on paper there are things that appear like hail in form and hardness, and for this reason, this illness is called "grandine," which is an assembly of thick moisture on the paper above and below; the work is such: take care if the grandine moves from one part to another, and it is a minor thing to know; thus cut it widely, then peel each side lightly, then take pincers and remove it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	if you cannot remove it without piercing the paper slightly, it does not harm the patient; and if the tear is large, join it with a suture, treating it until it is healed; and if it is small, make no effort, for ointments will restore it quickly and promote flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hailstone is descending into the ear towards the upper part, it turns the membrane inside out, and grasp the hailstone with some pincers, and cut and press it from one side to another; and if the membrane is removed by incision, this does not cause harm; and when the hailstone is extracted, so wash the eye with salty water, and treat the place where unhealthy flesh grows until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	from the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Echinach is a fat that forms in the eye membranes above, and this happens more often to children than adults, and it greatly harms their eyes, causing them cataracts in the mornings, and they cannot bear to look at the sunlight because tears rush to their eyes; because of this, they lie down on their faces headfirst, and sleep like that, with their eye membranes beneath their eyebrows moistened by the echinach which appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press down on the place with your fingers and feel the exit point between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	The method of the operation is as follows: have the patient place their head on your lap; then take a linen cloth and prepare a cone-shaped cover according to the amount that will be removed from each part, then place it on them; press with your fingers from one side to the other so that the exit point is within the circle; then make an incision in the middle of the moisture using a sharp spatula, but not larger than the wound made when opening a vein; and cut through the skin thoroughly until you reach the exit point; often, the substance will come out of the incision resembling a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Pull it out then with one piece of cloth padding between your two fingers on top, and turn your hand right and left so that the spatulum is evenly spread; be careful not to insert into the crack, or you may injure the eye.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	If the spatulum does not emerge at first from the crack, slightly increase the size of the opening until it appears; then extract it as we have described, then wet pads with vinegar and water, place them on the site, and apply bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	For such people who grind herbs and place them on to corrupt the moisture that has remained.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to a hot abscess, treat it with soothing emollient plasters until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	hairs of paper.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow on paper that are not natural and are inflamed, they harm the eyes, causing various diseases such as habitual tears and softening of the papers and albuginea, leading to eye destruction; it is treated in four ways: with cautery by fire, or medicine according to what was said before in the chapter on cautery, and done either by incision and suturing or by canes, depending on what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	Place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the paper of the eye towards your left hand; if it is inverted, that is good; otherwise, insert a needle with all its thread above it; and whether this be near the margin of the paper where the hairs grow close to these hairs, draw the thread over all the paper, and turn it on a razor; then make an incision in the part beneath the paper, under the appended hairs, for the full length cutting away the entire thickness from the large tear duct down to the small one; next remove the thread, and place below the paper a little tent of cotton and linen, then sign upon the paper a figure of ivy, but be sure that the figure is proportioned to the extent to which you wish to raise the divided paper.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	Et si a teil qui a mestier c'on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; 
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cut this which overcomes the small forces equally according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the forceps, and the thing is not equal, take a needle with thread in it, place one end of the thread on your face; pass the other thread through the large tear, and the second thread through the small one, then gather the two threads evenly between your fingers; lift your hand equally, and raise all the skin you have gripped as we have explained earlier, then join the two lips of the wound by stitching, and cure it until it is healed; if an abscess forms around the incision, treat it with a cauterization using cerate ointment or similar soothing remedies; sometimes the hair on the membrane becomes inverted: in such cases you must follow the instructions we have given for incisions; but the sutures in both instances are more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of ulcers is done in this way: you must fold the paper and make a slit inside according to what I have said; then you make two canes per wound, two fine cords as long as the width of your thumb, and cut at both ends where you hold the threads together. Then join one part with the other carefully over that which stands above in the eye of the paper, and stretch the two canes from their respective ends: leave it thus for a few days until the skin stretches and becomes black and putrid, so much so that it falls by itself
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes a long time to cure, cut the ulcer with forceps and treat it until it is healed. Once the wound has closed up completely and you can lift off the paper without hurting the patient too much, remove any hairs that have started growing again; these are the two kinds of canes that you will make according to this shape and in this quantity: length-wise and width-wise
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	li ovraiges est telz that you take a fine needle and thread it with soft, fine silk; then join the heads and tie one end to the other carefully, making sure the length of thread is about as long as a palm's width; next attach another fine silk thread briefly in the eye of the needle; knot both ends together; have your patient place his head on top of yours so that sunlight falls directly onto the work at hand because this type job requires delicacy and precision; insert your needle through all parts toward base near hair root quickly enough without damaging natural hairs but deep enough beneath skin surface until you reach paper underneath; remove natural hairs one by one from hole created earlier then put them back inside same place they came out from originally along with any additional ones removed during procedure (one or two, three more perhaps); finally withdraw hand gently so as not damage natural hair growth direction pulling all newly inserted strands towards papery surface alongside original shaft.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the arrow is treated and the hair does not come out with it, you will treat the arrow from below along all the thread that you have arranged for it, until the arrow comes out of the hole above and you see it by the vision of the eye; then you will remove the arrow and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed II or III days, until the hair withers in its place and flesh grows over it; and if the hair is small, accompany one long natural hair from the head hairs, and raise it up with that (hair) which you leave, until it lengthens and then remove it.
de la porriture de l’oil	From the corruption of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this illness called "aleacrati" or the corruption comes into the eye, there are two types of it: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And this occurs suddenly due to a wound, or from a cutting instrument or cauterization, and through similar procedures.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of treatment involves cutting through that scar and separating its lips, then placing linen cloths inside and binding it until it is healed; one must not use things that dry out or constrict in treating this injury.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do not, the illness will return worse than before; but use softening substances instead, such as fenugreek; and boil flax seeds in water or some other liquid along with linseed oil, melted diaqilon grease in any kind of oil, wrap a cloth around it, and treat him like that.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the secret to your treatment is that you must ensure it does not heal according to its previous form; and these procedures we have mentioned are only initial measures against this illness so that it may never return in its former state.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	from flesh which comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease, which is dislocated and truly called "axacrati", is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cauterization and similar things; and the way of operating on it is to take a needle with double thread, insert it into the flesh, make it pierce from left eyelid up to right, so that the threads come out in two places of the flesh; then stretch the flesh above the entire needle and cut with a spatula one finger wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure on the paper returns as it should, that's good; if not, take a razor and place it in the incision, turn the paper over, and make two cuts along its edges inside the paper; let the ends of these two incisions be at the angles of the cut you made, and make the angles so that when they are put together, the figure is like that of a letter with the name "Greek"; then remove this flesh, according to how much its sides reach underneath the paper, from what follows the paper, then join the two parted parts, and sew them with a thread of wool; then treat it as we have said regarding softening medicines and bandages until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the illness comes from a tear or a suture or cauterization, you must make an incision filled with paper beneath the hairs and according to what was previously mentioned; then sever between the two flaps of skin like I said before; one should do work based on the form of the disease, since it is very diverse in its forms, and wise masters use all their power to fashion an appliance that will restore figure to its natural form; and even the sick themselves, according to what is required for them in terms of work and instruments in various arrangements.
dou soudement de la papiere	Suddenly from paper...
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suturing occurs on the hands of men in such a way that the paper above is adhered with eye-white, and it cannot move nor perform its natural works, you must therefore insert the tip of a razor beneath the paper and lift it up; extend it to pincers so that you cut what is hardened by a subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp or too blunt, such that the patient may not suffer if the spatula is too sharp and pierce the eye; let your incision, from which you peel away this assembly, be lightly made, such that the paper returns to its natural form; and heal all of this assembly with a salty eyewash, then rinse it with warm water, and collarbone oil; then place between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and put on top of the eye wool moistened in egg white; after three days use of the collarbone oil and sealing things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the nail is according to two manners: it is nervous and similar to hard sinew, and another which is not nervous, but is like white frozen moisture, when touched by iron and one thinks to remove it with pincers, it cannot be done; both appearances begin towards the great tear duct, and grow little by little until they cover all sight, light, and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is as follows: let the patient put their head towards your hand, then open their eyes; lift up the eyelid with your hand, then coil the nail with small tweezers and extend it upward; then take a needle, and place within it a horsehair, or cow hair, or ox hair, and strong thread; double the point of the needle slightly and insert it into the nail, piercing through completely with the needle, and tie the nail with one thread and extend it upwards, then scrape away all the hair on the side of the nail which is attached to the eyeball and the eyelid up until the head, then cut off the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a very sharp spatula and small forceps, and leave the natural flesh around the tear duct so that through incision, the body of tears may flow as usual; sometimes you extend the nail only towards the eyelids, and to one thread, just as we have said; then scrape it off completely with a spatula made thus:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And make sure the spatula does not touch the fleshy membrane and tear it, and that the plumule is not pierced; after incising pour some crushed silphium into the eye, and a collar made of litharge, and leave this until the next day; then treat with what is necessary until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, and the uncines cannot enter it, this similar condition of a nail has often been treated by physicians; they grow as I have described in the division, and if you see them cut off, treat the patient's eye, and take a light spatula with a small sharp point according to this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And lift the nail carefully from above, and if you see that it does not decrease in size and the root presses against it, then drip from your mouth into the eye a distillate of litharge and red lead collar, and silphium powder; pack the eye until the next day; then repeat this operation according to these same actions until it is entirely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes you in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then milk it, and treat first the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of flesh around the tear duct causes great harm to the eye, suspend it with a hook, and cut off a part but not all, so that body fluids do not flow out; then instil in the eye red colloy made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	In the eyes of some men, red flesh sometimes grows, covering the pupil and spreading onto the cornea, resembling a rose with its petals; the procedure is that the patient rests his head on your lap, then you open their eyes, and coil all this flesh around hooks suitable for it, holding it tightly; then cut off the first bit of flesh, and go on cutting with a razor until the end, taking care not to injure the eye while working; and let the incision be made by a small knife like we said in the chapter about nail incisions and small forces that one removes the nail with, as the form after this chapter shows; and once the incision is complete and all flesh removed, fill the eye with pounded wax or instil red colloy and similar corrosive medicines, and put cotton mixed with egg white over the eye so it is protected from a hot abscess; if anything remains, and your blood boils due to heat, and you suspect a hot abscess, leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with things that calm down hot abscesses; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do whenever flesh grows in the eye like this.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nevertheless, you must ease the treatment of each weak eye through natural means; and through accidental intervention using iron tools; never thrust your hand into any of these procedures until you see that this limb can withstand the procedure.
des voines des eulz	the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Below the veins are red lines that cover the eye, obscuring its sight and weakening it daily.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary for the first step to examine the eye and see where it is red, ensuring that there are no other ailments besides redness; then twist it in such a way: instruct the patient to place their head on your lap, then stretch those veins as much as possible according to your knowledge, being careful with delicate ones twice over in this manner.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	Et let there be two ounces by degrees in the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	then you must gently coil the forces of these veins, and wipe away the blood hour after another, until you see the removal of those veins from the eye; and be careful not to injure the eye with the points of spatulas, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, being very fervent in your task so that you only cut those veins; and when you have done this, then distill green and red collyrium into the eye to corrupt what remains from the sebaceous gland.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you are not able to collect all of it in that hour, then make a plaster over the eye with things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is soothed and the abscess is warm, then begin again according to this method which is before, until it is healed; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the eye's fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The surgeon calls it an "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cauterization and burning medicine as I have previously mentioned, and it is not healed, there is pus within that you must cut open over the abscess, where it should die, and drain all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, take all the instrument of which this has the shape; and it is called an "aspre chief", and make it of iron until the head returns, and point it like a file as it is in its present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a little so that you know this corruption is removed; do this once or twice, then restore the place with drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	if the wound is healed and flesh has grown in it, and the body of the fistula is closed, and remains so for forty days, and does not reopen or become abscessed again, and no bad accident occurs there, know that it is cured; if this is not the case, then there is another means to restore the fistula at the site of its origin according to this method: you should expose the bone a second time with an iron tool and sharp medicine; when it has been exposed, take one rod made like this, which must have three angles, and let the piece be tapered down towards the end as shown here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	place it over the bone near the elbow, and withdraw your hand one palm's length from the eye, then turn the drill completely until it pierces the bone so that the patient feels the wind go through it when he holds his hand above his knuckles; you may restore the site with dry medicines as I have taught you, and once the flesh forms and hardens over the hole, the matter will descend into the fistula, which is a more gentle process for the sick person.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eye opens completely without any obstruction or impairment of the nerve, you must bind the patient; then treat it and apply cupping glasses or leeches without injury to suck out the blood, then place on the eye a poultice made from aconite, aloes, incense, and gum; then extract the eye and place the plaster on bandages and soft cloths. The method of the cloths is such that you take very soft cloths and fold each one into four layers, then place one upon another according to the quantity required by the eye. Then bind it firmly with a stiff bandage, and reapply cupping glasses to suck out blood without injury; then remove the glasses and leave the eye extracted day and night, and if the poultice softens you must tightly extract it again; then remove the binding after the day and night have passed, and if you see that the eye is healing it's good; but if not, reapply the plaster, cloths, bindings, and cupping glasses until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	From the rupture of a hard membrane
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruption occurs in the hard membrane, it breaks open and expels a material like resin grains, which is awful to see; if you decide to operate on it, the procedure involves inserting a needle into the root of one part underneath until reaching the upper part, then insert another needle with double thread from the eyelid area; pierce through, leaving the first needle in place according to its position; cut the double thread and tie a piece of membrane around it, securing it tightly, then extract the needle and apply moist wool soaked in egg on the eye; leave until the threads dry along with the membrane, then treat the eye with comforting substances until the wound is healed; sometimes the wound is constrained by membrane on each side with a circle of cloth until healing occurs.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eye shows great bulging, pierce it with a subtle spatule that comes in perfect alignment with the eye, and drain out the white moisture and lower the eye, and enter (it) immediately; then extract it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the eye's bowels
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease which is called "alcunnati" affects only the bowels of the eye, appearing like descending water, but it is not water; and the way to treat this condition is for you to have the patient sit on a furnished seat that is upright, then take hold of their head with both hands, and move it until you see the bowels come above your eyes; then they will be cured, and the light will not descend nor become cloudy again, and the patient will be able to see things as they used to; but if the descent of water does not stop, know that it is indeed water, and if the descent of the bowels is not aligned as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	sit the patient between your hands, then take the fine spatula and make an incision on the horny membrane at one point along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the horny membrane and the cornea until the bowels are exposed; and when they have been removed, pour into the eye warm water mixed with honey, or water in which fenugreek has been boiled and honey, then treat it with another cure until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	Watery eyes
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen similar watery conditions in the eye, and what needs to be pierced for treatment; so we treat it according to health principles.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	Have the patient sit with crossed hands, facing away from the light to avoid sunlight, and tie the healthy eye shut very tightly; then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are left, or right hand if they are right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left, the instrument called 'almagda', or in your left hand, if the eyes are right; then place the tip of the instrument beside the cornea with the thickness of a line in that white part of the eye at the part of the lower lid, then push the instrument called 'almagda' carefully, and turn your hand so it pierces the white of the eye, feeling that almagda reaches an empty space; and make sure that the length of the way almadga travels is exactly the depth from the top of the eyeball to its end; and this is the cornea of the eye; you will see the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the horny membrane, and then place the instrument until it reaches where the water is, then express it under a path after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the swelling goes down now, the patient will see before them and the instrument in their eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting for a moment, and if the swelling rises again, insert force with the instrument, and when it is fixed in place and does not rise, extract the almagda lightly while turning your hand back and forth; then put a little seal gem stone ointment on the eye.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place over the eye with dry lint or wet wool in rose oil and egg white, and bind it with a healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, put on it crushed cumin with plenty of egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called 'alberit', of which this is the shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And therefore pierce the conjunctiva only, do not go too deep but make a subtle hole, then insert the almagda as we have said; and upon completion of this procedure provide for the patient an attractive bed where they may sleep on their back in a dark place; avoid all movement, take light food, and do not move their head to either side, be bound according to your discretion for three days; unbind them in that same dark room, test their vision, make them see some things, then re-bind the wound until the seventh day; it is not fitting to do this during or after the incision at present but you must ease up on this so as not to raise the water.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	If an abscess appears, do not unbind the eye before the seventh day, and treat it with a poultice to ease the abscess; when it is healed, uncover the eye and apply gold leaf to cover for one day, then return them to that dark room.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then leave the house step by step, and turn towards your quarters; know that no disciple should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And a man came to us from Iran, who told us that in his country they make pierced alembics, from which water is extracted, but I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I read about it in the books of the ancients; perhaps this is something new.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of alembic forms, for those who do not know them to see; and they are properly made of copper.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And the head is of the same subtle material, and the end is in three angled corners.
de la char sor le neis	Of flesh above the nose.
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes there are born flesh bumps of different kinds, some which resemble scorpions with many feet; and if there be such with flesh raised in colored spots, and if it has soft flesh of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	With this soft flesh that is not raised, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open their nostrils, and take out the old skin of these bumps, and treat them with a strong ointment; then cut off what you can bear with a thin sharp spatula until you know that all the flesh is removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if any remains that cannot be cut off, then open it up all over with delicate instruments lightly so that nothing is left; and if this does not overcome you, or the wound becomes hot, then treat the patient as required; and if these are malignant abscesses, hurry and cauterize until the blood ceases to flow and all flesh is removed, then apply an astringent and wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the nose bleeds and moisture reaches the palate, know that it is healing; and if the moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is cartilage in the bone above, preventing the instruments from cutting: then you must insert a piece of linen thread, slightly thicker, knotted at one end, with a space of about an inch or less between each knot; have the patient place the head of the nose on the thread to its fullest extent and draw it out by pulling gently until it emerges through the nostril into the mouth; children in schools often do this, and it is a simple thing for those who wish to perform it; then hold one end that comes through the nostril with one hand, and the other end that emerges from the mouth with the other hand, and know each extremity by feeling along the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this so that you know the night has corrupted that flesh, then draw out the son, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and replace it back into the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments have eroded all remaining flesh; and then insert a cane of lead for some days until it is healed, and if there's need for drying medicines, use them; and that's the shape of the instrument to purge the head, through which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be made of silver or copper, resembling an open lamp, like a pipe, and it also conducts thus; and if you wish, make a closed pipe, and let the instrument be full to purge the head; and hold one handle on the head to keep it steady when heating oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh above the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Often a disease arises on the head of the nose called 'telul', and it grows and becomes large over time, becoming an unsightly thing to behold; therefore, you must cut it out at the beginning, and remove it entirely, then apply either a cauterizing agent or burning medicine; if one waits too long until it is large, take heed if it is hard, of dark color, and devoid of feeling: do not touch it with iron, for it is an abscess that has developed, because when one cuts into it, great harm comes to the patient; if the abscess is soft to the touch, not of a dark hue, and you see that it can be wholly cut out, then empty the patient's bowels and cut it without fear, cleansing the wound with drying and constrictive agents.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when the operation of continuing into one of these cartilaginous works yields little benefit, except for some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary then that when this happens to anyone, consider if the wound is fresh and has all its blood; and then join the two lips in a suture, then treat it until it heals; and if the lips are already separated on both sides, you must remove all the parts of their heart until they bleed, then bring together the two lips in a suture, hold them, and apply powder of dragon's blood and ground incense over the powders; place upon the powders a piece of strong emplastrum or another sealing plaster, and leave it until it scars by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of sewing is such that you unite the edges: either with needles, as we have said for suturing the abdomen; or with thread, as I have made you aware.
des apostemes des levres	Of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Skilled men find within the lips hard abscesses, similar to grains of wheat, both small and large; you must then turn back the lip, make an incision over each one, take hold with forceps, and cut into its every part; afterwards fill the place with powdered vitriol until the blood is stanched; later clean it easily, and treat the area with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	On the flesh of the gums.
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a fleshy growth arises on the gums, which the ancients call 'albulus'; you must grasp it with forceps, cut into its base and let the pus or blood flow out; then apply ground vitriol or other drying and cauterising powders to the wound; if this flesh returns after incision - as it often does - remove it a second time and cauterise: it will not return after the cautery; these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	Of sores.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes hard crusts are found at the top of teeth inside the mouth between the gums which are ugly and rough, sometimes also the teeth go black or yellow-green with putrefaction reaching the gum so that the tooth stinks; you must seat the patient in your lap and hold his head steady with one hand while with the other you extract these crusts from between his teeth - all of them - as well as the decayed parts, whether they are dark green or yellow or any other colour until no trace remains. And do this again on the second day if necessary, and also on the third so that everything is removed; know that for cleaning teeth various tools must be used depending upon what work needs to be done since scrapers which clean the outside of the tooth have a different shape from those that reach inside it; these shapes and others should all be available.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you delay in extracting it as much as you can, because this should not be done; for it is a very important substance until such time as one has no excuse to remove it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is forced to extract (the tooth), you must be certain of which tooth is causing pain.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the pain troubles the patient, and they believe it is in a healthy tooth, leading to the extraction of a good tooth; yet the pain does not subside because the bad one remains, as we have seen with these sinners; and when you are certain which tooth is causing pain, you must scrape around the tooth entirely with a strong spatula to protect the gum on all sides; then hold it in your two hands or with subtle pincers at the first pit and cavity, until it is well loosened, then firmly grip the pincers; and have the patient's head resting healthily between your knees, holding it steady so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it cannot be removed, use one of these instruments and gently insert them on each side, moving it as you did initially.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	If the tooth is perforated and worn down, you must fill it with small pieces of cloth where there are holes; then carefully extract it with forceps, ensuring it does not break during extraction; it requires great skill to work around the gum to remove the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	Be careful not to break the tooth, leaving a part of it behind, as this will cause the patient even greater pain due to the remaining root.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	Beware of not doing as the ignorant surgeons do, who in their haste and boldness sometimes break the jaw, and fail to address what we have described; they sometimes cause severe illness due to remaining roots or a broken jaw, as we have often seen; once the tooth is removed, clean the area with wine or oil and silk; if there is bleeding, fill the space with crushed vitriol; and if this does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the instruments, with which you first loosen the teeth, should have long points and thick handles so that they do not bend when you pull the tooth. These are the tools needed:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should have thick shafts so that they do not bend when pulling, and be well-made iron with teeth to grip the tooth.
de la racine des dens	From the root of the teeth.
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains during extraction, you must place moist cotton soaked in butter over the socket for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the socket softens, you can insert pincers called "algefri", which look like a stork's beak; their shape is that of a file with teeth inside, this is how they should be made:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not wish to come out with all these tongs, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root, and place the instrument which is called 'althali', that is to say, a scalpel, of which this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root comes out by this means, it is good; if not, assist with all the instruments, of which the forms are as follows:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one requires assistance with this instrument, which has two blades, of which the form is as follows:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron instruments that are positioned at the root of the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large tongs, of which the form is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this instrument be strong enough so that it cannot break; and know that there are many dental instruments, along with other types of tools which aren't included here; and wise master craftsmen find their own tools by themselves according to the jobs they do and the illnesses they treat, because there are such diverse diseases that ancient authors did not teach any instrument for them; if you don't break the skull or the other bones where it could be damaged, then look for the instruments which I have said suit you, and help yourself with gestures, of which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	They should be thick and secure enough to hold the bone so that it doesn't escape, but can still be held and removed; then restore the place with medicines appropriate for this purpose, and if there is rot in the bone, and it is small, then remove all of these instruments.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not according to their natural form, and they are ugly, especially in virgin women, you must know if the tooth is newly born after another one, and it is not in its right place, and cannot be treated or filed: then extract it; and if it is connected with a tooth, take this instrument which has the following shape, similar to a small beak, and made of iron sharpened at the end.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And strike it several times with a hammer during the day for its hardness, and so that you do not move other teeth, and if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it with this kind of rasp whose shape resembles this.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	which is also similar to the rasp used for making needles; and file the tooth several times during the day lightly, so that it does not move until you finish filing completely with any kind of small rasp, and if the tooth is too sharp and hurts the tongue, then you must file its roughness enough to make it even, so that it doesn't hurt the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	When teeth loosen
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When front teeth loosen due to impact or fall, and the patient cannot bite down without them falling out, even after treatment with constricting medicines which is ineffective, they must be restrained with a gold wire, as silver wire turns green and decays but gold does not change; and let the wire be neither too thin nor too thick according to the space between the teeth; and if you wish to straighten the teeth, take the wire and pass it double through two healthy teeth, then place the loose tooth or teeth between them until you have reached safely to a sound tooth on the other side; then repeat the covering process back to where you started, drawing your hand carefully and gently so as not to move anything, and let your binding be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cut the gums of the thread with a pair of pliers, and gather them together, and fasten them between the healthy tooth and the tongue, placing it so that it does not wound the tongue; then leave it thus tightly bound as long as it can remain, and if it loosens or the thread breaks, tighten it with another thread; if it remains in place and serves its purpose, this is the method for fixing two healthy teeth, and two loose ones, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when a tooth falls out, one places it back in its position, fresh for fresh, as we have said; and let no one who is not wise and skilled be involved, and sometimes the shape of a tooth is made from cow bone, and placed where the gap is, and tightened as we have described, and it remains thus serving for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cut loose the tongue's bond
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	This ligament sometimes arises beneath the tongue by nature, or through an accident of a healed wound; and the operations are such that you open the patient's mouth, have their head in your lap, and lift up their tongue; then cut loose the broad nervous ligament, so that the tongue is released from its bond, and if there is hardness or knot, which comes suddenly after a wound, thrust in the hook and cut widely this ligament; take care that the incision is not too deep, for the artery beneath; and when you have done this, wash the place with rose water and egg white, or cold water, then put under the tongue a tent of linen; and the patient must hold each night so that the wound cannot heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	If bleeding occurs, apply crushed vitriol to the site immediately. If blood continues to flow, cauterize with a small-spot cautery, which is suitable for this purpose; then treat it further until it heals completely.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you notice it becomes discolored to green or black and hard, so the patient does not feel it, do not touch as this is cancer. If there is a decline towards whitening and moisture present, incise with an lancet and open it up gently with a slender spatula; then drain from one end to another until all matter has been released. When blood flow occurs during your procedure, apply ground vitriol until the bleeding stops completely before returning to your task so as not leave any remainder within afterwards. Finally treat this area separately using other treatments until healed thoroughly thereafter.
des apostemes de la gorge	abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes abscesses form inside the throat called "godath," which are properly known as the two tonsils; and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, if they do not heal, take care: if it is a hard abscess with a small base and light color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for the discharge of blood; but leave it until it matures, then you can remove it, or it will break open on its own; and if it is white with clear roots, prepare your instruments to cut, but first check whether the abscess has cooled down and is soothed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, and ses chiés soit en ton sain, 
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	When you press the tongue against all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the lancet and fix it in the almond, and pull it upwards as much as you can; and draw out any threads with it, then cover the instrument, of which this is the shape, that seems like a forceps; and nonetheless its heads are bent, and one against the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this instrument ready, then cover it with the tongs, of which this is the shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And let it be sharp on one side and blunt on the other; and when you have covered one of the almonds, then cover the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with warm water, and water mixed with alum, and if blood flow occurs, then gargle the patient with water or with boiled pomegranate rinds, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding is stopped; then treat it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses occur in the throat besides the two almonds, so treat them likewise as you would the two almonds.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that had formed inside her throat, specifically a small abscess; it had nearly closed off her entire throat, so the woman could not breathe through the blocked passageway, nor could she eat or drink, and she would have died if she remained like this for even one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	The abscess was so swollen that it had burst, with two streams of pus escaping through the nostrils.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I then quickly grabbed hold and inserted a spike into one nostril, forcing it through, and extracted a large piece of bowel through the other nostril; I pushed this piece back in through the other nasal passage, opened up her mouth, and pressed on her tongue; after that, I inserted the spike into the abscess and cut away part of it, removing only a small amount of blood; thus, the throat's passageway was unblocked for the woman, who could now drink water and then wine, and ceased not to drain this abscess over an extended period; the abscess would heal and fill the space I had emptied until it became very large again; at that point, I cauterized it within her throat: thus halting its growth. And so she remained, without further increase in size or severity of symptoms. I then left these parts behind, trusting God to take care of the patient from there on out.
de l’uve	Of the eye.
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the membrane descends to the eye, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called a "perpendicular"; if it is below, thick, and round, it is called an "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the sore abscesses are alleviated, and it is subtle, then you must cut it; and if it is a round mass and not elongated, and it is bloody or of false colour or black, then you should avoid incising it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is necessary, therefore, when you see it according to the manner I have described, regarding its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit facing the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument which we previously mentioned; then insert the needle into the eye, draw it down, and cut it using one of two instruments I mentioned for the incision of almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must not cut away any more flesh than the superfluity that lies beyond nature's boundary; for if you cut more, it will cause harm to the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient fears cutting, you must employ an engine for cauterization to ease their fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is quicksilver.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And have the patient put their head in your lap, then press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and seal it with hot quicksilver, but not too thick or too thin; and use this tool for its purpose, of which the form is thus:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; 
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or cauterization; if it is cured by fumigation according to this method, take calmament and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and vervain and similar herbs, and mix all or some of them in one pot, add oil, and boil it; the pot should be well glazed with strong clay, and inside the pot have one instrument shaped like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be made of silver or copper, and one end of the instrument is inserted into the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the eye through the nose, until the eye becomes withered; then repeat this often, until the eye dries up, and make sure you do not perform this at the beginning of the occurrence of a hot abscess, as many things may happen; and do not carry out this procedure when the hot abscess is declining.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put a piece of egg shell inside the patient's mouth so that it does not get too hot; for the eggshell will not let the vapour harm the mouth, and it is a good remedy together with safety.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Often something sticks in the throat - a fish bone or some object; therefore, you must take out what you can see, and press the tongue under sunlight towards the entire instrument so that you may observe movement of the object; and for that which does not appear to you and remains stuck in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach; perhaps in this way the object will come out with the vomiting; or let the patient swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel (umbilical cord), or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread; and tie to the sponge a thread, then let it be swallowed; when it reaches the place, it will stick out, and then you can pull it out; if it does not come out by what we have said, take an instrument made of lead in this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instruments be curved at the tip so that they can more easily enter the throat, and keep the head raised upwards; guard against touching the epiglottis, lest it swell, nor push any bone inside; better that the patient pushes the instrument himself, for he knows best where the problem is located; if you insert it down, or pull it out through his mouth, do so gently with equal force all over, until it is completely removed.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the phlegm of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	In no case is phlegm medicinal, as I said in the division of cures; and when it does not benefit, then examine the patient's throat under sunlight, then press their tongue with an instrument that I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the leech, draw it out with a very small hook, or use delicate forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, take a hair from the tail of a horse, insert it into the patient's throat, then attach a hot iron to the end of the hair, and repeat this frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient has water retention all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full glass of cold water and open the patient's mouth, pour it in so they swallow it, and keep hold of them by their hand frequently; as soon as the leech feels the water, it will fall out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not fall out as we have said, then smoke the patient with asafetida, using the instrument I mentioned for fumigating the eye; do this many times, for it will fall without delay.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of the fumigation is such that you take a pot with visible coals, and cover it with a perforated lid in the middle, and place the end of the instrument through this hole; then throw your fumigation into it, and let the patient put the head of the cane in their mouth, closing the mouth so that no smoke escapes but goes down to the lungs; and the lungs will now discharge phlegm, and if they do not discharge it, restart the fumigation several times; and let the patient feel thirsty, eating salty things and similar, drinking no water; then there is a need for them to cough up phlegm through this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument with which we extract phlegm is such that when it can be seen, it resembles bent tongs to insert into the throat; and has a resemblance to a bird's beak, and has the roughness of a file, so that what it grasps, it cannot let go; and see here its form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are many types of abscesses according to what memory brings forth in this book from one and another, they vary in perforation and size; there are two kinds one is by its very appearance itself, and because of moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second kind is according to their location in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and abscesses in fleshy places are different from those that come to joints, and each has its own treatment.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And one must not pierce abscesses when the bowels are dead according to their completion; and for those which need piercing when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses develop near joints, and one leaves it until it rots all around, perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which is why this causes contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	When the abscess is located near the main limb, and if you delay perforating it until it dies, it will harm the principal limb; when it is near the foundation, pierce it before it dies; and you must not puncture an abscess created without digestion being complete, unless that which is near the foundation rots entirely, forms a fistula, and cannot heal for a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you must know the time for perforating and draining the dead abscess according to its development, which is when the pain subsides, the fever breaks, and there is a reduction in pain, redness, swelling, and tenderness of the head of the abscess, as well as other signs; and you should make an incision at the lowest point of the abscess where it appears raised, and this perforation must be along the length of the body, but if the abscess is on the hands or feet, near a joint, nerve, or artery, then in all equal places with no curvature.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those that bend, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when the abscess is in fleshy tissue, it is better that you allow the perforation to remain until it is confirmed as healed by complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before that, the body of the poison would be elongated and full of much dirt; and by chance, the lips may harden and the depth of it will close up.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And for any abscess that is pierced according to the breadth of the body, according to what the member requires.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you must make small abscesses with small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many incisions according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and for such abscesses where it is necessary to cut into the heart, one should do so when it becomes like a piece of cloth, and has softened, then you must act as with boils: and there are some that have three angles, and others which are cut like myrtle leaves, like abscesses from carbuncles; and those where one makes a circular incision, other incisions, and similar cuttings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; 
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the spirits sometimes twitch with the exit of the bowels, which by chance may kill the patient, and you won't realize it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, dry the wound, and observe if the abscess wound is small; and if it's a full-blown sore, apply linen or old cotton threads; and if it's a large abscess with many perforations, you must insert a thread into each so that they come together; and if you've cut away part of the skin around the abscess, fill it with old cotton or shaved flax cloth without moisture, and bind it until the third day; then remove it, and clean it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if there is bleeding during your procedure, bring cold and light water, dampen the cloths, and place them on the bleeding area multiple times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the bleeding persists, apply compresses and ointment, and use the powders I mentioned earlier in this book, on different areas as required. If it is winter and the area or abscess is very sensitive, you should put warm tents and cloths dampened with wine and oil; if it is summer and the area is fleshy, use cloths dampened with water and oil, or cold wine and oil, for up to three days, as we have said; then uncover the abscess, wipe it, and treat it appropriately until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this must be known universally for treating abscesses: now I have told you how one should proceed to treat abscesses, and here is the chapter (on that).
des soros	abscesses
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where the skull of the head is soft come small abscesses, and they are like cloth, similar to the inside of a hen's egg, and there are many such things (abscesses).
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	Some are fatty and such that they have moisture like pus; and of such there are those which are hard and stony to cut into, and there is no doubt if the arteries do not act contrary (to treatment).
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of cutting is such that you must test every instrument which is called an "entromissoire", from which its form comes afterwards, what thing it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if there is moisture present, they do so above the long bone.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is evacuated, thoroughly scrape away without leaving any skin where this moisture was present, for it will return if nothing is left behind; then apply a dressing of cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, if available; if not, use water and salt, pack the wound, and leave it until the next day; these procedures will expel whatever remains from the night before.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, resume the cotton dressing as before on the second day, and on the third, until you know for sure that nothing remains from the night before; then treat the wound with an appropriate ointment, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds in fatty tissue, incise it in this manner, from the long bone; insert your fingers, and scrape out all the pus, and apply all your treatment to drawing out the core where it lies; but if an artery opposes you, then do as I told you before.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also of the abscess if it is full, and of cutting and treating as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the incision on the full abscess and moisture is lighter, as they have little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if for some of these abscesses or head where there is no moisture, and in this case the abscess which I opened from an old woman's head; and found it like a hard stone, rough and white, and could not be crushed; and if one were to cut into it, they would also cause as much injury as with a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming from the head, especially those which appear on children's heads and at the roots of ears, they should always be opened as low as possible so that pus may flow out; and treat them as is needed.
des scrophules	scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Often these abscesses occur on the neck, and beneath the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes elsewhere on the body, and they are numerous, and connected to each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly within its own compartment, just like the brain and head abscesses we have mentioned, and there are many similar cases of these scrofulas.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not want to obey the rules of health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	So for those that you see are of a good nature when touching them, and appear similar in color to the body, and move with each movement yet are not near the neck veins or arteries nor the passageway, and it is not deep; then you must cut it from above, and peel off its skin on all sides, and extend the two lips of the heart as needed, just like we have said for head abscesses; remove it piece by piece, and be sure that you do not cut any nerves or veins, and ensure your spatula is blunt and unsharpened so the contents don't escape, and don't dig too deeply lest you cut something you mustn't.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery and it will not stop operating, so put in the wound ground glass, or certain powders that stanch blood, and hold the wound; and leave it until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and it begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the blood is staunched, then return to your work until you complete it; then look with your right index finger if there remains any small scrofulae, so cut and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large wound in the root of the scrofula, then it must not be cut at its root, but tied with a strong double thread, and left to drop by itself without harm; then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then heal it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you remove the entire scrofula, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound, and suture them now, given that there has been no delay in treating the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	you must proceed to cut the root of it, and draw out the humors, and suture it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For those scrofula that have excess tissue, pierce where it is soft and putrefying; and pierce it in the same way as mentioned before, depending on its type, then apply dressings with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, treat it with an ointment that promotes flesh growth until it heals.
de squinance	of dislocation
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke of the incision in the throat; but I have never seen it performed in our land, and this is a record of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those with dislocation, it is necessary to ensure that the incision in the throat, known as the epiglottis, is avoided; and one should not perform aid in this way, because all the veins and pores of the patient are vulnerable to those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in both tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the channel of the pore, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to escape the destruction that comes from suffocation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is necessary, therefore, when we wish to split the epiglottis, that we split it below three circles or four with a small transverse slit between two circles or according to the quantity of the incision of the surface, not in the cartilage; and these are suitable for the section of the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long from within.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is afraid, one must extend the skin of the throat throughout, then split the heart until it reaches the windpipe; and remove the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut the surface as we have said; and it is proven by the section of the breath of the windpipe that it should be through the place which is broken, and by the fault of the voice; and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed that one suspects strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound from the heart, and cut it completely without the cartilage; then administer medicines that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Al-Bukhari states that one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dying, and breathing becomes impossible.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then make an incision on the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe, and they will be saved from death; for this reason, the ancients advised leaving the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three or four days. Then they would order to stitch up the wound and treat it until it was healed; I shall tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a damsel took a knife and plunged it into her throat, severing part of the windpipe; I was called to treat her, but she appeared dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found blood flowing from it; I knew she had not cut a vein or damaged her lungs, but air was escaping through the injury.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened to sew up the wound and treated it until it was healed; other than her being hoarse, the damsel suffered no further harm and returned to full health; thus do I say that in epiglottis injuries there is no need for fear.
de la grosse gorge	Of the swollen throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called "gorge hernia," and it's a large abscess with a yellowish colour; it is quite common in women; and occurs in two ways: naturally or accidentally; where there are no internal injuries.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	The accident occurs in two ways, one resembling our fat tissue, and the other resembles an abscess originating from an artery; and there is fear involved, and cauterization with fire should not be done except in small cases, examine and probe thoroughly: if you find it similar to our fatty tissue, and unable to access any veins, then cut it like we cut a nail, remove its entire covering if necessary; probe carefully, and treat as required until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	Des nous
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to treat the shoulder, that you first examine and inquire about all the instrument which is called an 'entromissoire', according to how its form will appear in the following chapter.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the way of inquiring about new abscesses is that you take hold of the moistest part which you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers back and forth until you know the instrument has pierced the core, then do so according to the size of the abscess; then withdraw the entromissoire, taking care not to damage it.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If running moisture is present, regardless of its colour, treat it as I have said for other abscesses; and if after the entromissoire there is no moisture, know that it is fatty, so cut it in a cross shape, take pincers to pull on it gently from each side, and use the shoulder blade where it lies to scrape it healthy with the entromissoire; and if you cannot make it healthy, then remove it by pieces until nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if anything remains there, the pus returns many times; and if a little bit is left behind, and it causes you grief, then fill the wound with some sharp corrosive powders, constrict the wound, and place warm abscess-soothing substances on it, cure it with other cures until it heals; and if the pus is large, cut the two lips of the wound, and cure it with something that produces flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the throbbing vein opposes you or something else hastes you, apply crushed vitriol to it, and leave it there for two or three days until the wound becomes gangrenous, and halts the boiling of blood; then return to cut away what remains from last night.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the shapes of the insertion instruments, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are three squares called "albaret", and one called "breb"; and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, for probing abscesses or fistulas; also like needles that we use to sew up sores, they are made of yellow brass, iron, or silver, yet those which are yellow are better, and more tried-and-true black lead is used to probe the curves of a fistula; and these come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of the uncinas are very diverse, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and there are uncinas with two curves in three different ways; and there are uncinas with three curves, also in three different ways; and there are uncinas with two curves, and some with only one curve, again in three different ways; and all these types are necessary for their purpose.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these instruments are sharp for cutting purposes and there are some that only cut on one side, which we use to slice open skin without damaging the nerves; the introduction of this instrument is carefully done in many places so as not to alarm the patient when opening abscesses; they come in three different sizes: large, small, and medium, as you can see here; it should never be used on fleshy areas such as legs, arms, breasts, or similar places; sometimes a smaller variation of this instrument is made resembling skin-scrapers for staunching blood, according to the following shape.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is placed back into position to heal by compression of the veins, arteries, and sometimes according to this large form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to deteriorate, making them resemble female breasts; they remain unsightly and swollen, and if one wishes to treat them, it is necessary to follow this procedure from point b. to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	scrape away the fat, treat the wound with medicated flesh-building ointment, then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches, treating it until it is healed; and if the breast sags downwards, softened by its size as happens in women, make an incision dividing it into two lobes above, through two similar clefts; so that one is attached to the other at the end of each, such that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from point b. to g.; then scrape away the skin which lies between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitches and powders, and what is necessary for treatment, until it is healed; if it is not healed or the incision is not completely made, because of patient reluctance to rest, or due to loss of blood, you must pack the wound with wet cotton in corrosive ointment; leave this in place until it discharges any remaining fat tissue, then treat it until it is fully healed.
des apostemes des asselles	Of abscesses under the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses which come from under the armpits are like hard scrofulae when they have sides, and if there is moisture contained within them.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those which contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b. to line g.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the matter within the abscess is evacuated, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton, and dress it gently until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles a scrofula, treat it as we have said for scrofulae incisions; and if the wound is deep, apply cauterization as mentioned before.
de la routure de l’artere	From the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is ruptured, and the skin above it is welded together, abscesses often form, and similarly, the vein becomes swollen and abscessed; one recognizes this for the artery when the abscess runs lengthwise perfectly; and if you feel it with your fingers, there will be a constriction; and where it belongs to the vein, its prominence appears round; and it is foolishness to cut into this abscess, especially when it lies beneath the axilla and breast, or neck and other places, and is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	One must therefore avoid the iron cure, and in that which is at the head one should also avoid it, and in that of arterial swelling, make an incision above the skin lengthwise; then cut open the wound with scissors, and carefully separate the artery from its membranes until it is exposed; then insert a needle underneath it, pierce through to the other side, and secure the artery with double thread at two points, according to what I have taught you for the extraction of the two arteries in the temples; then seal up the area between the two ligatures with an intrument so that blood which is there may flow out, and open up the abscess; then apply a cure made from raw bow gut so as to allow the ligature to fall off; finally treat the place where the abscess was until it heals; and if the abscess is caused by cutting of the vein, one must hold with his hand whatever can be held of the abscess and all the skin around it, then insert a needle underneath what you have in your hand, piercing through, and having double thread, so that you draw it out from the other side; next secure the abscess as I told you, by ligatures on either end of two sections of thread; and if you fear that this will not hold, you reinsert another needle with all the thread underneath the entire abscess to the incision of the first needle, then tighten the threads in four places; then cut open the abscess so that its superfluities flow out, after which clean the core of the excess, leaving what is tied; then apply a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil, finally treat it with bandages and ointments until healed.
des apostemes des ners	Of abscesses of nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Likewise abscesses come to the arteries and veins, abscesses come to the nerves when they are torn, or due to excessive heavy labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And these occur more frequently in the shoulders and hands and everywhere there are joints, and this is a serious abscess, and its color resembles that of the body, and it appears in various places without pain; when one grasps it firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not on the surface of the body but below the heart; it moves well from all sides, neither forward nor backward, neither above nor below, and the abscess which is in joints should not be cut with iron: perhaps contraction would occur; and that which is on the head or forehead, one must open with a spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, hold it with forceps and cut it at its root; and if it is large, suspend it with a hook, peel it back, then remove it and sew up the wound, treating it until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	large boils hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Sometimes they appear on the belly and nowhere else; it is a disease called "fungus" due to its resemblance to mushrooms, with subtle roots and large heads; there are small ones and very large ones; I saw a man who had two on his stomach that looked more like fungi than anything else; there was no difference in appearance, they were white, with thin roots, finely clefted, from which moisture ran.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them and found in one XVIII ounces weighing, and in the other VI З., and for the incisions you must consider if the patient is moist, and the color of the artel is white and moist from subtle roots; so cut it with a broad spatule, and have fire cautery ready.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For cutting can often result in too much blood loss, and if you faint from it, hasten to cauterize immediately; and if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the iron incision, take a well-made thread of lead and bind the artel as we have said, leaving it for two days; then restrain it, and do not cease tightening the lead thread until you cut through the artel, doing so without effort; and if the roots are large, be afraid to cut especially for the belly, but you can well cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not grow back; then treat the wound, and take care not to cut the thelul which is of a reddish color and poor quality with milky regard.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an aggravated abscess, and I shall come to the treatment of cancer afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	When it rages with hunger.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the abscess arises from cauterizing a wound or cracking of the skin, and it is on the abdomen along with some ulcers, as can happen in other injuries, or due to blood flowing from veins or arteries according to what has been described before, or due to wind; and if it originates from a skin lesion and from an intestinal ulcer, its color resembles that of the body, being a mild sensation without pain, and appearing through various openings.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to an intestinal discharge, then it becomes more varied: when pressed by two fingers it retracts and reappears, or perhaps it stretches out, becoming enlarged at the entrance of the bath and after heavy labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a minor issue, and it shows clearly when you press it with your hand, as it does not restrict movement; but if it is because of blood, then these signs appear: the abscess is large and hard, and is fixed according to its size; however, if it is caused by wind [gas], then it feels soft to touch, and in that case, you must consider whether it appears due to arterial or venous blood, or to flatulence.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	You should leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For he has doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if it appears to be due to the intestine or anus, you should instruct the patient to hold their breath and lie down straight; then bleed all around the wound; then have them often rest their hands over the place you have marked with your finger; go around the area that is twice as big as your palm; extend half of the abscess above your large thumb; tie it firmly with a strong thread or thick silk cord, ensuring the knot is on top; operate on the extended half of the abscess above the knot and insert your index finger, searching for the intestine; if you find it caught in the knot, untie it and push the intestine out of the abdomen; if you find the anus, grasp it with your thumb and cut off any excess; if the artery or vein causes trouble, carefully go around them, then return to your work and take two needles, insert two strong threads through them, and put the two needles into what you have pierced in a cross shape; stretch the abscess over the needles in four places, and if it tears, remove the needles and let the place rot until the dead flesh falls off by itself or cut away the dead flesh when it has become soft and rotten; then treat the wound as we have said; drain any blood or moisture you find, then treat the area accordingly, and close up the abscess.
dou chancre	Of cancer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have mentioned in the division the similarities of cancer, and how it should be treated with medicines, and how one must avoid iron treatment; now we speak of cancer inflamed within the marrow, and great caution is required for its cure, ancient physicians said that when a cancer is in a place where one can scrape it away as with cancers on breasts, thighs, or similar places, one must remove all of it at the beginning; but if it has grown large and old, do not approach it, for I have never been able to cure anyone from this condition. No-one before me has ever cured it either.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment, when it is in a place where one can remove it as we have said, involves purging the patient once with black bile; then bleed them if they show signs of excess flesh, after that rest the patient well before performing the operation; cut out your ounces or cancer and shave the head from every part, removing all of it completely without leaving anything behind. Allow blood to flow freely until it stops, press down on the wound with your hand or an object to stop bleeding, if blood still flows against the incision in the artery or vein cauterize the area until the bleeding has stopped; then treat them again until they are healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already mentioned in the division the appearances of dropsy, and how the accumulation of water is formed, and the signs of each appearance, and the cure that is done with medicine, and those cured by iron; so only these two types are written about; and one should not use iron for these two: namely tympanites and ascites, as they are deadly conditions; therefore when you treat this type of dropsy called 'eclites' with medicines, and if the cure does not help, consider whether the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as constipation and similar things; do not use iron, as there is doubt; and if you see that the patient is strong and healthy, and he only has dropsy without other illnesses, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you should proceed like this: lift the patient upright in your hands, and have assistants press on his belly by pushing the water to the lowest part of the abdomen, then take a sharp-edged spatula in this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	Et let it be divided into two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	A point, and yet it must not be so deep that it can reach the intestine when inserted, nor should it cause injury; then observe if the dropsy is caused by issues with the intestines: you must cut above the belly, three fingers directly below the navel; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, your incision should be on the left side of the belly, three fingers down; and if it's for the spleen, it should be on the right. The patient should not lie over the incision so that excess fluid doesn't flow there; then pierce through all the skin with this instrument, insert it, and lift your hand to take out the spatoulme between the skin and the fascia like when skinning an animal, at a quantity of one nail or so around; then pierce the fascia until the spatoulme reaches the empty space, and that is where water lies, draw it out forcefully, and insert this instrument which has such form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Et it resembles a fine silver cane, and is made of light copper or bronze, and on the underside part there is I small hole; and at one side, III holes; and II on the other side, and I more; and the head is shaped like a feather, and this is the form of the incision for which writers describe as cutting a feather:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	au chief desus est li alemele, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it descends now upon the instrument; empty half or a third part, because if you empty more than necessary at this time, perhaps the patient will die due to their spirit's resolution from the medicine, or they may fall unconscious, or approach death; but empty according to its quantity of strength, and according to what the dispositions of the patient’s strength signify, and his pulses; then draw out the instrument and retain water, and it is retained now for the heart which stops up the hole that is above the skin, of which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then reintroduce the instrument the other day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and drain a small quantity of water; do this for one day only, and take care not to dry out so much as to leave but one drop of water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt the patient's condition, and they have a lot of water in their body, cure them with burial or hot sand, and through excessive sweating or baths and exposure to the sun, and by abstaining from drink; and treat them with drying medicines until they are healed, cauterize their stomach, liver, and spleen after drawing out the water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Of the stopping of the penis.
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	There are times when children are born without an opening in the penis, or with a small one, or it is not in its correct position.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary to pierce it sometimes with a very fine spatula in this way...
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place the subtle white lead plug in the hole and leave it bound for three or four days and when he wants to urinate remove the plug so that he can urinate and then replace it; perhaps it is not needed at all as the urine which flows out will not allow the fistula.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those in whom the fistula is small will be treated with the white lead plug as we have said and this will widen it.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the fistula in its proper place are unfortunate for no one is born with it at the head of his penis and thus he cannot urinate unless he lifts up his penis; nor can he copulate because the matter cannot reach the uterus, this is an evil condition.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of treatment is such that the patient often lies on their back, then extend the head of the penis and the testicles as much as a feather's length so that the opening faces upward in the middle, just as it should; and beware of bleeding which may occur many times, and if it does happen, stop it with what stops blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	Pustules on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times this albath comes to the penis, and it is an appearance of ugly flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; you must take them with a subtle hook, cut them all out, clean them, then apply moist cotton with Egyptian ointment; then treat with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, of a foul colour and stinking, then you must apply a cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cauterized it, and if the ulcer is on a limb, with part of it under the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the part that is inside; and when it is healed, treat what is on the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it all together, the head of the limb is not secured so that it is not pierced, and blackness and corruption occur inside the limb and in the joint; therefore, you must cut away all that is black and corrupt, then apply a plaster made of honey and flour from bark, of pomegranates and figs, and treat with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar caustic according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauteries aid in two conditions together: that is, for bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, you must insert into the penis a plank of fir wood, and let the patient urinate through it; and when the skin is peeled at the tip of the penis which happens to those who are not circumcised, or due to a wound or abscess, then you must remove the skin with a sharp instrument so that the ligaments are loosened, and the head of the penis is freed from all sides; and if this is a serious matter to discern for oneself, then you must remove the skin with a spatula in a pouch at the tip of the penis and skin; then separate carefully between them, and apply a fine linen cloth moistened in cold water, so that it does not dry out again.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision.
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not like the separation of continuity as other wounds are; nevertheless, when we perform this work of our own will and specifically on children, it is necessary that we do our best work and the most careful for their well-being.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcising their children, for they do not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I have seen most masters and surgeons perform circumcisions around the first of the month, at midday, and with only one lancet; if it is cold there are two moons, and sometimes they cut the upper one and leave the lower.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or la recovient coper, and is li dolor double, and a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; and a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, and corront l’uevre, and maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification and je l’ai veut.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le lien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, and repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge and souffle ou keur, and la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet and au doit indice, and cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment and trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc and poc, car c’est li muedres; and met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin and fres, and lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, and le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of forceps for cleansing is as follows: the two handles are turned and made sharp, and the handles should be as long as the equal length of the arm.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The mistake in the cleansing process occurs when the core within escapes through the incision; therefore, you must extend it to your nail, otherwise the skin will form an abscess; and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, then use pliers, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they exceed three days, and what is beneath the stick has swollen, you should leave it until the hot abscesses are calmed, then gently peel it; cut as much as you can move, but be careful of the part of the stick, this will do no harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure therefore the place of things suddenly wounded with powder, as we have said in the treatise on powders, and if it breaks from the heart beyond measure, and it rises above, then it will not harm; cure it therefore, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	where there is retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to the obstruction of a stone, or frozen blood, or bowel, or newborn child, or similar things, as we have said in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is caused by a stone stuck at the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over their knees; their feet should be placed on their back, and they should extend their belly from above the back, restraining their testicles as much as possible; thus, the neck of the bladder is forced to express the stone upwards, allowing the urine to flow out; if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then an extraction must be performed using all the instruments called "syringe", which are made of fine silver like bird feathers; the tube should be one palm long and half a palm wide, and very thin at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, and tie a double thread to the top of a small bag made of wool or cotton; et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue stick the top of the bag into the syringe; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne and trim the excess wool; et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue then insert it up to the tip of the syringe, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef coat the syringe with oil or butter and egg white; et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege have the patient sit on a chair, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede lubricate the bladder and penis with moistened oil, olive oil, and warm water; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge gently insert the syringe into the penis, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge until it reaches the root of the penis, puis double la verge desus devers la boude then bend the penis upward toward the belly; puis boute la siringure avant jusc’a la vessie advance the syringe all the way up to the bladder, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide and let the patient feel it reach the empty space, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer that this is not done according to order would be because the path it takes is twisted; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc pull on the thread slowly until all of the wool bag comes out, and li urine en suit la laine and the urine follows the wool, puis l’estrai fuer then remove it fully, et fai corre l’urine allow the urine to flow; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie repeat with the syringe until the bladder is emptied, et soit aligiez li malaides and the patient feels relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	Of bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scalding or blood enters the bladder, and putrefaction has gathered there, and you wish to see urine and medicines distilled, then make the whole instrument which is called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and it has three perforations: two on one side, and one on the other, as you can see; and let its head have passages through which the medicine passes in such a way that it adequately seals the penis without addition, so that one may draw off moisture, and introduce liquid when needed; and when you wish to administer your medicines into the bladder, insert the head of the flask into the urine, and draw the other end towards you; thus will you draw out the urine through the flask, and then strongly push back the outlet tube; this will cause the liquids to enter it once more, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient shall feel them; and such is the form of the subtle clyster with which one clysters the bladder: here is a picture of it:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	Et est d'argent ou d'archaut, and it is the head higher; and below at I breast or li liiens falls; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture with which you want to enema the bladder, then tie it between the II breasts neatly with a double good thread, and heat I poc that moisture on the fire; then insert the end of the enema into the penis, then press your hand over the bladder so that all the moisture comes out nicely, until the patient feels that that moisture has arrived at the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, make I circle with it, and pierce it round about; then insert strong thread into these perforations, then assemble the circle as one assembles I dal, and put in it what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, press by hand so that the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	Of a stone.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already mentioned in the division the types of stones, and their extraction along with medicines; and I have spoken about the difference between kidney stone diseases, all its symptoms, and which stones should be operated on by cutting; as well as those in the bladder and urethra; and now I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is formed in the bladder happens more often to children, and this is a sign that the urine escapes from the bladder like water due to its subtlety; and it causes sand and gravel for the patient's penis, and they suffer pain many times, then it becomes blocked; and it damages their fundament quite frequently; and the cure is light for children up until four years of age, but very difficult in elderly men, and is an average difficulty for young adults, those who are between youth and old age; and the treatment is easier for those who have large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the bile that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it sometimes impedes trying to reach the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, raise them up and move them backwards so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes comes out from its highest point; then let the patient sit down between your prepared hands, with their hands placed below their thighs, allowing the bladder to be fully declined downwards; next probe and touch it inside; if you feel the stone in the space, now make haste to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not fall out upon being touched at all, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is an infant, or with your middle finger, if the patient is a grown young person; and insert it into their anus, probe for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, guide it to the neck of the bladder; then press upon it with your finger, and push it out onto the spot where you intend to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with their hand, and command them to stretch out the testicles with their right hand upwards, while removing the skin beneath the testicles with their left hand in the area where incisions are made; then insert the spatule gently, which is shaped like this:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	Make an incision between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the scrotum; it should be straight over the stone, with your fingers close to or touching the anus, and make the incision across so that it is wide externally, and narrow internally, according to the size of the stone, not too large; perhaps the pressure will force what is in the anus out without effort; know that there are stones with angles and edges: this makes their exit easier; and there are some which are below, resembling a nut, round, from whose outlet comes fluid.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; 
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, you must take care of it, and make a bigger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either they die, or urine returns through the wound that cannot heal; but nonetheless try to drain it, or scrape it with tongs until you remove it in pieces; and when you have finished your work, fill the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, compress it, and place a moist cloth on top soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then lay the patient back down onto their neck, and do not loosen the bindings until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you release them, thoroughly wash the wound with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of daffodil and an ointment of basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if an abscess arises in the wound and corrosions, and blood clots form in the bladder, causing a blockage that prevents urination: insert your finger into the wound, extract this blood, for if it remains, the bladder will rupture and decay; then cleanse the wound with water, eggs, and flaxseed poultices, aiding in every way you know until it is healed; and while treating him, bind his two thighs together, and apply medicines to the affected area.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small and lodged in the urethra, preventing urination: treat it as I have said before, by cutting into it multiple times; this procedure excuses the need for major surgery.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven this thus.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take iron forged with three-pronged ends fixed on one spike:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it to the iron rod below the stone, so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then insert the spike gently into the rod until it reaches the stone; turn the spike with your hand in the stone back and forth until you can pierce the stone from the other side; urine will immediately flow out, then press your hand on what remains of the stone stuck inside the rod.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is immediately crushed and comes out with the urine, then the patient will be healed from his affliction; but if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie one thread below the stone and another above it, then cut open the rod at the location of the stone between the two threads, extract the spike, untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; treat the patient until he is healed.
de la piere des femmes	Of women's stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	If a stone occurs in women and it happens occasionally, then the treatment is severe, and it is prohibited for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and secondly, there may not be an expert woman available who can diagnose by inspection, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third reason is that perhaps an expert woman cannot be found in this field; and the fourth reason is that women's stones are often deeper than men's, therefore requiring a more profound incision which is feared. If necessity arises for this, then you must take a skillful midwife who can hardly be found, and if none can be found, seek out a chaste subtle examiner; present them to an experienced physician in female matters or to a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you ask regarding the examination of the stone; carefully check if the woman is a virgin: then she must insert her finger into the fundament and search for the stone; and if she finds it, force it underneath her finger, and advise her to insert her finger where the patient hurts, and press her left hand strongly onto the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; 
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know these similarities to understand the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood defeats you, place ground vitriol on it and hold for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your work, ensuring that the stone is expelled, and have the instruments I mentioned for extracting stones from men ready to assist you in your task; and if the blood defeats you again, and this is due to a severed artery, apply the powder to the site and use tent and bandage extractions, do not repeat this procedure or try to pull out the stone, as there is danger that the patient may die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is cooled and the site is accessible, return to your work until the stone is expelled.
de hernie carnouse	of fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ruminant aqueous is nothing other than a collection of moisture or white puss, which is beneath the heart of calves and contained within the egg; and it is called 'puss', and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of an egg, so one might think that it is another egg; and this is the skin of the calf between the white puss we have mentioned; and it does not have its own name.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ruminant aqueous is due to weakness that comes to calves, and this matter is spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from a blow to the calves, and this moisture has many colours: it can be a shade that leads to yellow, or without red, or black, or white aqueous, and more; and these are the signs to recognise this collection, because if it is in the white puss we mentioned, then the abscess is round, quite long like an egg shape, but does not open the calves because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	If there is moisture in the flesh itself, the abscess forms with part of the egg, and thus one thinks it is another egg; but if the moisture is between the skin of the buttocks and the white substance underneath, it can be felt well; therefore when you wish to know the color of the moisture, test all the objects mentioned above, from which its form is derived.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the introduction, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, the patient must be bled according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then have him lie on his back, on something slightly elevated, and place many cloths beneath him; then sit on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on his right, and stretch out the leg at one of the two sides of the heart of the buttocks; then take the spatule, and cut through the skin of the buttocks from its middle down until you reach the wrist bone, making a straight incision by splitting the skin as far as the white surface underneath, and carefully remove it according to your ability; then make a large hole in this moist substance full of water, and drain all the water out, after which place your hands inside, and stretch the said moist substance upward. Do not touch the heart of the buttocks but only the moist substance; cut through it whole or into pieces especially its soft side, for if you do not carefully cut it away, moisture will return; and should an egg be found in your work, push it back to its place once you have finished treating this moist substance. Then sew together the two leaves of the heart of the buttocks with a suture, then treat the wound like any other until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then you must bind the vessels that are suspending it, fearing the flow of blood; then cut away all the suspension and extract the egg, curing it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the water is gathered in two parts together, know that these are two roots; cut away the other part as you did with the first one equally, then wipe off the blood, and place on the wound moist linen with rose oil; put over it another piece of wool soaked in wine and oil, and place both roots on top, then cover with doubled cloths, binding them all together with a bandage shaped like this:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths and fill them with wool charpie according to this shape, and they are sewn together at the waist of the breeches; one part covers the root up to the back, while the other reaches the armpit; both ends cover the two angles (joints), and the whole thing is tied around the waistband; sometimes this root is cauterized instead of cut with an iron tool, so you take a slender cautery tool, and cut through the skin covering the roots, heating it as we have said, until the white substance that contains water is exposed; then take this cautery according to its shape and perforate the surface at intervals, and scrape off the skin using this delicate hot cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And strike it in every way you can, until everything is removed; be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; know that this work is safer; and watch out for bleeding, and do like the operations of cutting; if anything opposes you, or an abscess forms, or there is bleeding or any other issue, then treat what opposes you according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	If the patient is afraid and does not want to undergo this procedure due to its horror, then make an opening as I have told you; when you are certain through the signs we have mentioned that watery discharge is present, then have the patient sit on a raised seat; pierce the abscess in the area beneath with a spatulae-like instrument across its width, and place the incision along the length of the body; make the openings wide so all the pus can flow out; then apply cotton to the site, bind it, and leave it for the rest of the liquid to drain, then treat until the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not allow the fluid to exit at the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a feather or the instrument used to draw fluid from edema patients, which has been described previously; enlarge the wound, know that the pus will return after six months or so, when it is gathered again as before, and thus the patient will pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	You should know that in the cutting of this branch, there is fear in many positions, which is why I think it's better to leave it be; and I will tell you about the work and similar things regarding abscesses.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come on the body, especially on the testicles; this happens in most cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is caused by excess acidic and bitter humors that spread to the testicles, or due to a blow; and its colour is like the colour of the body; there is no pain, but it's an extensive abscess; perhaps some abscesses are large, hard and stony, and dark in colour, sometimes coming from arterial blood or from swelling of the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is due to an arterial rupture, it is recognized by the hot abscess-like swelling when you press it with your fingers; and you must not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	He who is troubled by swelling of the veins is recognized by its appearance upon touching with the fingers, and one can easily make an incision on this resemblance, and on other parts; and it is that you open the heart of quinsy, then extend the egg upwards, and take away the white matter, and free the yolk from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already hardened with these parts born, then it is necessary that you take away the egg, and open it; and if it is hollow on the surface, or in what is inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you free all this membrane, and open it roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is at the place behind, then you must cut it all away and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Once your work is completed, cover the wound with wet wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess surrounded by a wrapping resembling a core, with the softening of testicles, and the patient turns seriously ill when he urinates; and the treatment of this disease is almost as fearful as the one before, yet we will tell you how to treat it according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then attach the scrotum suspension to your two fingers, hold tight all the vessels near the penis, and stretch them strongly; then cut with a broad spatula across these vessels until they are uncovered, then strip each side as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples; insert there a needle where you have double thread, tie it at the first place where the vein comes out, and tie again to the other end; then cut them straight in the middle according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted sinews; then treat the wound like the others with a bow-shaped tool so that no vessel cuts off nourishment for one of the testicles; because through this there is no harm done, but if all the vessels are cut it is necessary to draw out the testicles from all these vessels; so that the scrotum does not lose its nutrition due to the incision of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot be saved.
de la routure dou syfac	From a fracture of the sacrum
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The occurrences of this branch are due to the rupture that occurs in the sacrum or in the extension on the abdomen in the area of the intestines, which is why the intestines descend from that fracture towards one of the hips; and this fracture can occur either in the sacrum itself or its extensions, and it happens in these two ways for many reasons: due to impact, jumping, straining, lifting heavy loads, and similar activities. When it's a case of an extension of the sacrum, there is gradual pain over a long period of time, rather than sudden onset; and the abscess develops horizontally towards the surface because the sacrum compresses the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are that when it's a case of sectioning in the sacrum, there is sudden pain at first and the abscess appears differently just below the skin, due to the intestine protruding through the body outside the sacrum.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the tendons descend with the intestine, getting caught, which causes great pain to endure for the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments with iron [instruments], there is fear, so it must be abandoned.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	The method of operation is that you instruct the patient to retract the intestine with their hand into the wound, if it can be reached; then have them lean forward on your shoulder, between your hands, and raise their thighs; then stretch out the heart above, and cut all the skin from the length of the intestines; then insert the forceps into the incision according to what is needed to open the wound, ensuring that the esophagus can exit; then remove the fat that lies below the intestinal skin on all sides; then insert your index finger in what follows the intestine, between the white fat that is beneath the egg's skin and the second layer of fat, separating what is behind the egg and between the second layer of fat; with your right hand inside the heart of the intestines, stretch out the white fat upwards using your left hand, lifting the egg towards all of the fat at the sides; instruct the assistant to extend the egg upwards, and loosen that which was tied behind; check with your fingers for any part of the intestine entangled in the hard white fat, and if you find anything, push it downwards into the stomach; then take a needle with one thick thread made of ten threads, and insert it through the rear portion of the fat, after the intestinal skin towards the incision; cut four strands from the threads that appear above, then bring them together like a cross over each other and bind this fat, which we said was beneath the egg's skin, tightly into two parts; wrap the ends of these threads and firmly tie them in two parts so that none of the nourishing vessels can enter any openings where an abscess could develop; make another binding along the first lengthwise one as wide as two fingers of that, then after these two bindings leave a gap equal to the width of your finger beneath the heart of the intestines; after all this work done around the egg's round shape, cut into the part below the intestinal skin until blood and bile flow out just as we've described earlier; then apply damped wool soaked in oil onto the wound and fasten on the binding which was mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white skin we mentioned is cauterized after incision due to fear of excessive bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens often, and leave the bond until it breaks on its own; and if it delays in falling off, let it be soaked in warm water, and place upon it what we have mentioned, until it falls off; then treat the wound with another remedy, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	Of fleshy hernia.
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to treat it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is done like the branch which grows together, in such a way that you tie the vessels slightly below the waist; then cut it in half, and treat the abscess with what heals it, until the vessels fall off; and cure it as we have mentioned, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Une fois la rupture dans les intestins survient, comme nous l'avons dit, le lieu de la blessure apparaît ; et aucun des intestins ne descend vers les cuisses, et s'il y en a un qui descend, c'est peu, mais il se répare à chaque heure; néanmoins si cela dure trop longtemps, la plaie ou le syphac grossit au point que l'intestin descende. Cela se produit en raison de l'extension du syfac dans les intestins, comme nous l'avons dit, car il est étendu, puis le lieu de la blessure s'adoucit et s'ouvre ; et le traitement consiste en un cautère, comme nous l'avons déjà dit; parfois, cela est traité avec un fer de cette manière : le patient repose souvent sur son dos entre tes mains, tu coupes alors le lieu de la rupture enflé dans une largeur correspondant à trois doigts ; ensuite, retire le syfac qui se trouve sous la peau que tu as ensuit; prends ensuite le rait et place-le sur l'endroit apparent du syfac; presse le au fond du ventre, puis coupe les deux endroits apparents du syfac situés au dessus de la tête du rait, en coupant d'un côté puis de l'autre ; ensuite retire la tête du rait, mais ne coupe aucunement du syfac ou n’étends pas l'œuf ni autre chose, comme je te l'ai expliqué dans le traitement de la ramice des intestins; ensuite traite-le par le traitement des plaies.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the sons' hairs, clean them thoroughly and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The surgeon is compelled to act; there are no signs of healing in the wound, and cauterization here is necessary for recovery.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	from softening the skin of the calves
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often the skin of the calves is softened in certain people because the fat beneath has become soft and visible, and it needs to be removed if you wish to treat it; place the patient on their back for this procedure, then cut away the softened skin from healthy skin, bring together the two edges with a suture, and if you wish, stitch the superfluous part of the softened skin with three or four strong sutures; then cut between the sutures and treat like other wounds until it is healed.
dou chastrement	L'amputation
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Know that amputations are prohibited by our law, and for this reason I would prefer not to discuss them in this book; it is only necessary for two reasons: one being so that the doctor can answer questions when asked about it and know the cure; and the other because we often need to perform amputations on some animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, cats and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say that amputations are done in two ways: either by traction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the case of amputations done by traction, we make the animal sit in warm water until its tendons are softened and relaxed; then you grasp them with your hand so they can be removed without feeling it.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Du chastrement de taille: it is necessary that you hold the animal and press its testicles with your left hand, then tie a suspending cord around them, and cut each of them with one stroke when they are well-scrotched; leave some of the skin where the sinews and delicate sinews which are on the vessels are located; this type of castration is more deadly than that done by extraction because there may remain in this case something from the testicles so that the animal continues to feel lust, then heal the wound until it is cured.
des hermofrodites	Il sont bestes monstrueus qui ont les deux membres et ont la vertu de copuler comme l’omme et la femme, ce sont por ceu des bestes impures et abominables.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	An hermaphrodite can be of two kinds among men: one is when between the two testicles appears as if it were a woman's body part with hair and sometimes urine comes out.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And this other type [of dislocation] occurs in women, affecting the wrist like a rod and with two knobs.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	The treatment of both men and women is such that you must cut away all the damaged flesh, and treat it like other wounds; in the second type [of dislocation], where the urine escapes through the skin of the knobs, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	Of tensioning.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tensioning is damaged flesh on the natural part of the body, so ugly to look at that some women have it as large as a hand, and this requires treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You must hold the excess of tensioning with your hand or pincers, and cut it lightly; do not go too deep lest blood flow from it, then treat any other damaged flesh until it is healed; there is another type of tissue that grows at the mouth of the wound, filling it, perhaps like a cow's udder, so the ancients called this "udder disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	You must cut it off, as we have said with tendonitis, and treat it until it is healed.
de erratique	Of erratics
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic is the case when the nature of a woman's opening is not perceived or is small; and it is natural by birth, an accident due to illness, caused by scar tissue from a subtle wound or species, and is made perfect in the marriage bed, whether on her back, side, or elsewhere; it prevents conception, childbirth, and perhaps flowers [the monthly period]; knowledge of this is obtained through observation of the bath.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the obstruction is close to the surface, take it with your fingers or a rod.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If he is delicate and near the two lips, hasten to treat it thus: place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with legs spread; then stretch the two lips wide apart so that the delicate wound is exposed, and cover the stitches; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it on the site, having the woman lie with a man each day, such that it cannot heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the wound is hard and thick, you must cut it with a spatula similar to myrtle leaves.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the stitches are of new wood, suspend them with horsehair and cut it; and have on hand medicines that stop bleeding, such as dragon's blood, incense, mixed with egg white; then apply a wide piece of lead foil so that the wound cannot heal; and thus it will be long-lasting, and bring her a tent of dry linen; then treat any other injuries until she is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when a tumor develops in the womb, it should be removed in this manner, unless there are embedded abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the abscess that is embedded in the womb, one should not attempt any treatment involving fire.
des emorroides	Hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that usually bleed, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hard; we have previously mentioned their similarities to other conditions, and the signs, and now I will tell you which ones can be cured.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and hard tumors, when they are perfectly located in the anus and do not protrude, should not be treated with fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the mare's [illness], one can feel, are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	You must therefore put the woman in a cold house, then extend the ulcer with tongs, and cut it at its roots, then powder on medicine that constricts blood, such as dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then press her feet against the wall for an hour, then put her into cold water; and if there is still bleeding, make her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate rind, galls, and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and egg white, and make an ointment on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops bleeding, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, let the patient drink air through cupping glasses on their back and breasts without wounding them; then take wool, dampen it in juice of plantain or elderberry with old wine, and apply to the affected area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Once an abscess is healed, treat the area with ointment until it is cured; and this one called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough head, so you must cut as I said for the carbuncle; and then treat until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	Abscesses of the cheek
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscess arise in the cheek, such as cancer, stone-filled abscess, herpes, shingles, fistulas, haemorrhoids and hot abscess, along with numerous other diseases that I have mentioned in my classification.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary that I speak in this treatise of the hot abscess which appears on the armpit, which is not one of those abscesses that are caused by a blow; and if you want to know how to treat it, look to see if the abscess is acute at its onset, full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Do not hasten to pierce it, but let it die until the pain subsides; then have the patient sit on a seat, and place two small seats where they lean, supporting their back and bringing their legs close to the outside of their thighs; their hips should be spread apart, and they should put their arms under their knees, binding them well with a good bandage; then suck out the matter towards the right side, and introduce the instrument used for opening the armpit, which will later take on this shape; when introducing this instrument, you must first mark out the depth of the armpit so that whatever part of the instrument goes in does not go deeper than it should, lest it hurt the patient; if the instrument is too large, then line the bottom of the armpit with cloth so that the instrument doesn't cause pain; they must hold the end of the instrument with a funnel, holding the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess opens, and you break it with your hand gently, you must cut towards its head or spatulate edge; and when the bowels are empty, you should place in the wound moistened bandages soaked in rose oil or dry green oil; then put a cloth outside of the wound onto the skin, and on top of that place clean, moist woolen cloth with water or cooked mallow leaves; afterwards cure after II days from applying this, until it is healed; and sometimes lift up the skin and the wound with an enema of water and honey, and then with water or cooked lily roots and long aristolochia; then return to applying ointments.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is red in the flesh, you must be cautious of applying hot iron, but treat it as we have said in the previous section.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	The midwife must first know the nature of childbirth and its signs, which are when you see the woman press down, and desire to smell air: then the child hastens to come out forcefully; thus know that these births follow natural order, with the issue beneath their head, and the second stage accompanying it; and when you see these signs, gently pressing her belly is necessary so the child can leave quickly; for once they descend onto its head, there's a second stage accompanying them, and the husband sees his wife rid of all superfluity by proper cleansing; those who come otherwise are not born naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For sometimes it comes out from the feet first, or forcefully from the body or shoulders, and hands; it can come from the stomach, often ending up turned around its neck, or other bad positions; thus the midwife must be wise and skilled in these matters to avoid error and disappointment, as I will show you all possible outcomes on how they should aid.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child is born head-first through natural birth, and the woman gives birth with difficulty due to her weak constitution, have her sit on a saddle or be held by women; arouse her nature with oil of fenugreek that has been cooked, then insert the small spatula into her vagina.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	Cut the amniotic sac and trim her nail so that the moisture inside flows out; press on the woman's stomach until the child descends; if it does not descend, administer an enema of fenugreek mucilage with sesame oil to the woman; then make her sneeze from condiments, holding her mouth and nose shut for an hour: now extract the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands are outside [the birth canal], you must gently push them back one by one; and if they cannot be pushed in, place the woman on a chair with her feet raised upwards; then lift the chair to the ground, holding the woman so she does not fall when getting up; and if the hands cannot be pushed in and the child is dead, cut off its hands with the knife mentioned before, extract the child, and reset it equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	At the child's birth from its feet.
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes out on its feet, you must pull it upwards; and then turn it over and over until it is straightened; then take one of its feet and stretch it gently.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	When it reaches the thighs, instruct them to grasp and make them sneeze hard; if it jumps so be it, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump as we have said, turn it over and over until it is according to its natural form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will be lightly done.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come out as we have said, take some mucilage of old figs, and oil of sisymbrium, and molten gum, and grind everything in a mortar; put this mixture on the woman's nature inside and outside this ointment, then make her sit in warm water up to under her ribs; when she is wet underneath, make her wear a collar of myrrh, and place it underneath, leaving it for an hour; then have her sit on a seat, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose shut, gently pressing her belly, for the child jumps now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	Of the child's exit onto their knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this manner, place the midwife's hands here and there; then let her be assisted on her neck, and hang her feet downwards, and let her lie on the bed; and fold her hands here and there, then place her hands on her belly, and remove the cushions from underneath, until she is prepared downward; and if the child does not cry, take their feet and move them strongly, then move the belly upwards, then put in both hands; and exhale the child here and there; and instruct the woman to hold herself until the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	Of the child's exit from the broad side, with one hand hanging out.
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I must use the device to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, make the woman get up and walk; if she cannot walk, let her lie on the bed, and stretch her legs strongly; then apply the medication I mentioned; and if she does not give birth, sit her on a chair, then try to retrieve the hand; and exhale the child according to their natural position, make her sneeze, and instruct her to hold herself until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	Of the child's emergence from its collarbone, let it spread its hands, with its face turned towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I agree that the nurse should hold their hand, then turn it little by little, and lift it gently; when it is level, apply a mixture of nature's moss and oil as we have said, then instruct them to move it slowly; once you have done this, make them sit on a chair, and command her to grab onto something; then make the patient sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in this same manner for all secondary dislocations
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes out in this manner for all secondary dislocations, squeeze the dislocation with your nail until all moisture is drained; and if the child falls onto their face or neck, lift them from below so they are not caught underneath, and kill the child; then push the child inside, until you have put it back correctly, and instruct the woman to grab something: then gently extract it.
de l’issue des gemelz	Of the dislocation of the hips
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born at once; this is not a strange occurrence, but it may happen.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	These are strange and do not live, if there are several of them; I know this, that they may be multiplied, and are separated by the surgeon who divides them, which is done at the navel; sometimes they emerge naturally like a single child, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they emerge in distress, then treat them as we have said, and let the surgeon be skilled, acting quickly and lightly with his work; and do this for their well-being.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	None are formed in the womb I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or many up to XV, and they are all shaped like a child through the measurement of the glorious blood, and it is fitting that the bailiff knows all this, for perhaps similar things may happen to him; so he must act accordingly.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman for a dead child in her womb, as I said in the division, and it does not come out naturally, and you are forced to perform manual work; then you must know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or fear of death; she must be laid on her back, with her hips inclined downwards, and her legs raised; and the minister should hold two parts, or she should be tied to the bed so that she does not move during the child's descent; then rub the mouth of the womb with moist oils mixed with a concoction of althea and fenugreek seed and linseed, then anoint the bailiff's hands with these oils and mixtures; then insert them gently into the womb, and look for one place where he inserts his fingers so that it is suitable for this, and take care if the child is equipped to descend on its head; then place your fingers in its eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or in the armpit or near the sides, and if the descent is at the feet, insert your finger in the groin or lower abdomen; he should hold the finger with his right hand, and place the curvature between his two fingers of the left hand, and push it gently with all his force, and place the finger in any of these places that we have said until the object comes out empty; this is the shape of the finger:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then insert it into the other incision, or place a third if needed so that the extractions are equal; and then stretch them evenly from side to side, for removal, and let the incisions be toothed in order to hold them, as is shown here:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if any part remains, oil your fingers and push it into that part, then pull the other part; and if there are still points remaining, place this incision higher up and do so until it comes out entirely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	If one hand comes before the other and you cannot reset it due to tightness, then you must wrap it with a cloth until it is fully extended; cut open the skin at the wrist or ankle joint, and do likewise for the other hand and foot.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on their feet, then the traction is light, and the adjustments at the mouth of the womb are slight.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	If it is trapped in the abdomen or pelvis, then you must extract it with fabric wrapped around your hand; and split open the abdomen or pelvis until the moisture that is there drains out; and if the other limbs are removed, and the head remains, insert your hand perfectly inside the womb, and draw it towards the mouth of the womb; then insert one or two fingers, and pull it through; and if the mouth of the womb is narrowed due to hot inflammation therein, do not exert force, but apply moist and oily things; administer plasters, and also apply warm emollients and softening agents in water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is on their side, and you can make them lie flat, proceed as we have described for a living infant; but if this cannot be done, then deliver it by pieces, leaving nothing of the caul (amniotic membrane).
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	Once this is done, proceed as we have described for hot abscesses that arise in the marrow; and if discharge of blood occurs, it should be treated with cold water compresses, restraining movement, and other treatments are applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly a child had been dead, then another was born on top of it, and the other one died as well.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess formed in the jaw, swelling until it burst open, and began to rot (or stink).
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat him, and I thought long about it, but could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a plaster of strong attraction, and an object came out, seemingly like bone, then after some days another one did too.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly puzzled as to why the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it might be the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I probed the wound and extracted several bones from it until the woman's condition improved significantly. She lived with a missing part of her bowels for many years; I had never come across such a case before so I am sharing this chapter in order to help others who may find unusual cases that require medical intervention.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To bring back the bone to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Here comes the form of the pressor, for which one needs levers; and returning to the second joint of the two bones.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the horns are more subtle than the restriction device, and they should be made of ebony or boxwood; and let the mouth of the shaft be two fingers wide, and let the edge of the wood be one finger thick, and let it be a palm and a half long; and in the middle of the two bones there will be two joints of this same wood, which are firmly attached to each other at both ends, with a length of half a palm or slightly more; and these two joints are pushed into the mouth of the bone to open when you turn the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in its resemblance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, similar to the shape of tongs; with two jaws having two adjustments each, as you see, one palm long and two fingers wide; when you wish to open the vagina with all the instrument, have the woman sit on a bed, feet hanging down and legs spread apart, then insert the two adjusted jaws together into the vagina, and hold the head of the instrument underneath between her thighs; operate your hand with the entire device as if it were tongs evenly, according to the size you wish to open the mouth of the vagina, so that she does what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are entirely overmounted and multiplied in their resemblances; when the doctors have them prepared, they hasten to work with them more quickly, and confer greater skill on men according to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not despair of the instrument which you have prepared, because their need is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the midwife is delayed in childbirth, you must tell the patient to hold her breath and then make her sneeze strongly, holding your hands over her mouth and nose; if she jumps due to this, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, take a pot and make an opening in its cover, then put herbs that can open the mouth of the sufferer, such as rue, peppermint, aniseed, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, must be boiled with water over fire; then place one end of the pot's spout into the other end in the mouth of the sufferer, hold it until the vapours come inside the sufferer; then make her sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the injury is caused by a fall.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment, and does not heal, instruct the nurse to wet her left hand in oil of sesame or muskroot juice, and then insert it into the body, seeking the secondin. When she finds it, she should grasp it and gently pull it straight, ensuring the wound does not tear during extraction. But she must move it lightly from side to side first, and then draw it out; this will ease its removal.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	If the opening of the wound is narrowed, we have mentioned the treatment of inducing sneezing and fumigation with herbs. And if it does not heal despite all that has been said, take care not to be hasty in pulling it out. Instead, bind what is at the mouth of the wound to the woman's thigh, then administer a clyster of tetrafarmac syrup; this will ripen and reset it, leading to healing. However, when it does ripen, there may be an unpleasant odor in the stomach and head, causing discomfort to the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So it is necessary therefore to use appropriate fumigations for this: some of the ancients have tried fumigations with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates a woman to retain her flowers and second-course is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	It is of glass similar to a dog's and has a subtle head in its nature, with broad jaws above the fire; and let the fumigation be over coals, and leave it until it is consumed, then start another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the fundament.
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born without a perforated anus, but have one closed off with a subtle membrane: therefore it is necessary at their bath to pierce that membrane herself with her finger, and not use a pointed spatula, and be careful she does not touch it; then apply moist wool soaked in wine and oil, then treat with ointment until it heals.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will heal, insert a plank peg into the hole, and leave it there for several days; remove it when the child wants to go outdoors.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	Sometimes this healing comes suddenly from a wound or an abscess; you must cut away the callus: it should be treated as we have said about the plank peg.
de la fistule dou fondement	From the anal fistula.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Anal fistulas are inflammation and swelling that come from beneath the anus or in the space between two parts; there is a single or multiple fistula, and when this inflammation is old, it operates, and still moist with white pus or soft scabs, and sometimes these fistulas break open; they are recognized by those who have them through egestion or flatulence when the patient defecates, and perhaps a worm jumps out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And so for fistulas that penetrate up to the bladder, and up to halfway along the penis; reaching even as far as the hip joint, and down to the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	Then one understands the fistula piercing through to the anus, or not: and it is that you insert your index finger into the anus, and carefully place a thin needle of brass or iron into the fistula where there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is any twisting, then insert a slender tent of bronze or horsehair until you feel the tent or hair with your finger; and if you do not feel it, and no egestion, wind, nor excretion comes forth as we have said: know that it does not pierce through; so wait to treat it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula pierces through to the bladder or the urine passage, it leaks urine, and cannot be healed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it pierces through to the hip joint, its path extends down there; if there is no tortuosity and the pain arises around that area, it should be treated with a bow-shaped instrument, and medicine or ointment cannot quickly heal it; for these penetrating fistulas, there is no cure other than surgery, and the foolish surgeons who attempt them are vain.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the case of one that is not penetrated and is not an old injury, there is hope for healing with iron, as I have proven, and it must be done by placing the patient between your hands on their back; you then lift their legs up to their hips, leaning their thighs towards their stomach; next, insert a bronze probe, or silver if it is tortuous, until you find where the probe enters.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around their anus, you must insert your index finger there; if you then feel that the tendon has been pierced; and if what you feel between your finger and thumb is soft or flesh-like, know that it has indeed passed through; do not labor under the impression that it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	It is said that one can heal some of these cases well, but it rarely happens; the help provided consists in heating the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as mentioned before; then insert the hot iron into the fistula until you reach near the anus; do this twice or three times until you know that the faulty flesh, resembling bird feathers, is burned away; afterward treat it with moistened lint soaked in butter so that the remaining raw flesh may be removed and finally cure it with a healing ointment which joins skin to skin.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If this cannot be healed in any other way; and if you insert a tent inside, and it does not pierce all the way to the rectum, but gets stuck between your finger and the tent with a thick covering of skin or tissue, and you see the fistula through the covering of heartwood; then cut away from the beginning of the fistula, push forward towards the tent, and cauterize afterwards until reaching the top of the tent; and it will release the tent and fall out; then clean those faulty tissues that resemble a bird's feather, leaving nothing behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if blood rushes into you and comes between your body and the work, cauterize it with fire or with medicated paste.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For fire cautery brings together two beneficial things: namely, the burning of adjacent flesh and the stemming of blood flow and drying of moisture; then treat wet wounds with butter or ground substances until the wound exudes pus, and after the flesh is burned in the presence of pus; then treat the wound with soothing ointments that harden tough flesh, and these are dry medications.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For once it is reset, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes right up to the anus, and is away from the body, put your finger in the anus and ask the patient.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the swelling and find either sinew or membrane or flesh where it is close to breaking through, take action with confidence and hope by administering one of three methods: cauterize as we have said, or cut down deep, or if you can apply an ointment and treat as before; but do not go too deep lest you sever the tissue that holds the anus together so that waste comes out unwillingly. Then treat it as we have said; perhaps he will be healed, or remove this covering and clean it after cutting away from the anus by ointment or other pointed instrument; then purge this faulty flesh which is in the wound until you can; then turn your attention to restoring the wound and stopping up the fistula outside of the anus: for him a lesser evil.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are formed in this manner: it occurs when you pierce the tent with a lance in the fistula, and it is located on the side of the fundament near the skin above; then take a pierced tent at its head in this form...
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	...and insert the thread awry into it in II, and pierce the tent with the thread into the fistula until its head is reached.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is pierced through the edge of the fundament inside, then remove the thread from that hole, just as you would insert your finger into the fundament; and draw out the head of the thread, and bring the two edges together, pressing one against the other, and leave it like this for one or two days; sometimes press it occasionally until the thread cuts through those parts which are between them, and discharges pus; then treat the wound until it is healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not rupture, make it burst in every way you can if it is not too deeply embedded.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not suitable to treat a wound that deeply embedded with cauterization; and then you must cure it as we have said until it heals.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the pointed spatula used to make a fistula is very sharp on one side and not on the other; thus you do not cauterize what should not be cauterized as you can see here:
des emorroydes	For haemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Haemorrhoids are of two kinds: they can be found inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there are small ones and large ones; they emit a little blood, there may be one or several, and they protrude outside the anus at its edge; however those that are on the outside have very little moisture, and in addition to this there is either some water coloured yellow, or a bit of blood, and they are the colour of skin. The cure for those who have them inside the anus is as follows: you must instruct the patient to strain themselves going into chambers until the haemorrhoids protrude from the rectum; once visible, quickly grasp it with forceps, or hold it between your fingernail and thumb, then cauterize its roots. If the forceps cannot take a grip of them because they are too moist, grab them with a piece of cloth, cotton wool or chamois leather, remove them with two fingers, then cauterise them, sprinkle some hot powder over them which acts as a cautery; you may also cauterise them according to what is written in the chapter on cauterization. You can use other treatments until it heals. If the anus cannot be extruded, then administer an irritating enema and harsh one so that they can wash away whatever is inside the rectum, which will allow the haemorrhoids to protrude clearly; once the patient has strained themselves, and the haemorrhoid has come out of the anus, then treatment is easy. This involves grasping them with fingernail or forceps, cauterising them as we have said, until it heals, being careful about incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: 
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	By drying out of faeces from the bowel/rectum.
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often there is drying out of faeces in the intestine, due to constraint by natural forces and when illness is longstanding and does not respond to treatment.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	You should apply a thin layer of bark from a spathil or your nail to the area, preventing it from becoming moist; then treat until it is firm as required; if it cannot seal, repeat the shaving more vigorously than before until there is abundant healing and scarring; subsequently treat again once healed.
dou fremit	From swelling.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	A formix is a small faulty appearance between the body and goes very deep; sometimes it finds cold, and one feels it like death from swelling, and appears all over the body but most in hands rather than other places.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is such that you take a cane made from a goose quill, or a strong vulture feather, and place this cane on the trembling [part of the body], so that the purple circles touch the trembling all around; then turn your hand over the entire cane so that you grip all around the trembling, and put it in perfectly, and uproot the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see fit, make such a cane from copper or iron according to this form, and let it be thin below and thick above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce it, to hold with your finger, and press it; And if you see fit, cauterize the trembling, as is described in the chapter on cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	Of the form of the clyster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes the clyster is made of silver or tin, or melted and wrought brass; and sometimes these instruments are small and great, according to what they are adapted for.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those which we adapt for the treatment of children and those who are weak and full of pain are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small and great clyster is thus broadly as follows: the bellies are tied according to this manner
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And it has a discharge where the bellies are tied, as you can see, and the head is pierced inside; and have on one side two perforations, and on the other one; and be the bellies in which one places medicines of a beast's bladder or parchment, and be pierced all around with small perforations, and have between each perforation one finger's breadth, then thrust into these perforations a strong thread of twisted silk wound in an X or round about, and assemble the belly as if it were a goatskin; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then clysterize; and this is the form of the circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicament not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the tube with oil or egg white, or similar substance, then gently insert it; then squeeze the minister's II hands together until it is entirely out, then remove the tube, and lift the patient's legs against the wall, and if the medicament wishes to come out, hold it in as much as you can; and if he sleeps a whole night through, so much the better.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you give him an enema for a bellyache, and the medicament comes out quickly, repeat it until he is cured.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if there are haemorrhoids at the anus or abscesses, then let the enema be as gentle as for a child; and this is the form of the subtle tube with its tight skin:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have spoken of the treatment of wounds in the previous division; now we will discuss the art of healing and medicine according to its practice.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what has caused them, where they have been inflicted, and by which means.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	Wounds are caused by various things such as the impact of stones, sword cuts and other sharp objects, or blows from lances, sticks, arrows, or similar instruments; also depending on where they occur in the body, like wounds that fall upon the neck, head, foot, belly, liver, and similar parts. I shall explain to you the treatment for each wound, beginning with simple head injuries since remembrance will come in its own chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head, and the bone is not broken, take note if it is due to a stone impact or similar things, and the skin is still intact but the wound is large, and you mildly suspect an inflamed abscess: then cause the patient to bleed immediately with the cephalic vein especially if little blood comes from the wound, and let the bleeding be contrary to the injured part; and prevent the patient from overeating wine and fatty meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not wish to bleed, then let his food be reduced, and let him neither drink wine nor eat meat; and place on the wound, if inflamed abscesses occur, moist cotton in rose oil alone or in astringent wine; and if there is no hot abscess, then apply to the wound, while it is fresh with all its blood, and has not been moved by air, the powder which I will mention shortly; and if the air has moved it, then apply certain ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	Et if the wound is large like that of a sword cut or similar, and the lips cannot be brought together with stitches, then bring them together by sewing, as I will explain for wounds in the belly, regarding suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to the bone, jagged, and holds only by a little piece of skin, cut it away; then treat the wound with medicine, restore hard flesh in place of leather, and instruct the patient to eat coarse meat, such as testicles and wheat porridge, as well as chicken, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find rotten flesh on the skin, but it has not reached the bone, then cut away all the rottenness and throw it out, then treat it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein from which blood does not cease, and it cannot be staunched with medicine, then tie off the artery, and if you find it severed, bind it with a thread; and if this brings no benefit, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: you should put this powder on it so that the art [of medicine] moves [cures] them.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The manner of the powder is as follows: take one part frankincense; two parts dragon's blood [a red resin]; three parts quicklime [a white or pale grey fine powder], and finely grind this powder, then apply it to the wound, pressing it firmly until it dries well and joins with all its blood; then bind it tightly, leaving it unloosened, if there is no swelling; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And at times one uses only lime [calcium oxide] when there is no frankincense or dragon's blood available, but the art has healed the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the fire has cauterized the wound, especially in summer, do not put this powder on it; instead, apply some digestive ointments or poultices made of barley flour with water and honey until it exudes pus; then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone fracture occurs with the wound, and it is minor, extract it with fine pincers; I will tell you later about skull fractures.
de la plaie dou col	of the neck wound.
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound occurs on the neck and it is straightforward, there is no distinction between this and a head injury; however, if the carotid artery or the jugular vein in the neck has been severed, this is critical.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the head, there is no other remedy but to leave it alone and put nothing constraining on it, as it harms the head and makes it retreat; and put nothing cold on the wound, because the substance of the head is cool, and its connection is with the brain, which is the highest organ; instead, use gentle medicine, such as balm washed in clean water, and mixed with rose oil, and cucumber also washed in clean water, and other stones depending on this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, cut it and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and full of filth, open it further down to where it is deeper; and if the artery is cut, and blood flows from it, open it, clean it, and cauterize if necessary; and if the spine of the neck is cut or the heart and its ducts are affected so that breathing is possible, then sever the heart above the neck vertebrae, without touching the neck but resetting it according to its natural shape; then bind it carefully, leaving it untouched for a few days, after which treat it with drying ointments until it is healed; and if the wound has compressed into bone, clean it; and if there are pieces of bone, bring those you can together strongly, and leave those that cannot be brought close to decay, let the wound suppurate, and alleviate any discharge; and if the wound is fresh, apply a powder over the powder I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound with a fistula, treat it as I have described in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	Of the wound from a lance or knife.
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a lance or knife wound, and the injury is deep, look to see if there are signs of wind escaping when the patient breathes: know then that the wound is deadly. If it is not deep, and fresh with all its blood, do not apply powder nor bandage it for the blood should not be stopped from flowing freely back to the heart, which would kill the patient; instead apply an attractive ointment, and dress it twice a day. If you have no ointment, put old cotton in the wound to absorb fluids, and let the patient sleep on their injury for three days or four or more: there will be no spasm nor bad tremors of the heart nor strange breathings; and when you see these good signs, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure it then with dressings and other treatments until it is healed; if it cannot be healed, operate as you see fit to treat the fistula; apply the appropriate treatment.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	If the wound is an incision from a sword or knife, and it is simple, on the arm or back, treat what is visible first; if it is large, use sutures; if small, apply powder; if it has penetrated the bone, breaking pieces, clean the wound, realigning any displaced tissue; if it is not dislocated, let the wound fester and ease extractions; other wounds to other limbs are judged as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The rupturing of the belly occurs in many ways: great and small; from a large wound sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines may emerge, causing hernia; and suturing is more difficult, and often the smaller wound causes greater harm than the larger one, for it is harder to replace the intestines, unless they are replaced immediately. Because the intestine swells quickly when it feels the cold, so they retreat even more tightly, hence the small wound is preferable, because the intestine can be placed back in its place easier than others. And know that there are four kinds of abdominal rupture: the two ordinary suturing techniques occur in the abdomen and the suturing of other bodily wounds; while two other specific types of sutures are common to other wounds, although they are more appropriate for the abdomen wound, and I will speak about each one individually and explain it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and something from the intestine has come out, and it is a difficult thing to replace, this can be done in one of two ways: either due to the small size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: moisten a sponge or soft cloth in lukewarm water only, or cook it in water with vinegar and cypress and spike, and apply to the intestine until the swelling is reduced; and sometimes do this with restraining wine, which helps to reduce the inflammation.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling subside, moisten the intestine with water or cook elderberries and mallow, as these alleviate any further enlargement; and if nothing can enter, make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids; and the first treatment is advisable for the opening, so that one should not enlarge it without great necessity; here are the instruments to use: make an incision on the inside of the curve and outwards, and see this form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines have come out, then replace them carefully according to their natural form into their proper place, if you are able, for this is better.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on their back, with their legs elevated above their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, place the head and chest higher than the lower parts; also, if the abdominal rupture is in one of the two halves, focus your attention on ensuring that the injured part is positioned higher than the other; thus, you must manage as I say for large and medium-sized wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, use what is available to you, then have someone with gentle hands assist by holding the entire rupture in their hand and bringing together its lips; this is a common method of suturing, involving taking either one or multiple needles according to the size of the wound's width, leaving a finger-length space at its head before threading it with a good strong thread; pierce both sides of the skin with two ends of catgut that lies beneath, until you make them emerge from that part and bring together the four ends in pairs; then draw a double thread around the needle from either side, bringing together the lips of the wound neatly, leaving another finger-length space before inserting another needle; tie the thread as for the first one, repeating this according to need with any number of needles until the entire wound is sutured, using medium-sized needles (not too fine or they'll cut through all the tissue but not so thick that they won't fit); be careful not to pierce beyond the flesh and skin, lest you tear open the wound before it has a chance to heal; then clip off the ends of the needle so as not to prick the patient while sleeping, and place lint or cloth around these points to hold them in place until the wound is healed. This method of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds because only one or two are needed. The second type of suture is common: you bring together both sides of the skin and catgut ends into a single medium-sized needle, threaded with strong thread; after piercing all four lips together, draw the needle back to where it began in the manner of sewing cloth, leaving the thickness of one finger between each stitch. This method I used on a man whose abdomen was torn open by knife, the wound over a palm wide and intestines protruding two palms out, the wound itself being mid-belly
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned his intestine after it had been outside for twenty-four hours, and the wound was healed up to fifteen days, I treated him, and he was cured.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the doctors had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; I did not treat him with ointments because I was in a place where they were not found, nor any medicines; instead, I applied old cotton twice a day on the wound, and washed it with honey water until he healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you the two proper ways of suturing: take the needle and pass it from outside to inside; when it has pierced through directly, leave the chief end of the siphon or gut where you inserted the needle, and make it pierce from the other side, from inside to out; this type of suture is done in such a way that you sew as furriers do with skins, leaving one edge of the wound and then taking it up again on the other side until the whole suture is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of stitching, as Galen properly describes it, is like this: some do it by naturally bringing the two parts together and applying one head of the wound to the other, in such a way: insert a needle into one head of the spleen close by, and pierce that place alone, leaving the two heads of the pancreas; then turn the needle, and pierce through from the outside part to the inside, at the two heads of the spleen; then pierce each of them from the outside part to the inside, in the other two heads of the spleen which are on the opposite side; and this is the most common type of stitching.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen says this word, and some testify that one should stitch the belly with two needles, each having a thread; and you must push one needle from one side, and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew belts; and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the stitching is more grievous than in other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgements of the wound are such as those of other wounds: and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, rather than let it be moved by fire, keep the intestine cool, and treat the wound; then apply a powder made from charred flesh, and if it has been moved by fire, use an ointment that is at hand, until the wound heals; and stitch the skin, and ensure the sinews are joined, and the tendons; then treat the wound like any other, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, apply old cotton immediately as it begins to heal, moving it twice a day until it is cured.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you will not need any other medicine in various situations when the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound might become infected with the principal limbs, then it is necessary to moisten light woollen cloth with oil of a moderate temperature or rose oil, and apply this around the affected areas and under the armpits; and if there is pain or swelling in the belly, which happens often, cleanse it with diluted red wine, especially if the infection has reached the intestine; pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called 'jeun' cannot be healed when it is wounded, and this is due to the fragility of its veins, and because of the delicacy of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the serous membrane springs out of the wound, put it back in as with the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and has turned greenish or black, then you must bind the place that is black so no blood flows from it, for there are veins and arteries; then cut away what lies between the binding, and tie both ends of this to the part below the wound until outside to ease the extraction when the serous membrane falls, and the wound bows.
de la routure dou boueil	On the rupture of the mouth
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is perforated and the wound is small, it can be restored in some cases, for I have seen a man pierced in the belly by a lance; and the wound was to the right of the stomach, and became inflamed and turned into a fistula, from which issued egestion and flatulence; I treated him as best I could, and did not cease until he was healed, and his flesh knit together.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him healed, I feared the patient might still have pain in his belly; and there was no pain, but he remained in better condition, eating and drinking; and some experts said that for a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound thus: take two large-headed wooden pegs, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the peg has opened its mouth, place it on both lips so that it holds them tightly shut; then cut off one head of the peg, and leave it so that it cannot come undone, then insert another peg in the same way as before, until the whole wound is secured; then dress the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine,
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it heals, is universally called a "fistula", especially when it is healed and bowed inwards.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is truly a faulty hard and white nodule, where there is no pain, and it is also bowed like the feather of a bird; sometimes it jumps outwards and at other times inwards, sometimes small and often large enough, and I have already spoken about this in the section on wounds, that any wound which has not healed and lacks flesh, is always caused by one of nine reasons: either due to the deficiency of blood or pus; or its malignancy; or because it contains hard matter within and around its lips, preventing new flesh from growing; or there is too much pus; or the wound is poisoned and the matter is of poor quality; or the medicine for treating it is inadequate; or due to corruption by some manner of pestilence; or because the region's nature has a delayed digestion, slow healing, and swelling; or if there are veins or bones involved: I have already shown all these causes, their signs, and appropriate treatments.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now I must inform you of the treatment for fistula, which is performed by manual operation.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistula can occur in any part of the body; for there are fistulas which come to large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the anus, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and such that comes to the principal part of a member, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	All the fistulas that are of this nature are difficult to treat and heal, and there is only hard work and ignorance involved; if there is any fistula which does not reach the place I mentioned, and you have faith in its cure, and you can identify it, then take a probe made of brass or iron, if the fistula is straight, so seek it out; but if the fistula is twisted, use a thin brass probe, for brass bends to fit into twists; and if there are many openings to the fistula, and you cannot thoroughly examine them with probes, then wash it out through one of these openings, as moisture will pass from one opening to another, washing it clean; thereafter examine it carefully by probing until you know whether there is bone or nerve present, and whether it ends cleanly, ask the patient about any pain they feel when you press your hand upon their body, and where exactly this feeling arises; once you are certain of its true location, and how close to a joint, or nerve, artery or vein, or in one of the places I mentioned before, then proceed as follows: cut into it according to what I have said, remove scabs and rotten flesh that is inside; thereafter treat until healed, and if this fistula is deep and straight, you must carefully cut out all matter until there remains nothing except healthy tissue, then insert probes moistened in caustic medicine right up to the head of the fistula, so that the superfluous waste at its base might be eaten away by the corrosive properties of the medicine; thereafter apply ointments which encourage healing of healthy flesh until it is completely healed. If this does not work, cauterize as mentioned before and if bone has been affected by the fistula then you must cut out the bone.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If neither the bone nor flesh burden your main limbs, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, with putrefaction and blackening present, let it reign until all corruption is removed, then treat subsequent matters by cutting away flesh until it is healed; and if it isn't healed and returns bowed like before, know that you haven't reached bottom: so uncover and seek until you reach the base, and remove all corruption, then restore its place; and if it thus heals, well done.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; there are other natural agents for this situation; and if there's a small corrupted bone, which you can extract with pincers, remove it using an appropriate instrument; and if multiple bones are present, extract them all at once, leaving none behind; and if moisture causes opposition, without error or fear, cut through both moisture and flesh to deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, apply something that causes putrefaction to the wound, and leave it until the flesh is rotten around the bone, and then they will more easily extract the bones; and if it is a large bone, like in the leg or thigh, scrape away only the corruption until all blackness is gone, then restore the wound; and if a great part of the putrefied matter has extended to the marrow of the bone, you must treat it by cutting out all that is corrupt down to the marrow, then cure it so that it heals completely; I will tell you about a fistula which happened in a man's leg, from which you can take an example and aid your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was this young man around thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to an internal cause, such that the matter came out into the leg and became swollen with a large abscess which did not have any external reason for opening; but through their foolishness the surgeons worked on it until they opened up the abscesses, and much matter flowed from them, then it turned into a fistula, and many holes formed, all of which emitted foul and moist matter from his body; many surgeons had treated him with cures over two years without any wise man in the art of medicine, so I was called to see him, and saw his leg as well as the medicines they were treating him with, and that which came out through the holes in great quantity; the young man's flesh became red where these matters issued from, and had a yellow colour.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set up a tent in one of these holes, and then examined all the holes, and found that one came against the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hurried and cut into one of the holes until I exposed a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and perforated, with the corruption reaching deep inside; I cleaned what appeared to be the corrupted bone, believing there was no other corruption beyond what I removed; and so I began to restore the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, but it would not heal; then I started again, exposing the bone as before, and found that the corruption had continued into the bone, so I cleaned it and then removed it, trying to close the site; but I could not, even when I cut around an inch of the bone, which was all soft tissue, before restoring it with medicines; and it healed swiftly, without need for further treatment beyond the patient's weakness, who could not endure more, and my fear of death from him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation, he often bled, but he was completely healed, and in place of the bone, a hard tissue grew, and it had good consistency and caused no harm or damage whatsoever, neither going nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	If the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated like this: take a linen cloth and pull it over the exposed end of the bone, and ask someone to stretch it upwards; then place another larger piece of cloth on top of the flesh covering the bone, stretching the head [of the bone], so that you push away the corrupted tissue underneath, and uncover the area where you want to operate, being careful not to cut into healthy flesh; next, put a red-hot iron or an iron rod under the bone in order to cauterize the corrupted tissue; make sure to remove all traces of corruption when operating, then do it again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupt and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, uncover all the flesh; then place a hot iron underneath, and with the iron move from one side to the other over the corruption, let it be so long as our described; and if the corruption is in the joint, cut out the corrupt joint, and clean the bone on either side of this; and if the corruption continues through two joints, there is nothing else for it but to cut; and if the corruption is at the wrist of the hand or ankle of the foot, that place is very strong, yet you must search into the nature of that corrosion, how it reveals itself to you; and cleanse it in every way possible, without harming the sinews or nerves. Know that there are many cutting instruments for bones according to their position, appearance, size, subtlety, large or small dimensions, hardness etc.; therefore it is necessary to match each kind of instrument with a different work required; know also that the work shows you what instrument you need by the knowledge and skill in this art, and from observation of the symptoms shown in sicknesses. Therefore think about the tools needed for your operation as described above.
dou feu	Of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The head putrefies either internally or externally; and when you have treated that decay by the cure of medicines, and it does not benefit, then you must amputate that limb up to the place where the decay originates, so that the patient escapes death, or the greater evil, which is the defect of the member itself; and here's a sign: the member becomes black, as if burned in fire, and after the blackness, the decay spreads from one member to another, taking over the entire body. So you must hasten amputation before it comes down to that, and if this corrosion was caused by the sting of venomous creatures like scorpions or snakes, cut off at the top part of the thumb, do not give any space for it to reach all the way up to the hand itself
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	Et si décorruption du sang vient quant tu ouvres, si cautérise le lieu aussitôt, ou tu mets sur certaines poudres rétrécissantes; puis reviens à ta médecine tant qu'elle est accomplie, puis lie le membre nu d'un lien convenable, et soigne-le jusqu'à ce qu'il soit cicatrisé; et je te raconterai qu'il arriva à un homme en son pied: il lui arriva une noirceur qui semblait être une brûlure de feu, et cette corrosion vint premièrement sur son doigt du pied, jusqu'à ce qu'elle couvre tout le pied; et quand l'homme vit la corrosion, il se hâta de couper le pied, et fut guéri; et longtemps après, la corrosion revint sur le doigt de sa main, et il vint me voir, et je lui mis des choses répercussives après avoir nettoyé son corps, mais les corrosions ne purent cesser; et il comprit que je devais lui couper la main, et je n'en voulus rien faire, car j'avais l'espoir de soigner le mal; et j'eus aussi peur qu'il meure si je taillais sa main, car ses forces étaient faibles; et il désespéra tout, et retourna dans son pays, et se hâta de se couper la main, et fut guéri; et je n'ai pas pu raconter plus que pour ce qui doit être fait autrement, s'il en a besoin.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Sometimes an abscess arises in fleshy places and persists for so long that it forms a large accumulation of pus; then it ruptures and pierces the skin like a pot, leaving the place bare just as if it were a vessel; the skin which is above is as delicate as thin cloth and does not extend down to the bone or nerve. Such diseases are called "sinus" and not "fistula"; but when they reach all the way through the bone into the marrow then they are called "fistula", and the skin around it should be cut away, especially if it is delicate like a cloth; one does not fear its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you are concerned that the skin may corrupt and the corruption is not deep but there is some flesh around it, then treat it with an enema in this way: first see if the sinus is large or small; whether its contents have a foul odor and are coming from deeper down within. Then make your enema out of Egyptian medicine which you will prepare as follows: take equal amounts of verdigris, oil, and litharge put them into a vessel over heat until it becomes red and thick like honey. Take what is necessary according to the size of the sinus add water and honey; with this enema you can clean out any remaining pus by squeezing the orifice shut for two hours after inserting the medicine then letting it come out freely afterwards. If sometimes these medicines are not available one may use ashes instead mixed into water when they become like a paste which is also helpful in cleaning out sinuses that have been made dirty by other things such as Egyptian ointments etc.; but if neither can be tolerated add some honey mixed with wine since this has the property of cleansing while still keeping everything clean at all times; and afterwards apply emollients to help new tissue form again - either use diaphanite plaster which you will prepare beforehand using rose oil mixed into red wine or else simply apply one of many other ointments mentioned previously depending on what is available there. If however the aperture leading down into where pus has accumulated happens to be small and cannot easily accommodate an enema tube then stretch it out slightly with a thin iron rod first before applying some type Egyptian ointment such basilicon within so that space becomes wider accordingly; but should opening happen instead due either cutting off too much tissue surrounding wound area (thus creating larger than needed hole) simply leave behind only single layer covering entire wound surface while removing anything extra below.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bowels are in their natural state, they do not allow meat to be digested; and if you cannot cut open the breast as you wish, then arrange it so that the bowel moves down to its lowest point, for when the bowels are healthy, they do not allow meat to be digested. And if you cannot cut open the breast in the manner you want, prepare them in such a way: let the bowel descend gently and leave nothing of the bowel behind; take consolidating medicines to place on the wound, and stretch over it a linen cloth that covers the entire wound; then cut with force at the right spot where the breast is a little wider than the first incision, stretching the ointment onto another piece of fabric according to the amount needed for the wound. Place this fabric onto the breast wound in order to ease the bowel movement and do not remove the large cloth that covers it until after many days have passed once; and remove the one placed on top of the breast often to relieve the bowels, and clean off whatever is coming out from them, whether it be poison or a little or enough, digested or undigested. Take note if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there are abscesses present in addition to this; once your medicine has been applied as described above, you will know that the wound has already healed when you see nature emerge from the breast incision. Then approach the saints and afterwards release the bowels every morning for three days while changing their cloth each time and renewing its ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast ejects undigested food after many days, know that the breast is not healthy.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle venom emerges after a long time, do not despair of health, for healing is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are people whose wounds take a long time to heal, and others who do the opposite; if undigested food comes out of the breast after many days, know that the breast is not healing; and if the breast takes too long to heal, and it becomes prolonged, you should apply drying medicines that are moist in substance but dry in nature, such as a fine ointment, for there is a great deal of vitriol in it, which is the last medicine used. Take this fine ointment, made with rose oil, and moisten it with an equal amount of old wine; then smear it on and use it. This same treatment works better when cooked and thickened if the aforementioned fine ointments are not available. Use myrrh, aloes, and incense instead, grind them together, add powder to honey while still over the fire, mix well and apply onto a piece of cloth. Place the cloth over the breast and administer for some time; you may use aristologus longa (a type of herb) or roots from lilium candidum (or its flour-like powder), centaury (centaureae herba). Use either single herbs or mixtures, grind them up into a powder and mix with honey as I said before. If the cure is prolonged and does not heal even after this treatment then know that corruption has reached deeper layers of tissues and bone, causing hard masses in soft tissue; treat it like an abscess fistula (a type of skin infection), as we have described earlier.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of an abscess under the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that forms beneath the nail of the thumb, or toe, or occasionally elsewhere; and when it becomes old, and no attention is paid to it, it develops into a deep-seated abscess, discharging pus until it erodes the root of the nail, and sometimes even destroys it entirely; then there is bone exposure, causing stench and swelling, and the digit becomes broad, with an ugly color.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the previous section, and the treatment is not effective, then it is necessary to cut away all the remaining unhealthy tissue near the nail with an iron tool, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauterizations are a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is sound; and if the nail presses on the flesh, starts to prick, and wounds it, then you must place a slender rod under the nail that pricks the flesh, pushing it upwards, and cut away this flesh carefully and lightly, applying caustic and corrosive medicines to remove all of it; then treat with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	If the corrosion is in the bone, cut it away and treat with boiling oil, for as long as there is corrupted bone, it cannot heal; and if you see the finger becoming corrupt, then cut it off close to the hand as described above, then treat until it is healed; and if it is wounded and pierced, and feels great pain, then you must first cleanse it; then cut the nail with a sharp spatula by cutting across it, making sure the incision does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and should this happen, apply something to ease the pain.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of the shoulder joint from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two adjusting thumbs that are born in some people's hands are sometimes very fleshy, and there is either skin or bones; at times they have nails, and one of them grows on the root of the joint, while the birth occurs in several of us.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	One that is born in the root of the thumb does not move, and one that is born on the joint of the thumb sometimes moves; the size of the fleshy one should be cut at its root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	One that is born in the root of the joint is difficult to treat: make sure you take care of it.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In one who is born or must be delivered by the posterior route, you must first cut the round flesh down to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable depth for it, and cure it until it heals.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joining together of bones occurs either by birth, or by the healing of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	You should cut this fusion so that the bones can repair according to their natural shapes; then place between them two tents or oiled wet cloths, so they do not fuse together; or you can put between them two pieces of fine lead, until the joints are healed as they should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If a fusion occurs on someone's hand with the palm facing upwards, cut this fusion as it is required.
des vils	des villages
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Worms are large veins wrapped in excess melancholy humours that come from many parts of the body; and they occur more often in the legs of those who walk on foot and work, carrying loads, than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	So it is necessary for you to administer purging of the bile sometimes, then treat with the basil plant.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment with iron is done in two ways: one is by cauterizing and drawing out the black blood; and the other way is that you lift the vein and draw all of it out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The cut is done in this way: first immerse the leg in very hot water until the large blood vessels are softened, then stretch the patient's leg from above the thigh to below the knee; then make an incision on one spot or two or three spots, a wide one, and lift it up and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, as long as there is still enough blood coming for the patient to withstand; and then bind it up, and command that he abstains from eating meat which produces black bile; and repeat the evacuation and treatment when the veins are full again, if it harms the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The treatments for the wound are as follows: remove the patient's leg hair if there is any, then place it in a bath, and bathe the leg with hot water until it turns red and the veins swell; and if you have no bath, heat it over fire, and then scrape along the vein from long to knee or ankle joint; then cut open the skin with an instrument, and peel back the skin on either side of the vein until it appears when felt underneath; and one can see it as red and black, appearing like a white cord when looked at under the skin; then push a thread beneath it, lifting it away from the skin, then cut lightly in another spot three inches above; then peel back the skin over the vein once more until it is exposed, then lift it with the thread as before, and cut again at an other location one inch above; then make several more cuts if necessary, then lift it up, and make a final cut at the patient's toe bone, pulling and lifting until you reach the second incision made earlier; remove it by incision after incision until all is out, then cut off any remaining ends; and should you be unable to pull or lift it, thread a needle with strong double thread and tie it on, then draw it through, turning your hand from side to side as it comes out; be careful not to cut the vein, for if one does so, it cannot be pulled nor lifted and would harm the patient further; once you have extracted all of it, place soaked wool in wine and rose oil onto the wound site; treat until healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the face is contorted and twisted and rolled together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it crookedly, but do not cut it; and draw it as we have mentioned before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron with which one cuts the face is curved, and does not slice, so as not to cut the vein; and it has a thick curve, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and here is its shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is engendered in the legs, in warm parts where grass or trees do not grow, and on land that has no moisture; and perhaps it grows elsewhere other than in the legs, and this occurs due to putrefaction that arises from under the skin, just as serpents and worms arise within the body, bred between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the sign of the beginning of this vein is that a great inflammation comes to the leg, then the color changes, and the vein starts to protrude, just like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the vein opens, you must wrap around a piece of lead that is 3 and a half to 2 inches long, tie it up, and let the lead hang on the leg. Whenever some part of it protrudes, wrap the lead again and retie it; if it is too long, cut off a portion and rewrap the rest but do not cut at its root until all of it has been removed; because if you cut it, it will retract into the flesh, causing an abscess and putrefaction in that spot, as well as a bad disease. So one must treat this vein little by little up to its head without leaving any part inside; often when this vein is treated it may be 5 palms or 10 long, there was once a man who came to me with such a vein issuing from his leg for 10 palms in length and after cutting into it one root or channel issued forth, then perforate the whole thing so that all of it issues out; empty the material within, and apply healing medicines against putrefaction every day, then treat like abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes this vein is more delicate, especially when it appears in the ankle joint, or where the foot joins, and there are many perforations, making it fragile; treat it then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Worms that are born between the skin and flesh.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called "ox disease" in our land because it often occurs in cattle, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, moving throughout the body up and down, and one can feel its movement from limb to limb, until it tears open the skin where it was, and falls out; it is caused by the decay of certain humors, just as worms, serpents, and lumbricals come from the belly; we doubt its maliciousness because when it moves through the body and reaches the head, sometimes entering the eye, and destroying it. This happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it curing and spreading, one cannot escape except when it goes: therefore, you must tightly bind the place above and below with a strong bond, then cut above and pull out the core, and if the poison is deeply embedded in the flesh, and you do not find it, cauterize it with fire until it dies; and the greatest harm that it does, is to run into the eye, as we have said; and if you see it approaching the head near the eye, strongly constrict the eyebrow below it, then cut above, and pull out the core; and the patient must use bodily cleansing medicines of solutive medicines for bad, rotten humors, and avoid consuming foods that cause decay.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from windiness.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that appears in certain limbs, and can move from limb to limb; and I saw what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to see a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and soon after, it appeared like a worm rising towards the shoulder, more than anything else, like quicksilver when it flows from one place to another; the pain left that spot, settled into the shoulder, and then shortly afterwards spread throughout the body, until it reached the other arm; she then told me that it kept circling around her body, just as I had seen.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed at how it moved from limb to limb, because I had never before seen this illness behave in such a manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Toutevoie, I avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, but I ne l’avoie mie wants, si com je le vis en la femme; and I me pensai that c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste reason a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, and li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, and puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; and cauterize le leu; and se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, and pilules de serapin, and semblans autres.
des saiettes	from arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and the parts of the body where they land.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of arrows is such that there are those with large points, small ones, barbed, and solid; there are also those with two angles, some with long shafts, and others composed of several pieces; moreover, an arrow can penetrate a limb in one of two ways: it may strike a vital organ like the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder or similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When an arrow strikes any of these organs and the sign of death appears, which I will tell you about later, then it is necessary to be wary of extracting this arrow because many die afterward in different circumstances; when this evil sign does not appear and the arrow is not deeply embedded, draw it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when an arrow falls and pierces the bone, and breaks the thin layer that is above the brain, it is when your sight becomes dark and dim, and you see green and red in one eye, and there is inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of the mind, and vomiting bile; and perhaps blood flows from the nostrils or ears without cause; and maybe they lose speech and voice; and also white moist matter oozes out of the wound, resembling pus, and also like burnt flesh; if these signs appear to you, stay away from treatment, and remove the arrow if it remains there.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the arrow when it falls on the heart are that it is near the left breast, and they also feel as if it were stuck in a hard object, not empty; and perhaps the pulse changes like an arrow, and black blood flows out, and coldness and cold sweat appear, and fainting: know then without doubt that death is descending.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrowhead that has not pierced the lung is that there is no foam coming out of the wound, and the throat swells up, and the patient's complexion changes, and they breathe heavily while rejecting cold drinks.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrowhead falls into the lining of the lung, it is near the small ribs; it causes great pain and difficulty breathing along with heavy sighing; and it affects all the limbs from the shoulders downwards.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrowhead falls into the stomach, sometimes something undigested may come out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrowhead falls into the belly, and no excrement comes out through the lower intestine, there is no hope for a cure or the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and flows forth, and the patient feels intense pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, such as the arm and forearm, neck, throat, shoulder, armpit, backbone, waist, thigh, legs, and similar parts are safe according to many arrangements.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery and it is not poisoned, as I will tell you happened to me so that you can do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man that an arrow fell on his cheekbone into the root of his nose: I grasped it and pulled it from underneath through the ear's fat, and he was cured without incident.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And drive an arrow into a wound so that it ends up in the fat beneath the eyelid, and the arrow is blunt, and one can only reach its tip towards the shaft, and this arrow was as large as a Turkish bow, all of iron but light without barbs; the wound was cauterized, and no ill befell him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And I drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and this arrow was Arabian with barbs; I cut away the flesh, and manipulated it until I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And I drew an arrow from a man, which was embedded in his belly, and I thought he would die; after thirty days had passed, there was no change in his condition; so I incised the skin over the arrow, manipulated it, and extracted it, and he suffered no ill effects.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you have a man with an arrow lodged in his back or shoulder, and the wound has healed over it; yet the arrow remains within him, and it hasn't changed its natural position nor caused any harm to his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And consider another man with an arrow lodged in his face, and the wound has healed over it; remaining thus without causing him great pain or other significant distress.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And treat an arrow wound in the prince's servant, where the arrow had penetrated his nose and was slightly inclined towards the right side; the arrow itself was entirely bent. I was called to perform the cure after it had been there for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found that the wound was quite narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I sought it everywhere with a subtle touch, yet felt naught; he sensed pricking and pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of the arrowhead I applied a drawing and digestive poultice there so that the flesh would not swell; and the flesh above the arrowhead became apparent.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I left the poultice on longer, and the wound healed initially, but the patient remained ill for a long time, feeling the arrowhead inside his nose every day; he told me so himself.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied a corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it opened up, and I probed it, feeling the arrowhead's tip moving in place; then I adjusted the medicine inside the wound's opening so that the arrowhead's head became clearly visible; after four months of waiting, the arrowhead finally moved enough for me to widen the wound with forceps, which I inserted from one side and another but could not extract it; so I kept devising and ingeniously crafting instruments until one day I seized the arrowhead with properly-made forceps as described in this chapter's end, pulling it out and closing the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the surgeons judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored; so I restored it then, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or I have told you about the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you focus your attention on what I do not say, for books cannot cover everything; but wise masters compare many great things, and for what is present and lacking, find new work, and new instruments, in the treatment of strange cases which occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows exit the body in which they are embedded either through the way they entered or from another part; and those that must come out through where they went in are arrows lodged in soft tissue, and this may occur at any time.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not jump now, leave it until the flesh is rotten around [the arrow], and the exit point is loosened; and also if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, then let it remain for a few days, moving it each day; and then it will jump, and if it does not, then pierce all around with a very fine saw until the surrounding bone is widened, and then pull [the arrow] out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and goes up to one of the membranes of the brain, and any of the accidents I have mentioned appear in the patient: do not pull it out, but leave it until it is even after a few days, because if the arrow reaches the surface, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not stuck solely in bone, and does not emerge from the skin, and the patient remains without incident for a few days, prepare to extract it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply embedded like this and cannot exit through the skin, apply tourniquets around as I told you; then treat the wound until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is lodged within the body where it cannot be seen, search for it throughout; and if you can feel it, extract it with a suitable instrument; and if due to the tightness of the wound, or the depth of the arrow, there are no bones, nerves or veins involved, make an incision until the wound is large enough; draw out the arrow if possible, and if it has barbs that hold it in place, remove flesh stuck on two sides as much as you can, then break or bend the barbs so you may withdraw it; do this carefully lest you snap the arrow which would make extraction more difficult.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, leave it until the surrounding flesh is rotten; then pull it out, as the extraction would be eased.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the loss of blood makes you hesitate, so manage what we have said about treatment in its chapter; and beware of cutting into a nerve or opening a vein, instead use devices to draw out the arrow without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; place the patient according to how they were when the arrow struck them, for this is the greatest aid available, and if you cannot, then lay him as the signs show.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	If the arrow comes from another place, or nothing appears of it, but the skin is swollen where it may be; cut open that spot until forceps can grip it and pull it out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is stuck in the bone, turn your hand roundly until it enters the bone and widens it, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	If it cannot come out, leave it be for now and then restart the extraction process until it finally exits; if there is an arrow shaft present, push on the entire shaft; and if it was blunt, and you want to administer a thrusting motion, use an instrument with a pointed end so that the tip of the arrow enters the aperture of the instrument; then give a final strong push, and if the arrowhead is stuck, insert the instrument with its point facing inwards to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is envenomed, you must cut away all flesh around it, if possible, and then treat the wound as necessary.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow falls onto the foot or belly or bladder or ribs, and it is close to the surface, and you can cut above it, then do so; be careful not to cut into the vein or nerve, then extract [the arrow], and then suture the wound if necessary; heal until it is whole.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the pliers used to extract arrows resembles the beak of a bird; see below for its form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many types of these pliers: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the pointed end is also like a bird's feather, to push against the tip of the arrow, as shown here:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the forceps for pushing and extracting is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	Of the veins from which one bleeds there are thirty-one, of which sixteen are in the head: two are the beating ones that lie behind the ears and are called 'herbech'; the two arteries that appear in the temples; the two veins lying at the corners of both eyes, which are called 'aspires', as well as a vein in the middle of the forehead; a vein in the centre of the head near the nose; two small veins that lie on either side of the neck; and finally two veins that are situated just above the mouth between the lips: these last ones being known as 'augeherich'; besides, there are also two veins below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins that are commonly treated for healing are five in each arm: one is the cephalic vein, which is located on the left side and known by laypeople as the "head vein"; the median vein is called the "fast" vein and composed of the cephalic and basilic; the latter is referred to as the "heart vein" by laypeople. The basilic lies on the right side and is called the "belly vein" by laymen, being located above the axillary artery; this is the vein used for healing, which becomes clearly visible in the armpit.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the superficial vein is located between the little finger and ring finger, having two branches; in the leg and foot there are three veins: one runs below the bend of the armpit on the left side, another passes through the right ankle; a third, known as the "nest" vein arises from the other ankle. In the opposite leg there are three veins that correspond to these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The bleeding of the veins that are located behind the ears helps with chronic colds and headaches; and regarding the quality of the bleeding, as I told you, it is necessary to raise the patient's head, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then, hold the patient's neck with a vise so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two dependent places from the head: look for them with your finger, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, make an incision there; then take the lancet, and insert it under the vein until reaching the bone, then lift your hand to open all the vein upwards, and cut both the skin and the vein well across two fingers wide, and let out blood as much as you want; then release and tie it up so that it is sealed; and I have already mentioned incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The bleeding of the two arteries located in the temples is beneficial for treating chronic migraines, solid obstructions, and accustomed ophthalmitis, as well as acute lachrymal discharge from the eyes; and here are the characteristics of this treatment: the patient must extend their neck so that the two veins appear clearly; you should feel the pulse beneath your finger, then proceed to open up a vein below with a lancet; lift the heart upwards onto the vein using your index finger and insert the lancet underneath, lifting the vein as before when dealing with the other veins, and let blood flow according to your needs; release the patient and place your finger on top of the opened vein for an hour afterwards, then cover it in cotton; bind this firmly and leave until healed.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bleeding of the vein in the forehead is equally effective as the bleeding of the temporal artery for ancient facial diseases, and for migraines, and for redness; its quality being that the patient twists their neck so much that the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called a "fosseur," whose form is this:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Place the tip on the vein and press it against your hand or another object, and allow blood to flow out according to the quantity you desire; then untie the patient's collar and bind the wound until it is healed, sometimes using a wide strip of cloth.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, the cloth strips should not be too sharp or pointed, and take care to bleed across the grain as the bone is nearby, for fear of breaking the strip when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The bleeding of the two veins that are in the two temples aids the eyes, and [helps with] scabies, redness, inflammation in the eye, and diseases of the face; the quality of this bleeding is such that the patient tightens their neck by twisting with some cord, as before; then bleed them, and let the bleeding be crosswise, a little above the length of the flame and slightly wide, for there is no flesh [there].
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the veins are delicate, by chance they may break; then make the blood flow until you have what you need, and then bind it with cotton, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The bleeding of the vein in the nose is beneficial for fever, severe headache, and facial diseases, such as migraine and redness that appears on the face, especially when it is long-lasting; and the quality of this bleeding is such that the patient tightens their neck, then pulls their nose with your left hand, take the delicate, long vein, and insert it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well downwards, and the blood will now begin to flow; do not go too far inside, and make the blood flow according to your need, then bind it for one night, as it heals quickly; this is the form of the vein:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The bleeding of the two jugular veins aids in relieving constriction of the throat, and at the onset of apoplexy, and in many illnesses, such as pleurisy, catarrh, herpes, and abscesses; and the quality of this treatment is that the patient must compress his neck with both hands, as we have said; and let the master stand above the head of the patient, and let the patient sit on a chair, then open the wound about an inch wide in length, then drain some blood gradually, or as much as necessary; then repeat this procedure for the other vein, then unfasten the binding, but tighten them slightly around all wounds so that they do not strangle the patient; and let him rest until morning, until the wounds are healed.
de la sainie des leivres	The bleeding of the lips
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The draining of veins from above helps with glue in the mouth, and gum corruption, and lip cracks, and from the nose and around it.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Place the patient before you and restrict his neck as I said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one is on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are known by being black, and by the small black veins around them: so cut both of them, and if you do not know or are unsure which to take, just cut the thicker one from each side, and do this also for the two that lie above and below, because it is the same procedure.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	On bleeding beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The bleeding of veins beneath the tongue is aided after the bleeding of the cephalic vein, and it is done at the narrowing of the throat, for diseases of the uvula, and ailments of the mouth; and the quality of the bleeder is such that the patient sits between your hands facing the sun, you lift their tongue, and look beneath on each side a black vein: bleed one or the other, but do not go too deep, as below are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the neck that are commonly bled are bled in two ways: either by piercing with a very wide flame-like martin or with an olive-shaped sharp instrument, and they are called 'anesil'; these are wide and slender according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of Martin's flame is very renowned, and it is so widespread as you can see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the swollen veins filled with visible thick blood, and containing thick and troubled blood; and this is the form of the olive flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	it is more pointed and sharp, and it is used to bleed delicate veins, where there is thin, yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The bleeding of the basilica, which is one of these veins, aids in treating illnesses affecting the throat, neck, chest, and abdomen; and the bleeder must be careful to avoid the artery located beneath it.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he cuts the artery, and blood flows out, it must be stanched as I have said; and the flame must not be gripped tightly, but held like a scalpel.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilic vein does not open clearly, you must extract it and replace it with another; or take a part of it, or heal in its place the vein within the arm: it opens clearly; and cauterize the wound as we have said before.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you wish to know the location of the wound, you must first extend the arm and touch the area until you feel the pulse; then mark the spot with a sign, bind the arm, and cauterize the wound as we said before; take care not to cut into the artery when you see the spot is swollen, for it is the artery: avoid it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see blood rising like the urine of a child, and it is red and thin, know that it is blood from an artery: act quickly then, press your finger on it for some time, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, which often happens; bind the arm, and leave it be, do not move the patient; and let there be fear, and do not move them until they are healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is not staunched, and it overcomes you, and no medic is present, then cut the artery if it is exposed, for this stops the head of the retreat; and staunch the blood.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take a bark of fustic, slit it open, and take one half, binding it on well until the next day; if the blood is staunched, that is good; if not, then treat it as we have said with powders to staunch blood; and the staunching is not grievous in many cases due to the small size of the wound, and the strength of the arm's bond.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The bleeding of the vein in the middle helps as it draws blood from the head above and the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic veins, as we have said; and the bleeder must take care for the nerve that lies beneath, and if they cut too deeply into it, and find the nerve, it swells and the wound becomes grievous, and perhaps cannot heal; and this nerve often appears, and if it does not appear in some men due to its subtlety, then you must treat it with a sharp instrument; and avoid the nerve as best you can.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	Et if there is a vein between the two nerves, cut it lengthwise.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The bleeding of the cephalic vein is beneficial as it drains blood from the head and aids the eyes; one must bleed with caution near the olive-shaped flame or the martin's flame because this is the safest of all veins, for beneath it there are no nerves or arteries.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, one must seek the lightest place and not be too harsh if they miss the first time, for then one can start again; sometimes the vein swells in some people when pierced the first time but this is no great harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of bleeding depends on your assessment.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about bloodletting is that it was not introduced for the purpose of curing diseases but rather to maintain health and prevent future illnesses; and bloodletting should be done on one of the three veins which are: namely, the cephalic vein, the basilic vein, and the median cubital vein; and you must perform bloodletting at the beginning of Lent while fasting, and in autumn or winter after eating when signs of fullness appear; and it is best to do bloodletting on the first day or third day, two hours or three hours into the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	Bloodletting when administered for diseases has no determined time, but can be done whenever needed, day or night and at all times; and children should not be bled until they are fourteen years old, nor women who are pregnant before the fourth month up to the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	They ought not to bleed the old who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wishes to be bled, no matter the reason, it is necessary that they first cleanse their intestines with a light clyster, if they have too much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw from the intestines any harmful superfluities which would damage the main organs; one should also not bleed those who are overly full of food, drunk, saturated with liquid, or suffering from dropsy; and nor should you attempt to bleed someone after an attack of colic, vomiting, diarrhea, excessive intercourse, or fatigue due to work, lack of sleep, fasting, or exertion in sports; and do not attempt this if the subject is lacking vitality because of some bodily injury or harm caused by a weapon; then purify their humors, drawing off any thick blood through diet and drink and medicines, provided you know how to use them properly; after which they should enter a bath - if there is no reason to prevent it - in order to thin out the blood, and bleed from the vein on the inner side of the elbow, as we have said before; the subject must then be guarded against any further labor or exertion that day, likewise lust or similar activities; the patient should remain calm and happy, whilst the one who is bleeding them stands above them, rubbing their arm two or three times until they feel a throbbing in the veins, at which point he tightens his grip with moderate force on the arm - too tight and the blood cannot flow properly. Then he moistens the iron with an old oil, then puts his left hand below where he intends to bleed them so that the vein doesn't collapse or break when it's cut;
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that escape like cords into the wound, and some of them are filled with windiness, so that when you place a flame on it, it retreats from the flame, and cannot open the vein; and thus is one among these things; if one opens the wound, then the wound becomes too narrow - for this reason, one must be careful in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the wound opens for the first time, it is good; but if not, one should try again a little below or above that place, unless the area has swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the area has swollen and the patient is afraid, one should wait for a day or two without binding the arm: perhaps some hot abscesses will appear; do not enter the bath, but instead try again to open the wound if you wish; if the hole is small, let the blood flow out carefully - you may doubt that it won't drain enough blood as you want, so apply fire directly onto this same opening; operate a little above the swollen area unless the wound is tiny. This happens often when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the place is swollen, do not restart the wound, and apply a poultice of oil, as it reduces the body's blood flow, and in this place, oil has a cooling effect. Thus administer an oil-based ointment for each dressing that treats open wounds to stop bleeding; this same method produces good results when using triacle (a medicinal syrup) or egg whites, when applied topically; they are so subtlely draw out the blood and separate it when it is too great.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a large abscess forms there which occurs many times, especially when it has not been properly dressed and the wound opening is small, then you must act quickly, and apply to the place warm sponge soaked in water and salt, and hold it for an hour; you should do this after the bleeding from the wound stops. If after a few days some blackening or greening remains there, it will not be harmful; but if you see any of these signs, then use some aloe or myrrh mixed into gallic juice, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often abscesses and appearances occur in the healing of the basilica: so place your hand on it, and if you find the area soft when pressed with the hand, then this appearance is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, avoid putting anything on it that we have mentioned, for perhaps the cut is close to an artery; but apply a dry poultice to harden the area, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw from each person's blood according to the quantity of its quality, and the colour of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it as thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And for one who is full and strong, requiring blood extraction, make a wider wound, and let the flame be wide; for someone who is weak, do the opposite, and they must be bled little by little, often, and should be bled by making an oblique incision rather than pricking; this manner of bleeding is safe from excessive loss of blood and cutting nerves, and it is better than long or wide incisions.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for someone whose body requires bleeding, give them bread moistened in pomegranate juice; if they are heated, take blood three or four times; and if they have a cold constitution, feed them before the bleeding moistened bread with musky syrup or aromatic honey syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and an odorous syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he loses consciousness due to excessive blood loss during the operation, it is necessary for him to drink meat broth and subtle fragrant syrup, and to use other things that we have mentioned in the section on fainting, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to bleed his arm and perform another operation, it is necessary, when he is weakened by severe bleeding, that he bleed little by little, according to the amount of strength he has, continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if one wishes to bleed his arm after the first bleeding operation, and he has a strong constitution, then he should be bled seven hours after the first bleeding or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if one wishes to bleed in another part of the body, then he should be bled on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood within the body that has already heated up, and causes fever; it must be drawn out in great quantity, and the opening widened until it ceases in remission; then you should reapply all the conditions of healing, and place your hand on their pulse as they heal, so death does not come to the place of remission, and this happens many times when the healer is negligent; and do not apply pressure strongly when you wish to free the arm, and make blood flow a second time, if the opening has closed; or if it curves, stretch out the arm quickly, for that would be bad; but leave it as it heals a second time; or prick at the tip of the flame, until the blood that is congealed exits through the vein's opening, and apply a small piece of linen soaked in water, pressing lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the wound is swollen, leave it alone and do not constrict it until the abscess has subsided.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, do so in the same place or in another vein, or even on the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein between the arms is bled instead of the one on the head because it is more accessible.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	The method of bleeding is as follows: the patient immerses their hand in warm water until the veins turn red; they are then tied loosely so that the vein stands out clearly, and now it is bled through its full length but not across or along it; make the incision wide open, and bleed close to where the fingers join the hand, and if blood does not come out, immerse the hand in warm water again, letting the blood flow into the water until enough has been drawn off; and do not re-immerse the hand in warm water if the patient is feverish because this is done more often in winter than in summer. And bleeding from this vein is safer than all other veins because there are no arteries or nerves here.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The bleeding of the right palm is beneficial for all diseases of the liver, and here's how: Stretch out the hand and immerse it in hot water until the vein swells up so that it shows; if the vein runs sideways and you cut straight across it, there will be no harm; but don't cut too deep because below all are nerves stripped bare of flesh; then put the hand back into hot water if blood has clotted in the wound and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn as much blood as is needed, apply oil and linen to the vein to seal the wound, and do likewise for each tube.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	Bleeding from the left hand is good for disease of the spleen, and do everything just as I told you about the right one.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The bleeding of the saphenous vein is beneficial for all diseases that affect areas below the waist, such as illnesses affecting the uterus, retention of urine, kidney disease, and similar ailments in the hips, legs, and lower extremities.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its bloodletting is that the patient should immerse their foot in hot water, and rub over the vein until it ruptures, then bind it above the ankle joint; this vein lies at the ankle, and extends upwards along the leg towards the kidneys; bleed the larger kidney, or at the ankle, whichever moves more freely.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you bleed it over the foot, be careful not to damage the nerves underneath, and bleed across them as though cutting; let the blood flow freely.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot exit, place the foot in water, and let it thoroughly drain the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the veins fail to open the first time, try again a second time slightly higher, as the skin is salty; do not worry about nerves, as we have said, and do likewise with the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The skin of the sciatic vein is found above the ankle bone, and its opening serves to alleviate hip pain when hot blood is present.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	The quality of its opening is such that the patient should enter the bath and hold above the ankle for four days while twisting, as otherwise the vein will not open; if it does open, cleanse it in every way you can, and clean through it; it is better to cut it open, because the skin is salty, and this area is very sensitive in many men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you cannot find it, then treat any line of the leg that appears between the heel and little toe, avoiding the nerves; let blood flow from where you wish to see it, and then release the ligature, cover with cotton, and bind it tight; now she is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	cupping incisions
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping glasses are made of horn, or bronze, or glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by drawing out blood, or without puncturing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this non-puncturing cupping is also done in two ways: either using only fire, or without fire; and the cupping that involves puncturing and blood extraction is performed at fourteen places on the body, some of which are all over the head; others are on the neck; two more are under each armpit; one below the chin; another one on each shoulder; then there are cups for the loins, for both arms, for both legs, and finally for both ankles; but this cupping does not draw out blood but only minor veins scattered in the flesh, and so it doesn't weaken a person like bleeding from a vein would do; neither type of cupping should be administered either with or without fire to any sickness that comes from excess until all such fullness is removed.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if it is necessary due to illness or for treatment purposes, cupping must be administered each hour at the beginning of the month, or towards the end, and in between; because there are those who, when they need cupping, suffer from a heavy head; and some experience fullness and redness on their face, neck, and forehead; while others find a drop of blood in their mouth, have an enlarged tongue, and spit up blood; and still, there are some who see blood, cuts, corpses, and similar things in their dreams.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially when it is midway through the month, we instruct them to undergo cupping after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The bleeding of the temple helps with the headaches... that affect the eyes, and it should not be done after draining all the body's fluids; this cupping takes place instead of bleeding from the head veins, and those who have a cold constitution must not use it or they who suffer from catarrh, for it does them great harm; and therefore the elderly must not do so nor those suffering from cold illnesses in the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who heal often become forgetful, so it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little further down due to the fear of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	Cupping on the neck is in place of healing the head and brain, and for this reason, it helps with the narrowing of the chest, splitting of the canal of the lung, coughs, and fullness; one must be careful as if it holds too tightly, it can cause forgetfulness or stomach and heart issues.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	Cupping at the two collarbones is useful for headaches, eye pain, and migraines, as well as suffocation and tooth root pain; it replaces healing of the brain, and you must instruct the healer to extend their hand when placing it so they do not compress the artery or cause bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The swelling below the chin is due to mouth ailments and gum infections, as well as similar oral diseases, it occurs at the site of incisions on both lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Swelling in the shoulders is indicative of an illness caused by heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	Swelling in the armpit is just like that of the three veins in the arm, for it draws blood from these large vessels; instruct the surgeon not to make too deep an incision, as the area lacks flesh and has nerves and arteries underneath.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The swelling on the buttocks is indicative of haemorrhoids and underlying illnesses; it requires a large cup made of brass with strong suction power; if it were thin, it would break and cause major injuries.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The cups on the legs heal clearly, for they draw blood from all over the body, and are good for old pains of the kidneys, and of the uterus, and of the bladder, and bring down fevers; and they are placed on the two hips, and the two ankles, but nonetheless they weaken the body after long use, and cause fainting in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the cup is that you put it in place first while empty, and suck it firmly, and press it down quickly, and move it evenly, and do not stop until you see the area red and swollen, and the redness of the blood appears; then withdraw, and reposition the cups, and be mindful of the condition of the body, for some have tough flesh, and others tender skin: so one must strike only once, and make wide wounds, and somewhat deep; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to thin out the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we want to draw out small amounts of blood, we only need to strike once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want to draw out a large amount of blood, we strike often; and if the blood is thick, it must be struck perfectly, and the result is that the heart is pierced suddenly, and it is necessary for those with thick and hard skin, and who have narrow veins, to anoint the cupping glass orifices with aperient and dissolutive oil: if it is in summer, violet oil, almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is in winter, cress oil, lily oil, chamomile oil, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take almond oil, or oil of balm, or dill oil, and their likes.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one who is healing has tender flesh and large pores, it should not be oiled, but instead it should be washed after the fomentation with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or squash water, or china root water, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And for those with excessive moisture, rise easily with myrtle water, or sumac water, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those with large excesses should be treated with old wine, or water from a fig, or a decoction of dill or chamomile, and others like these; they ought not to be cupped before the bath nor in it, but after the bath for an hour or two; neither ought they sleep after the fomentation, but instead lie down when one must do a fomentation and when one is doing it.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And take care if the patient is choleric and their blood is too thin and inflamed; they should eat cold things like pomegranates and endive and lettuce at ease, similar things, drink little wine, eat pork fat, and moist meat.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And for those with a cold constitution, take honey syrup and medium aromatic wine, which is between old and new, eat little, drink little wine, eat pork fat, small birds, and pigeons; on the day they are cupped, they should drink more than eat; sometimes give some men treacle or nutmeg before or after cupping to strengthen principal members; although this thins blood, those who already have hot blood must not take it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The cups which are applied without any wounding are those that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen, podagra, on the belly, and buttocks, kidneys, and hip; for these parts do not tolerate being wounded, and it is done only to attract blood from one member to another as we also apply them on breasts when a baby suckles milk; in order to remove the viscidity that is present in such part as we place cups on belly or buttocks so as to diminish its dimensions; and for removing pain caused by concretions, calculi, if perchance it attracts concretion through its attractive power, or causes calculus to descend from its site. In this way it acts when applied on the liver and spleen where there is retention of flatulence and these cups are administered empty so as to suck only; sometimes they are administered together with fire, at other times filled with warm water like in diseases of pleurisy; and such a cup is filled with hot water alone or some herb suitable for this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The way to apply a fire cupping device is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And let it be two fingers wide and half a palm deep, with a small hole on its side in the middle, just enough to push a needle through, and made of brass, soft in front so as not to hurt the patient when applied to the limb; and have in the middle an iron or steel bar, to hold a burning candle, and these come in various sizes according to the disease and age of those who use them; for cupping devices used on children are different from those used on the elderly, and thin people require different ones than fat people.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one must thus place this cupping device on the limb: take a wax candle or taper and put it inside the cupping device through the bar in its center, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cup to prevent burning the patient; then place it on the limb with your fingers over the hole we mentioned before, so when you want to release the vapors, lift off the cup and take the taper as before, and repeat this process often if needed.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the cupping treatment that is applied for pleurisy, it is completely airtight, with no tube or opening, and is only administered when it is full of water, being placed solely on the affected limb. And this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Cupping is only applied to those body parts where cupping cannot be directly administered due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; also to the bare bone, like fingers or toes, and other similar parts. The quality of this treatment requires that when you find leeches that are in clear, clean water without any impurities, take them out; place them overnight in clean water so they become familiarized and have nothing in their bellies; then bleed the limb with a lancet and cupping, rubbing it until it is red, and apply the leeches. When they are full and fall off, if this is an area where cupping can be applied, do so, for it will prove very beneficial afterward.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If this does not work, then apply a hot compress first, and afterward with cold water, it is very effective, and then apply a poultice; if the wound heals too quickly after the application of leeches, wet a piece of linen cloth in cold water and place it on top until the bleeding has stopped; if the bleeding becomes excessive, apply crushed vitriol or gallnuts and similar substances until it stops; you can also put half of a peeled broad bean pod over the wound and leave it there until it dries up at the wound site, this will staunch the flow now; if more is required, take other leeches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the leeches do not want to take hold, rub the wound with fresh blood, or prick it with a needle until blood appears, and then place them on top; as soon as they sense the presence of blood, they will attach themselves; once you see that they are feeding, sprinkle some powder of aloe and crushed psyllium or ash over them, and they will now stay put.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with setting fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, my dear son, that if foolish physicians neglect this chapter and never turn to the ancient books or read any letters in them; for this reason science is neglected in our land, since I have never found a good one among them, nor do they know anything except through the science of these ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated their science and by experiment and through the experience of my life; and I have described to you in this chapter what it contains, having abridged it at the end and shown clearly the forms of instruments employed, as I did in these two previous chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is necessary, therefore, that we say in the prologue of this book the main points of the words and chapters where the sage puts his understanding, and remains focused on truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	When a fracture or dislocation or twisting or breaking occurs to someone, you must quickly bleed the patient on both sides if nothing else hinders you, such as bodily weakness, children, or elderly; unless the weather is too hot or too cold; and avoid eating cold foods like salads, pigeon meat, and goat meat, and do not drink wine, eat fatty meats, nor overeat flesh foods that fill the veins with blood until you are certain there is no hot abscess or discharge of matter to the limb. Then may the patient return to his former condition which he was used to govern himself in.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	When the broken bone begins to heal, one must feed the patient with nourishing meats that promote growth and have viscosity, such as wheat cooked in water, rice, eggs, feet, cow stomach, chicken eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For too much nourishment causes swelling and delays healing of the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the broken bones of the elderly and decrepit cannot heal or fuse well according to their natural state due to the dryness of their limbs; nor can those who are too young as their bones are still soft like those of small children. But there is a cure: place large splints above the broken bone which bind and join the limb together, strengthening it as it was before; do not cease this treatment entirely but continue until healed and for this one must nourish with nourishing meats as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from that of the arm, or the leg, and I shall tell you in this chapter all the types of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is fracture that requires resetting, and another by sharpening, just like the cut of a quill to write with.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is fracture accompanied by wound, or just a small crack in the bone.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And for each type of fracture there is its own method and proper instrument for restoration according to the memory that returns when in place; and bone fracture is known by twisted position, clearly visible externally, and sounding hollow under pressure from the hand; and where there is no deformity nor sound upon touch, and patient feels little pain, then there is probably no fracture but rather a twist or small crack or hairline fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You must not move it by hand, but apply the following medicines, then hold it firmly yet gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Know that the fracture which goes into the shoulder blade, where the two parts are separated, must now be brought together evenly, unless a hot abscess forms there; and if a hot abscess appears, leave it alone for one day until the abscess subsides; then reset it smoothly and gently, and know that its restoration is easier than that of one with pieces; hold it as described below.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone it is broken into pieces, stretch it out in two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or to your hand if it is a small limb, or with two cords, or with one cord and by hand; place the member according to its natural shape so that when the broken parts of the member are separated, bring them together using all means possible as smoothly as you can, taking care not to cause injury or pain to the patient; arrange the two ends of the bones well according to their best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And one feels it well with the hand if it seems to you that it is not well: so treat it gently, and do not hold it too tightly or press it as those who cause by their work a hot abscess and contraction in the limb, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is in place, chastise well the patient so that they do not move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, turning or in any other way; and make sure the limb is secured so that there is no pain felt.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when there is no pain felt, it is not in place, and one must put it into such a position that there is no pain; and be careful that it is straightened properly so that no twisting comes about when restored; and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme. 
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For the smaller limbs, such as arms and fingers and similar ones: one must wrap soft and fine linen cloths; and for those that are thicker, like thighs and legs: one must wrap with a wide and hard bandage, because wide bindings embrace all of the larger limb, constricting it evenly from all sides so there is no pressure. Then bind light pads around it three or four times depending on the limb, tightening your hand slightly to the whole binding; then go above the fracture and tighten less so that the fracture may move away a little; and loosen the binding little by little until you take up most of the healthy part. Then resume with another bandage, wrapping again onto the fractured area; then return to underneath the fracture and bind moderately, neither too strong nor too weak as we have said in the first binding above. Then put between the bindings linen pads or cloths so that it is all even, then bind everything from above with a cloth, and then apply your splints well done if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or abscess, apply a soothing warm poultice for abscesses and reduce the swelling, leaving it like that for several days; then place your stars above these rods, which are half of a wide cane cut carefully, or from wood used to make shingles, or palm ribs, and let them be shaped as follows:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	but the rod that is placed over the fracture must be slightly thicker and wider than the others; it should also be as long as the limb needs in size or length; then fasten above these rods like you did with the first binding, then bind a thread on top appropriately, just like the first binding for the fracture; being narrower at one end and broader at the other; and ensure that the threads are of medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and use soft flax; because if they are thick, as I have seen in works by fools who make their bindings with twisted linen threads, this is a major mistake, for the binding cannot be even if it is too tight, and there should not be less than two fingers' breadth between each rod.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the head of the rib after compression in their body, place compresses made from linen or woolen bandages underneath so that they do not bruise.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by a fracture and the heart is broken, I will discuss its treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And you should not extract ribs too close to the broken limb on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limb is large, one should not insert ribs before five or seven days have passed, or more depending on your assessment of the severity of the abscess that may arise; and see here the method for making old plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and torsions: it is necessary that you take flour from the walls of a mill, and mix it with many eggs, then apply this concoction - neither too runny nor too thick - and use it thus. This is the common way to make healing plaster for broken limbs in various situations, especially for women and small children as it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Autre maniere d'emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d'uef; se li complexion de l'ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Autre maniere d'emplaustre que vaut a torsion: take mugwort and viscous mallow, each 10 pennies; myrrh and aloe, each 9 pennies; aconite 6 pennies; Armenian bole 10 pennies, and grind well, then mix with water or egg white, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way of applying a plaster to dislocated joints and displaced bones, easing the pain arising from strains, wear on the bone, and fractures: take new wool, soak it in easy oil and cook it in oil, then place it over the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not restore health but they are good for treating hot abscesses and properly alleviating pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way of making a plaster that heals broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth-green leaves (or ivy), grind them together, then make a plaster from the mixture.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another type of plaster for the restoration of broken bones and to reduce the remaining abscesses.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take roots of marshmallow, chamomile flowers, violets, vetch flour, one part each; grind and mix with wine, if the limb is warm, mix with moist coriander water or plain water, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another type of stronger plaster for cases of hard abscess during limb restoration.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take marshmallow roots and flax seeds, pomegranate peels, melilot, sanicle, violet flowers, and chamomile; one part each; grind and mix with salted water or fresh water depending on the warmth of the limb, or wine according to its restfulness.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras states in his book that one should not place anything on the broken limb to restore it other than a mixture of wax and oil; he says it must be between two substances, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And Galen suggests that one should apply dry substances a little warm to the broken limb for restoration, such as myrrh, aloe, and incense, and similar things, just as we have mentioned.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another plaster that is good for injury and pain: take mugwort and chopped human hair, or bird feathers, with viscum albus and salt in equal parts; grind them up, make a plaster, and bind it on.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then you should loosen the binding a little afterward and check if the patient feels no pain or movement of the bone from its place; do not loosen it too much at once. If there is any pain, itching, twitching, or swelling, then hurry up, undo the bandage, remove the plaster now, take light cloth, moist sea sponge, dip in water, and cover the area until the itching stops and the pain subsides; leave the limb at rest for an hour, then apply dry linen, soaked either in water or rose oil, bind it lightly overnight, as long as you are certain that there is no hot abscess. Calm down the inflammation of the limb and remove the pain, then start again with light binding and a little plaster without too much tightness like before; do this gently until it heals.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess has cooled, turned red, caused pain, and swollen after everything has been removed, and you need an ointment and bandage, then start again, just as you did previously in the same manner.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	If nothing happens to the limb as we have mentioned, do not release it for three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, depending on what you observe, until the fracture heals, and the flesh approaches the joint; then restrain it more firmly than before, and thicken its meat, as I said earlier; if you see that the place is drying out more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot reach there; therefore moisten it with warm water every time you release it, every three days, and ease up a little on the binding; through this process, nourishment reaches the limb, and corrects what foolish doctors do by restoring the limb crookedly: this is harmful, and such work is fearful, and I see nothing else but to leave it alone and treat it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of various kinds of fractures
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many types of fractures and different shapes, and their causes are distinct; for there are fractures caused by the strike of a sword, where the blade takes out all the bone up to the soft part beneath it, like how an axe or wooden pole would break something; thus this type of fracture is called 'haichure'.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	When the sword strikes bone above without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called 'absolute'; the wound from these two types of fractures can be large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded percussion wound, or fissure caused by stone or wooden pole, or from falling on stones, or other similar causes.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating fracture, which reaches the membrane beneath the bone or upon it, and this wound may be either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound that pierces the bone as subtly as a hair, and the crack is small, and for this reason, this fracture is called "capillary"; and if the wound is made by striking with a stone or falling or similar, and it drives a piece of bone inward, and the hairline crack occurs like what happens when coppersmiths strike upon cauldrons; so too does stone enter within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more often in those with moist bones underneath the head, such as children's heads; and it occurs for all these types of fractures that small fragments are driven apart like stars; and I will speak of them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all manners of fractures through their displacement, examination at touch, and the corrupted flesh that is upon them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The fracture's likeness is known by this: when the bone is exposed, and one rubs upon it, the dark fracture opens up.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In treating the fracture, take heed of the patient's accidents, and if you see any ill accident such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, swelling, numbness, fever, eyes issuing forth blood and turning red, and other similar conditions in various dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see no fearful accident, and hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the fracture comes to you first, and it is in winter, then you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day so that you can treat it.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the summer, hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, unless the membrane beneath the bone has become corrupted, and the accidents we mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the bone fracture extends to the membrane covering the brain, then you must cut open the affected area like this: take the head of the injured patient and expose the bone in every way possible, especially over the wound's shape; if there is bleeding when exposing the bone or a hot abscess appears, treat it appropriately, and fill the space with wet dressings soaked in rose oil; let the wound rest until the hot abscess subsides and you are sure there is no more bleeding; then begin to remove [the membrane] around the bone, and this is done in two ways of operation: one way is to cut a narrow incision in front, and this is its form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then he makes another incision greater than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	The second method is that you have several different types of incisions: some narrow and others wide, all pointed, and made with a fine iron; operate lightly so as not to injure the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and thick, you must drill around it rather than using incisions with trepans which would not fully penetrate through the skull bone; there should be a margin or circle above the point to prevent the point from penetrating beyond the bone. You will need several of these so that each one corresponds to its place on the specific type of bone, and thus you will have trepans for every part of the head. This is the form of three types of trepans:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you place I tarere on the bone, and turn your fingers until you know the bone is pierced; then move the tarere elsewhere a little after, and do this all around, then cut with the incising instruments the space of the bone between the openings, doing it as finely and lightly as possible, as we have said, so that you draw out the bone by hand or any instrument like pincers. Take care not to touch the brain or membrane.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and drawn out the bone, it is necessary that you clean off any remaining marrow with all other instruments similar to an incising tool, but they must be more sharp and fine than the other incising tools; and if there remains anything of small bones or scales, remove them lightly with one of the instruments; then treat the wound with sutures and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of treatment is as Galen describes it, which is safer; he praised it greatly, and these are his words.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	You must first uncover a part of the bone where the fracture is visible, so that when you have uncovered this area, you will place beneath it the head of this lenticular cutter, which has this shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side only, as the blade has sharp edges on both sides, so that the cutting edges face towards the bone; then strike it gently with a small mallet so you tap the bone lightly all around, and be very careful of the membrane that lies beneath; if it is attached to the bone, remove it gently, for it can be removed without harm or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate to the marrow, and the bone is only cut from above, with small pieces remaining, it is necessary to smooth this roughness, and remove the scales using a fine rasp, of which you must have various sizes, to suit each place most suitably, according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Use large rasps first, then smaller ones, and do not stop until it is smooth.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the finer chiselling and delicate fractures, you must adapt the treatment according to its direction; this is something not taught to one who has merely studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the wound is uncovered, you must take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, then place it on the wound; next, take another cloth, doubled over twice or three times, and dampen it in wine and rose oil, placing it on top of the first cloth; do this gently so as not to irritate the wound, then bandage lightly above with another cloth, but do not bind too tightly beyond just holding the wound in place; leave like this for one or two days until the hot abscess subsides, then remove the dressings and apply medicines such as lily root, barley flour, incense powder, and similar things; make a powder from these and apply to the wound, then use non-biting medicines without any cutting; ensure that the wound remains clean and do not let it seal over with flesh, for when flesh grows over the brain membrane, it rots and can harm the patient; and when biting medicines are applied, they necrotise above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take heed therefore, if any ill accident comes to the patient, as we have said, it is indeed doubtful without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if blackening only comes from the medicine that has been applied, which has such a quality, then you must take some honey, and three parts of rose oil and glue one cloth, and place it on the affected area; then treat it in the manner of treatments required until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the upper arm are broken, or just one, for there are two bones; and the lower part is cartilaginous, it does not break but only becomes dislocated or twisted, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, you must insert your little finger into the opening of the arm, and place that break equally inside your index finger, and push from below so that the arm returns to its natural shape; do this gently, and take care that the patient does not feel pain due to your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part above the nose, and the two parts cannot come together, you must set it equal to the head of a slightly thicker nail.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in two parts, remake it likewise, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the hot abscess has cooled, then cover the head of the nose with strips of fine linen cloth, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Where you place another one from the other side, if the break is there; and let the strips be so thick that they fill the holes of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some restorers say that one must moisten the strips with butter, and change them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem to me that this is good, but it should be moistened with egg white and flour mixture; then leave the tent until the bones are firm and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	Sometimes goose feathers are used instead of tents, and a soft cloth is wrapped around it, and the patient blows through it to keep it in place; do as you wish.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess appears at the nose while you are working on it, put some ointment or moist cotton soaked in rose oil, or a piece of diacodium.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no abscess appears there, apply a plaster externally made of powdered sisymbrium and frankincense mixed with egg white, then put some light tow on top, but do not tie the nose; if the fracture is small and the bone broken into small pieces, extract them using appropriate instruments for this, then clean the wound and treat it with suitable plasters and ointments; and if there is no wound inside the nose, treat it with tents and put some splints of lead until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the fracture of the jaw.
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is fractured from below, and there is no external wound, and the break is only outside without breaking into two pieces or being pushed inwards like an arch, it can be diagnosed easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the break is on the right side, you must insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is on the left jaw, use the index finger of your right hand to push the broken piece in gently, while supporting it from outside with the other hand, until they are even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jaw fracture is separated into two pieces, you must apply extension to both parts until they are aligned.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if movements of the teeth occur, or breakage, draw them together with a thread of gold, silver, or silk; then apply softened wax to the broken jaw and cover it with double cloth; place over this a large pad well made, or an equal piece of leather long and wide according to the jaw, and bind it above as tightly as you can, commanding the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the shape changes, release it on the third day and then reset what has moved; apply ointment over this, of flour from the mill with an abundance of egg or sesame flour after removing the wax; cover the ointment with a light cloth, and if the plaster hardens and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until they are healed; often they heal in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if a warm abscess arises, treat it as we have said many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is both a fracture and a wound together, remove any pieces of bone that have been dislodged; do so carefully with suitable instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with a flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Once you have removed all these fragments and there are no more remaining, cleanse the wound if it is wide, and apply suitable dressings to promote flesh growth until it heals.
de la forcele	To strengthen it.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The collarbone breaks many times in front, towards the shoulder, and this fracture occurs in three ways: it may break and separate into two, with fragments, which is the easiest to heal; or there may be a fracture accompanied by a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie,
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need more extension, place beneath the patient's shoulder a round cushion made of cloth or wool, and make it thick according to your need; stretch and lift the arm, and grasp the cushion in your hand, so that you set the dislocation evenly as required.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the arm bone outwards because it is too deep, then the patient must often lie on their back, and place a medium-sized pillow beneath the shoulder, and have your assistants push the shoulder downwards until the bone of the upper arm is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then address the dislocation with your hands, and if you find it is fragmented, then you must split [the skin] above it; pull the fragments outwards gently, and if the bone cannot be joined by any elevation, cut one of the incisors that you have to fit beneath the upper arm bone, but place this instrument under the armpit to guard against infection:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	et semble une cuiller, et n't est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l'os et la possance de l'uevre;
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	Et if hot abscesses form, soak a cloth with rose oil, olive oil, and wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Li estrignement de l'os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l'os l'enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met i drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort i petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the shoulder's fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And before the shoulder is reset whether at its widest or narrowest point, and do not place it in force through manipulation; instead, prepare it according to the shape of the fracture, and return it to its natural form as much as you can; then apply some mill flour paste mixed with egg white, soft plugs, and a double cloth on top; next, put a broad yet subtle strip over these things, slightly wider than your shoulder, if there is hair in any place under this strip, cover them with linen wool to ensure the strip lies flatly; and then secure it all firmly with a large bandage so that the strip does not move from its position, and check the binding each day; every time you notice softening, tighten it once more, and adjust the strip if it is off-centre, and let the patient lie on their side; after 20 or 25 days, the shoulder will have been restored. Once this number of days has passed, remove the bindings, be sure to take care as there are no bones that can be easily moved about.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a part of the bone juts out, and pierces under the heart, then operate above it, remove it, and do as we have said for healing an abscess after breaking a rib.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breastbone fracture.
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The breast is sometimes fractured in the middle, but this happens rarely; it often fractures on the outside.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is fractured in the middle, it leans downward and causes the patient great pain, shortness of breath, coughing, and occasionally vomiting blood; the ends of the broken bone are exposed and clearly visible through the skin.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	The treatment is for the patient to lie frequently on their back, and place a cushion between their shoulder blades; then press the shoulders together and bring the sides of the two sets of ribs together with your hands, carefully putting them in equal alignment in every way so that the shape of the bone is correct; then apply bandages and pads made from fine salt or other light material on top, wrap these in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone such that there is no movement; turn the binding around the back and tighten it appropriately, loosening it each hour, and tightening again if it becomes loose; and if it needs to be removed due to corrosion, itching at the site, pain or abscess, then hurry and remove it, scraping off the bandages, and addressing any issues that have arisen with treatment; then reapply the bandages, tightening them until the wound has healed.
de la brisure des costes	Of rib fractures
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that rib fractures only occur in the back and towards the head inside, and they bend easily because they are delicate; one feels it well during examination with the hands.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And for the restoration, you must set the fracture evenly as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply a plaster, and restrain with a bandage if needed.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	If the rib fracture moves inward, the patient feels great pain and pricking, like pleurisy, as the bone pierces the tissue; they have difficulty breathing, cough, and vomit large amounts of blood, which is an emergency, and older doctors applied major treatments.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And there are some who say that it is necessary to administer meats that swell the belly in order to expel the rupture outwardly.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not cause this, but rather the hot abscess comes if it has been there already.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it is present, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some of you said to put cupping glasses over the place to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the cupping glass may draw excess to the place due to weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some of you said to cover the place with wet wool in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make even the skin around it; then treat it with a phlegmon treatment, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient experiences great pain that they cannot bear due to the bone piercing the flesh, and there is doubt about their condition, then it is necessary to cut above the location of the broken rib, and one must place an instrument beneath to protect the soft tissue; and thereafter one should cut into the bone, extract it gently, and then sew the two lips of the wound together if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a warm abscess arises, apply moist rags soaked in rose oil to the affected area; treat it while considering the location appropriate for the abscess, and let it lie frequently on its side where needed until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	On the fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes there is breakage of bones in the neck, and it often occurs that they bend; also to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will heal or not, take note if their hands are softened, swollen, and numb, unable to move or extend, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is deadly in many situations, and if they change and feel well when pressed and pricked, know that the bone joint is saved, and the patient will be cured with proper treatment.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will heal or not, take note if their feet are softened, and if there is an accident involving what's in the hands, and on the back appears windiness and involuntary evacuation; and when turned over onto their stomach, there is also involuntary evacuation.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is reminded of it on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is fatal; do not labor in vain in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if these accidents do not occur, then the matter is more trivial.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is such that you first remove any hot abscesses, then apply fresh fat or yolk of egg on it until it is cooled; afterwards, put an emplastrum confortans and desiccating upon it, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and let him not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is severed, you must cut above the heart; and remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then treat it with ointment promoting flesh growth until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow", thrust your fist from your left hand into it, and make it equal to the other hand of your power, then put on the emplastrum and estele, should you need them; then hold it steady, and if there are severed bones, take them out, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the broken hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	If the hip bone is broken and it happens, there will be little shrinkage at the head; and they are bent long, and slanted backwards, and pain comes to the patient in that place, with pricking and swelling of what was broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you stretch your hand above it, so that you are over the break; and know what the break is and its shape; and if the break is at the head only, make that break even, so that it has a natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long or it angles inwards, make the patient lie on their belly so that you can see to restore this break.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it equal, place the poultice on top, then put a stick of wood or heartwood above it, and secure the broken part so that it does not move; and keep the place below the ribs level until the ligament is evened.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess forms there, do not touch it until the hot abscess is calmed, and place on it what we have previously mentioned; then return to the restoration process and secure it as necessary, unless some ill-accident should happen; this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of shoulder dislocation.
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The adjutoires is what is located between the neck and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of two methods. The first involves taking a piece of wood of similar thickness as follows:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And bind the two joints with two straps, raising them upwards and place the patient on a seat. Then cast their broken arm upon the wooden shaft so that it reaches to the armpit; insert into this a curved piece of wood, then hang some heavy object from the ministers which will pull downwards. Next have the physician bring both halves of the break together in his hands until they return to the correct position.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	The other method is to have the patient lie on their back and bind his hand to his neck; command two ministers to hold the broken ends together with one holding above the break while the other supports from below with straps. Then each must pull in opposite directions until both halves of the fracture are realigned correctly.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more intense, then tightly bind the ligament below the fracture and above it, and stretch each of the ministers to their respective sides.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, then you must place one ligament across it halfway below the joint and another towards the blade, under the fracture; likewise, if the fracture is on the side of the blade, place a light restraint without exertion until the bone is level with its socket and blade; then align the break as necessary, and secure it tightly, provided no abscess forms.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess forms, do not restrain it for seven days; apply moistened wool soaked in rose oil until the abscess is soothed; then secure it, and do so by placing a plaster over the fracture before reassembling the arm on its support, put your hand above the shoulder or chest, wrap with cloth, and bind firmly to the sling as well as to the arm, such that the arm remains elevated, unless something else prevents you from doing this, or if the bone is misaligned.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone has moved, use splints, and place a wider and stronger splint over the fracture, leaving one inch of space between each splint, with each splint being large enough to extend three inches beyond either side of the break; then draw them together as I explained at the beginning of this chapter on fractures, more firmly and less apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the placement of the splints and their tightness, as we have said when restoring a broken limb, and suspect warm pus has formed, leave it bandaged until the seventh day, as we explained; then check every three days that no itching or swelling appears at the site, nor can circulation be cut off from the limb due to too tight binding.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the address, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents occur, do not release the patient until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back with their hands placed on their stomach; place a cushion filled with wool beneath the injured area evenly, and watch every hour during the day or night to ensure that the broken limb does not move nor the ligaments soften; if it heals through the power of medicine, feed them the food we mentioned before, but in such a way that the first foods are delicate; and when they start recovering, make their diet richer.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	It is customary that the splint and leg should be checked after forty days in total; then they must be released, and one must administer a bath and medicinal ointments to correct the placement.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the dislocation is severe and stuck, it may take one day or two months to heal.
de la brisure du bras	Of the fracture of the arm:
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the 'humerus' (the larger bone) and the 'ulna' (the smaller bone), where one attaches to the wrist and the other sits below the little finger; perhaps only the large bone breaks, or maybe the small one, and sometimes they break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the smaller bone is fractured, the restoration is easier and faster healing occurs; when the larger bone is broken, healing takes longer and is more complicated than when they are both broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small knuckle bone that is broken, you should gently stretch it slightly and make sure it is aligned.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large knuckle bone that is broken, you should apply more force to straighten it; extend it on a cushion and hold the wrist of the hand higher than the others, with the small fingers lower than the other fingers, and have the patient cross their arms over themselves, with the cushion in front of them at a height where they can tolerate no strain. Then have one minister support the arm below the patient's hand or elbow, while another supports it above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	Then place the mirror flat, according to its best shape.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it is broken into pieces, you should put each piece back in its place and hold the heart-shaped one firmly; if you cannot restore it to its place, cut it out as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the fracture of bone in wound, I have spoken about it in the singular chapter; then take its treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if at the beginning of the restoration process, hot abscesses reappear, take a cloth and make a soft poultice with rose oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft; bind the cloth gently above it until the hot abscess is soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	Then remove the poultice and apply a plaster made with the mill powder and plenty of egg; place splints afterward, making sure that the splint for the fracture is stronger and slightly wider than the others; know that there should be six splints or arms in various arrangements: whether the fracture affects one bone, or two; secure firmly above the fracture rather than elsewhere, always less so as you move away, just as I explained at the beginning of this chapter. The cloths on top of the fracture should be soft and moist, never hard nor rough; and the thread used to bind them must be linen, neither too thick nor thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And rest the limb and its connection for some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching which occurs in the limb, it is necessary that you rinse the limb with warm water until the itch is soothed; and let the limb rest without tightness.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then begin the compression again, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones are separated or similarly misaligned, then realign them.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you note that blood cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you must soften it a little and leave it like this for some days until circulation returns, then apply compression again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said come to pass with the patient, do not release him until twenty days have passed.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	If the injury is around the neck, then tie his hands to his neck, ensuring that both collars are even and guard against movement and jerking; let him sleep on his back; know that this fracture will be healed in thirty or thirty-five days, perhaps only twenty according to the components and complexities of the remedies.
de la brisure de la main	On la breche de la main, tu la frotteras tant qu'elle soit chaude et moult roide; car souvent est elle si roide que tu ne puisses la froter a nul chastez; adonques la laisseras desiester par le temp, et tu l'oigneras comme nous avons dit. Et tu la frotteras XX jors ou XXX jors ou XL jors selonc qu'elle soit plus roide ou moins roide, jusqu'a ce que le os se joignent a son chastez; et si elle est de telle nature que les osses ne puissent estre a leur chastez par frottement ni par oignement, adonques covient il que tu les remettes en leur place.
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and the knuckles there are few fractures, but more often sprains occur.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is fractured or sprained, the patient should lie down with their arms crossed, sitting upright and facing forward evenly. Then place their hand on a flat surface, and the assistants must extend the broken bones, aligning them directly with the mirror, until they are properly joined; apply a plaster cast and bandages, unless an abscess appears, then put a splint according to the size of the area; it should be wrapped in one piece of linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	If the fracture is around the center of the palm near the stomach, make a sphere-like shape out of cloth, and instruct the patient to tighten it around their broken palm; then strain it with a long piece of fabric, and let the splint be made from soft leather as big as the palm of the hand, tie it tightly as needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is on the outside, you must place a splint above it and another below, in the palm, so that the hand remains open and straight, then bind it all around with bandages, tightening them between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture occurs in one of our fingers, be it the thumb, set it straight as it should be; and hold it with the palm, and if you wish to place a small splint to raise the fracture, and it does not move; and if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the index or any of the others, then align them and bind them together with the healthy finger that follows; or you may tie all four into an 'I' shape, whichever is better, or place a splint over them like on the thumb; and take care during restoration and abscess treatment, be mindful of hot stones, and assist those who come to you as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of a broken thigh.
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The thigh bone is often broken, and one can easily see this when it turns forward or backward; the restoration involves binding a bandage above and below the break.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on their face, then each assistant stretches out their bandage to an equal part; this is when the break is in the middle of the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is close to the root of the thigh, then one bandage should be towards the wrist, and the other bandages below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	Also, if the break is close to the knee, then the bandages should be placed near the knee, and the stretching should be done below; have the assistants hold the bone equal with their two hands, so it aligns with its natural shape, and then apply the plaster cast, binding it well, unless an abscess appears.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is hot abscess, let it cool down before returning to your work and treatment; the binding should be done in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You must wrap the fracture with a hard bandage doubled in II or III layers, leaving the excess, then turn the leg so that the heel reaches the groin's root, and pass the long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and bring the thread's end above; then turn back over the leg and the thigh with the bandage, then place stars on the fracture, and put a star on the bone of the leg; then fill the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths to equalize the pressure, then start tying firmly III or IV twists over the fracture; and as you go up from the fracture, lessen the pressure; then tighten the II ends of the thread that you passed between the leg and the thigh, and tie III stars that are above, then return below to the thread's end until you reach near the foot; and bind it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this, waiting for no abscess or swelling or other similar thing.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, undo it and address what has occurred, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that are stuck, you must remove them if possible; and if one cannot, then one must split the place and draw forth with force; and treat [the wound] as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thigh is broken and fixed with pins, as in the hip or arm; nevertheless, during such a restoration, the patient does not suffer.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And understand that the thigh is restored in L days, or perhaps a little less or more, according to the variations of constitutions [i.e., different patients].
de la ruelle dou genoil	Of the groove of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the alley of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is only a crack or a hole, and this occurs with all wounds, whether felt as pain or not, and one feels well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	One should restore it by placing something equal to what is round at its two sides so that they are joined as close as possible; then apply the plaster and place a round rod if needed, holding it tight as required, then follow all the arrangements we have mentioned for other breaks, such as hot abscesses and similar; provide each accident with what suits it until it heals.
de la brisure de la jambe	On the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is rightfully called "mustelz," and the other is named "foscile"; they both suffer breaks similar to those occurring in the arm, and for this reason their restoration is like that of the arm, equally so, and the treatments are all found therein. If these two bones break together, the leg becomes twisted on all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the subtle bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the thick bone is broken, one feels great pain and it shows clearly; it turns downwards.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore, provide extension and make it even, and bind the bones equally; however, if the break is ugly and there are multiple fragments, let the extension be less extensive and lighter; ease accordingly to your strength.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, and le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of broken bones in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no break, but in the bones of the foot a break can occur and at the toes sometimes only cracking takes place in various situations.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a break in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones protruding from one another, then have the patient put their foot on the ground, as if they want to walk, and then place your foot on theirs, where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their places; then apply a plaster cast and bandages above, and place underneath the sole of the foot a small board with two fingers' width, then bind it to the foot properly, then wrap it with cloth and other things you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, untie the bandage, for you will find the bones equalized, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	If there are any of the toes broken, restore them as we have said for fingers; then place in the broken toe a peg according to its length and somewhat wider, then put beneath the foot that board I mentioned, and strain it suitably; if there be two or three, or more, broken, place on each toe a peg according to its size wrapped in a piece of linen, and fasten the board beneath the foot; let it rest on the head of the board outside the front of the foot so that it holds well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things I have said about other fractures that we have mentioned previously; attend to each fracture as it should be done.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Of the broken bone of the wrist
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, make her sit with her legs spread wide, then lean her towards her back and hold her from behind; then fill the gap in the nature of the patient with cotton, putting as much in there as fits; stand up the woman and lift her back little by little, until the cotton pops out at the entrance of her nature, bringing the bone together with it; when she wants to pee, remove the cotton, and once she has peed put it back in again, do this for seven days or so: the fracture will be restored, and if you wish, take a goat's bladder, tie a reed to its hole, push all of the bladder into her nature, then blow hard through the reed until the bladder is inflated inside there; her nature will mend where it was broken, then fill with cotton again and leave for some days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the wrist in man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said for the hip bone; and these breaks are not hidden from those who apply themselves and use what they learn from my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break shows itself in many ways, showing the correct path to restoration; understand this then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In a broken penis, take the gullet of a goose and insert it inside; then wrap it with soft cloth around, and leave it for three days so it heals quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	For break with wound:
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	He who has a break with wound, especially if it is large like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, must be treated now as we have described for treatment of wounds.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, treat it with vitriol poultice, if you have nothing else, then repeat the treatment to restore the fracture that same hour or day, unless hot abscesses arise.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	If hot abscesses appear, leave the treatment until the ninth day, until the abscess has calmed down, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause a bad outcome.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	If the broken bone is apparent on an exposed heart, you must set it gently with your hands in a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension does not match your hand to align it evenly, reset it with this iron tool which is seven or eight inches long, and its width depends on the size of the wound; and for this, the surgeon needs to grip it firmly with three or four fingers, according to his need in each treatment of a fracture; and let it be round and slightly thick so that it does not bend under compression on the limb during your work, and let it be pointed at the front, and thicker towards the middle like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche", therefore the curved head must be placed on top of the visible bone; push it once until it returns and becomes even with each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must cut off the head of the bone until the instrument has enough power to do so.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then cut it with an appropriate instrument, whether a cutting or sewing tool of your choice; afterwards remove what remains in the bone of roughness and small flakes.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not yet in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	Si make sure it is in its place, then moisten a cloth with black astringent wine, and properly so if it is in summer; do not put any ointment or other oily substance on the wound, for this will cause suppuration and corruption; administer stars when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, cut the cover all around according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not constrained by the fracture; many a time have foolish doctors done this, and they have brought death or corrosion upon the patient; let the constriction be softer and gentler than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that evil accidents may come to pass, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then do not put stars on it; but wrap around it, instead of using stars, hard cloths, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is inflamed, remove what you have applied to it entirely, and put on a healing ointment such as tetrafarmacon and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	You must loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at night, until it is fused and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be bandaged in such a way that the bowstring runs downward slightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if after many days it does not heal but becomes inflamed again, know that there are small pieces of bone present, which is why you must probe the wound with a needle and remove all these loose pieces that cause such pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula develops at the site or any other form of corruption occurs, you must treat it according to what he says in his chapter beforehand.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	When the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, like the thighbone or shoulder blade, and other similar large bones, do not extract it as death often ensues. Leave it until it rots; perhaps it will fall out by itself after twenty or thirty days; then treat the wound if you can, otherwise leave it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Scabs that form over the healing.
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often see patients after they have recovered from their fracture, especially when it is near the joint and the deformity of the limb is evident, which sometimes prevents the limb from performing its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care if it is fresh: administer styptic medicines such as aloe, incense, myrrh, and saracolle, acacia gum, and similar substances; prepare any of these or all together with styptic wine, egg white, or wax; place on the night in a tight bandage, don't loosen for two days; then release it and start another one until the nodules are gone; you can also strap them to a well-made wooden board as wood has the property to reduce swelling of limbs; if they have already turned hard like stone and must be removed, cut out what is apparent and scrape off the remainder so that all traces are gone.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	Of the member which is weak after treatment
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is healed, and afterward the limb remains weak and delicate, it occurs for many reasons: one being that it was bound too tightly, and not as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, preventing nourishment from reaching the limb; or due to excessive draining; or because of overly large movements, not at the right time; or because there is little blood in their body, thus making them weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment is that you make the patient eat, and soften their body so that blood multiplies within them; administer a bath to them, and provide joy and leisure; then place pitch on the limb so that the pitch attracts great nourishment, and often moisten it with warm water until nourishment reaches the limb; and return it to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	A joint twisted after the injury.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is visible, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the fools who say that one should break the limb anew, and many a fool has done this in our land; and these practices are condemned, resulting in great harm, even death; however, if the inflammation and pain are fresh, they should be treated with warm water, or softening herbs cooked, such as leaves of mallow, roots, and honeysuckle, and similar things; then apply a softening poultice, like well-made aquilano plaster, and take the mucus of mallow, mix it with chicken fat or sesame oil, and make a poultice out of it; alternatively, you can take fatty figs, grind them with fenugreek flour, and similar medicines that facilitate healing.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the swelling is removed by continually and thoroughly rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	Make gentle movements to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	If the tendon is shrivelled and hardened like stone, and must be removed with an iron instrument, cut it away as close to the bone as possible using a fine, sharp incision; then apply stitches and take care in treating the wound.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs to anyone, you must now reset it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	If you delay, the joint swells, and by chance if it is reset painfully to its place; for this reason, one must not move it while swollen: often causing spasm and other pains; nevertheless, when this happens, make the patient bleed, then leave them alone until the abscess has healed; then bathe the limb in warm water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each member as the cure progresses.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the head down to foot.
des mandibules	Of the jaws.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, 
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns through various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete and whole, you must reduce the dislocation quickly, without delay; in such a way that the assistant holds the patient's head, and with one of their hands they push on the mirror under the chin at the root of the dislocated jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is in two parts; and keep the other hand outside, to provide balance; instruct the patient to relax, their jaws, and move them around freely.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	The mirror is placed evenly until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if reducing it is difficult, especially if they are both jaws together, soak them in hot water and oil until they can be gently pulled back; do not delay the reduction as we have said before.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are repositioned evenly, and the patient's wound is closed without softening it, place on it moistened compresses in a cerote made of rose oil and wax, then lightly bind it with soft bandages; let the patient sleep on their back, with two cushions supporting their shoulders so that they cannot move them to either side, nor strain themselves by trying to chew, but take light food until the pains are gone, and keep their jaws bound; and thereafter eat what they wish in a gentle manner, not forcing open their mouth for eating or drinking, until the jaw is well healed and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be reset at once and fail to return to their original position, then fevers and sweating may follow, possibly accompanied by a loosening of the bowels or even vomiting up clear fluid.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, know that it is destruction; and many times the one it befalls dies within nine days.
de la forcelle	Of the fork.
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The fork cannot be reset from the sides within its limits; sometimes it is dislocated externally and this can be easily felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is as follows: let the patient lie often on their back and extend their arms; then press the place strongly with your palm and it will return to its position; afterwards apply a plaster and bandage, holding it in place; but the head that faces towards the neck cannot be reset; unless if possible, or if it is dislocated at some time, then reset it as we have described above; after this, put on the plaster and bind it with a bandage again, restraining it, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed. The same procedure applies for the shoulder head when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: thus one is that it dislocates at the part of the socket below; and the second is at the part of the chest; and perhaps it dislocates above, and this happens rarely; and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor inside toward the nerves; and many times it dislocates below towards the socket, especially in those who have little flesh, for it falls out easily; in those who have enough flesh, it falls with difficulty, and enters with difficulty.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And perhaps it happens to some men by blow or fall, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, and one thinks that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	You must therefore test it until you are certain; then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	The dislocation is recognized when the arm falls towards the shoulder blade and there is an obvious difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a noticeable disparity between them; and at the head of the shoulder, there is a depression, and beneath the shoulder blade, on touching the head of the shoulder, it feels like an egg; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose or make any movements; and if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you will find it clearly upon touch; and this type of dislocation is not difficult to reset when it is recent or in children.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	The method is for the assistant to lift the patient's hand upwards and then place their fists beneath the shoulder blade while lifting the joint forcefully upward into its correct position; the assistant should raise the patient's hand and stretch it upwards before placing it underneath, and this will bring relief.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said in ordinary days afterward, then the patient must be bathed in warm water; and bring him a moistening and softening remedy, such as a decoction of alum, fenugreek, and sweet clover in water, and let it be administered; then remember to place the patient on his back, and put beneath him an even woolen cushion that is neither too soft nor too hard, then have the physician place their heel on the cushion, lift the head of the shoulder virtuously, and pull the patient's hand; and another assistant should hold the patient's head so it does not move downward; that shoulder will return immediately, and if you wish to reset it according to this manner: and make sure there is a third man present who is stronger than the patient; he must be upright facing the side of the patient, then push his shoulder beneath the patient's cushion, lifting the cushion upwards so that the patient hangs in the air; while another assistant pulls the patient's hand downward toward their belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, weigh them down with something heavy, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And it is also reset in another manner: take a long pole and drive it into the ground, so that the shoulder aligns like a piston, neither too thick nor too thin; then place it beneath the patient, with soft cloths underneath, and have the patient lie down along the length of the pole; extend their arm on the other side very gently, and the joint will return to its place gradually; if it does not wish to return despite all these methods we have mentioned, perform this cure: take a pole two arms in length and four palms wide, with a rounded head so as to perfectly enter through underneath the shoulder blade, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lie above the head of the wounded man a cloth that does not hurt him and put it under the arm of the patient; spread his arms on top of the long board, tie up the shoulder to the board then fasten the arm at the head end by the hand, place the other arm along a peg in an upright partition with hands hanging down and leave the body let hang from the opposite side: the joint is replaced now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, no matter how it was done, you must put under the arm a wad of equal wool then apply the plaster prepared with flour powder, incense and egg white over all shoulder and around, then tighten the strap under the arm accordingly, return the binding on top of the plaster, embrace the hand to his neck, and leave hands in that position.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And he should eat little, until the limb is strengthened, for then it will heal faster; and after five or seven days, let him eat more, and move [the limb]; if it is firm and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has moved out of place due to moisture or for any other reason, you must apply cauterization to three openings, as described before in the chapter on cauterization.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this and it dislocates again after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot lift his arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is either cut, stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be put back in place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the arm, and the breasts, or at the back, is caused by an impact, and a stretch of hands, and it should be treated elsewhere; heal until it is cured.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing process, there is cracking in the limb, and delayed movement, let the patient bathe frequently until this cracking eases, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of shoulder dislocation:
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the shoulder joint is repeatedly dislocated and returns to its place; if it is fully dislocated, especially from front to back, and the dislocation is not corrected because it can be clearly seen and felt; and it varies depending on each person's anatomy.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick person's wound with the healthy one, you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	Because the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm or reach their shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must reset it before any abscesses form, for if an abscess forms, it will be difficult to reset; and perhaps it cannot be completely reset, especially when it is at the back; thus it is worse than other dislocations, causing even more pain, and sometimes death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration occurs when it is such that one can reset it; you extend their arm with both your hands; their arms should be spread out, and their palms facing towards you all around, above and below; push the joint into its socket or at the root of their palm until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he bends his hand towards his hand, and press against the root of the palm the bone which has come out of joint.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	If it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension; while one minister extends the arm, let the other extend it too so that it doesn't move during the extension; then turn the arm from side to side; after you have wrapped a long and wide double piece of cloth around it; when the doctors has united the joint with the hand, anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then press on the joint firmly until it returns; once it is in place, apply dry poultice with egg white on top, strain it tightly, bend the arm over the patient's neck and leave for a few days, then untie it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage and leave it alone; but if you see that the joint does not tighten properly, then reapply the plaster and the bandage, leaving it there for a few days until it sets firmly, before you undo it again.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels soreness after the realignment of the joint, and it becomes inflamed, bathe and gently rub it, pressing until it is soothed; or you can apply to the joint a poultice made with fat mutton wool, leaving this on for a day and night, then remove it and place the limb in a bath; when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then reapply the poultice before entering the bath once more; do this twice or three times until it is healed; if you see any remaining inflammation, apply warm fresh dung mixed with butter to the area, and it will return to its proper condition.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand is dislocated and its return is light compared to other joints. Nevertheless, it must be reset immediately when it is dislocated, unless the place is swollen or an abscess forms there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the resetting is such that you place the sick hand on a table, and the assistants stretch out the hand, and align it so that they put their palm above the joint, and push until it returns to its proper position. Nevertheless, one must ensure that it is in place; thus, make the patient lay the back of his hand on a table during extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, make the patient lay the back of their hand on the table and have the assistants place their hand above that joint's position.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it comes back now, that's good But if not, restrain with healing compresses hot abscesses, and leave them like this without restarting.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, the joint remains dislocated; and it causes no harm to the patient as long as the hand is weakened, and unable to grasp anything at all: then know that the nerves are cut, or the artery; there is no other instrument but cauterization near the site, and perhaps nothing else will help.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, apply the poultice we mentioned, then restrain it and leave it for five days, then release it and leave it like that.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it properly, and there is any tearing, then bathe it with warm water, and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the finger of the hand is dislocated on each side, sometimes on the back of the palm or on the belly; then extend the finger, and push the dislocation with your fingers until it returns, then hold the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated; leave it for two days, and then make it equal that day; at night, bind it as we have said, and untie it during the day, making it move, and rebind it at night; do this often until it is narrow, and do likewise if it is dislocated on the palm of the hand, doing as you have done before until it is healed; and do the same when it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Of dislocation of the spine from the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine from the back or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no cure, for death hurries the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that gas escapes involuntarily, and they cannot control it, and often parts of the body become weak, such as both thighs or arms or one side; and often the spine is affected in four places; this which affects the rear is called "gilbositez": the cure is to reverse if gilbositez came from childhood: there is no cure nor full recovery.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from a fall or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment with lengthy speeches have little benefit overall; but I have shortened them according to my intent, and crafted instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the hump which develops on the front of the chest, no surgeon or medical expert has any knowledge; and also regarding the one that comes directly at II sides, it cannot be cured unless that which properly comes to the back, as I said; And it is such that the patient should lie extended on his face in a level place, and have some strain beneath him so he does not hurt himself; then insert an iron bar into the head strongly embedded into the ground, and another at the feet, and tie a cord over the shoulder blades of the patient, and another to the hips, knees, and ankles; And two helpers should pull on the cords, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two bars; and they must be firmly fixed, both the iron bar as we have said, and the doctor puts his palms onto the spine forcefully until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return to its place with this treatment, take a board that is three arms long and place it below the wall, let the patient be on their side, push the head of the board beneath the wall, then put the middle of the board over the spine; have the surgeon put his feet over the other end of the board and press hard until it returns to its place; if you wish, do this with a device that twists in the direction of the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	Put two pegs in the head of the patient's arm and another towards their feet, leaving a palm-length space between each; have a hole in each peg where the rod runs through, and make sure these are firmly placed in the ground so they do not move; between every two pegs put one turning peg on top that has two small pegs of one palm length to turn it; then tie the rope that is amongst the holes to the turning peg towards the head, and another rope from towards their feet to the other turning peg; each assistant turns their rod with all their might while the master ensures an even spine as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is equalized, apply a drying plaster with an abundance of egg, then pack with linen swabs, and then use the rod of a tablet three fingers long to probe the site of deformity and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage as we have said, and let the patient use fine nourishment until they are healed; and if anything should happen at the end of healing, you must administer softening and soothing medicines along with the rod that we mentioned earlier; sometimes an iron probe is administered, and other times there appears in the last vertebra of the back a protrusion which people believe to be dislocation; but it is bone that has appeared, so one shouldn't presume: perhaps this could lead to death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	The joints of the hip and shoulder are susceptible only to dislocations, not like other joints; and the joint of the hip can be dislocated in four ways: inward and outward, and forward and backward; more commonly it is dislocated inwardly, rarely forward or backward.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the sign of an inward dislocation is that when you join the affected leg with the healthy one, it will be longer and the patient's knee will appear more prominent than the healthy one; they cannot bend their leg forward at the knee; and the area beside the hip is swollen with a hot abscess because the head of the thigh bone has come away.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes out of order is such that these accidents are contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him to whom it happens in front are such that he stretches his leg according to its length; however, he does not bend his knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot go forward, and he holds back his urine, and his ankle swells, and when he goes, he steps on his heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him to whom it happens behind are such that he cannot spread his knee, nor bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh bone is in place beneath the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The reattachment of this type of dislocation is such that you must reset it if the dislocation is old and remains in its position, so there is no need for treatment; and it should not be assumed as a simple task.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for the one with a fresh dislocation, which has four types of dislocation, you must hurry and reset the joint, stretching it both inside and out, and moving it right and left; perhaps it will return to its place, and no other treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	If it does not return with this method, you must prepare a strong assistant and stretch the leg firmly with both hands, or use a strap tied above the knee; another assistant holds the end of the strap; they all pull together upwards and downwards until the patient is lifted off the ground and left hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, it is necessary to apply treatment in a similar way. When the dislocation is within the groin, you must place the patient on their healthy side and then put a bandage around the root of the thigh and below the hip joint, stretching it upwards towards the hip and the inguinal ligament; another assistant should then embrace the upper part of the affected thigh with his arms and stretch it outwards strongly: this will bring it back into place at once; this kind of dislocation is easier to treat than other kinds.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot secure it in the way we have described, then bind together the two feet of the patient with a strong soft bandage across both heels and knees; let the affected leg be extended two inches more than the other one; then hang him by his head from a pole so that he is two arms' length above ground level; order another assistant to embrace the top of the thigh, while yet another hangs alongside the patient embracing the thigh tightly: this will quickly restore the joint.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocations are on the outside, the patient lies down as we have said for someone with curvature of the spine, and he binds the joint over the sick leg properly, and also on the foot; then he places two heated iron rods, one at the head and another at the feet, then insert the rod between the thighs of the patient in the area of the dislocation; and let moistened towels be placed around it so that they do not burn the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and have the surgeon place the dislocated joint equally with his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place him on the table, and press as we have said for curvature of the spine, and let the patient lie on his healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	Et when the dislocations are forward, you must extend the affected leg gradually, and as I said; have the assistant apply pressure above the afflicted ankle, then push with the other hand, and stretch it downwards toward the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is outward, you should not stretch the affected leg downward or lift it off the ground, instead, position it as if the hip were dislocated outward, as we mentioned regarding the arrangement on both hips; have them lie on their face and apply the strapping method described earlier, pressing on the joint with a flat surface; it is correct when the patient can extend their legs equally, align the thighs, then apply the plaster cast and wrap firmly so that the hip does not move; they must rest for three or four days, after which you remove the bandages, reapply the plaster cast; if you see that the limbs are aligned, repeat the process as before, leaving it on for another three days; then remove the bandage again, and have them gently walk around until their limb is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of knee dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knees are dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inwardly and outwardly, and behind; but they do not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the sign of this is that you command the patient to bend their leg at the thigh, and if it does not reach his thigh, know that he is dislocated; and the restoration of all these cases is for you to make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg as much as possible, and put your back on his face, and place his foot on your feet; then take his knee in your palms and pull it between your two hands, then bend both sides of the knee very hard; and another minister extends his foot so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he bends his leg lightly at his thigh; then apply a plaster, and make him stretch his leg to his thigh, and bind them together tightly for three or four days; then untie it; and do not let the patient walk until the limb is strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not broken, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	Of heel dislocation:
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes bruised, and sometimes fully dislocated, inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the sign of this is that the ankle is swollen, and more so on the part where it is dislocated; its reset should be done gently, and one must stretch it lightly by hand when it is only bruised.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated, you must have the patient sit upright, and hold them by the ministers (assistants) except for with the leg, above the ankle; then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then stretch it upwards, and push the foot upwards strongly; do this twice, as we have said, both in pulling and pushing the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, repeat the work, for it will return; and if it cannot be returned thus, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and firmly fix a pole into the earth between their thighs, securing the cloth around it so as to not hurt the patient; then have one minister hold the thigh, and another extend the foot by hand or with a cord tied above the ankle; then stretch each minister equally, and let the pole be adjacent to the patient's thighs to hold them while stretching; then place the mirrors (instruments) equally over the dislocation with your hands, and another minister holds the healthy leg underneath, and the dislocation will quickly return.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is at the point of being fixed, apply the plaster and pads on top, hold it firmly, bind the foot to the leg, and secure the tendons above the ankle from behind, ensuring the bindings are not too tight; leave it for two or three days, if the bindings loosen, tighten them again; then release the bindings after either the third or fourth day, forbidding the patient to walk for four days; and if he walks before this term is up, it is not secure that it won't dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if hot abscesses arise there, you must treat them as we have said elsewhere until they are healed.
des dois	twice.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the thumb is dislocated, it should be gently stretched without exertion, which is an easy task.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any joint of the foot or back, you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a straight table, and place your foot on what appears to be these joints, then press hard with your foot until it returns; when it is aligned and nothing appears wrong, place a two-footed table under the sole of their foot, then strain them firmly, and leave for three days, then untie (the bandages); let them rest until they are healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound occurs along with dislocation and it needs to be restored, often the patient dies: do not be presumptuous in your treatment if you are not wise in this art and have not practiced it long enough, and if you are not compassionate and merciful nor bold; first use things that cool abscesses at the beginning, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of health; and when you do see some hope, then reset the limb before any hot abscess forms; once the limb is in place, administer treatments to cool the hot abscess, and treat the wound as it requires with drying ointments; and if along with dislocation there is a fracture and small bones are displaced, remove them, and do what we have said for simple illnesses; beware of doubt and fear as I mentioned, because this will affect you according to your Creator's will, and for the safety of your soul and body.
Amen	Amen
