O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, most dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of medical science along with its fulfillment, and I have made an end through its explanations and by its revelations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely 'surgery'.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forbidden in our region and is hidden from all, so it has been lost and neglected; only a few brief references to it remain in the books of ancient authors who have described this work with their hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity; intentions have become closed off, and knowledge has been pushed aside.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Now I become convinced that I will revive it along with the arrangement of this treatise according to the method of exposition and explanation and abbreviation; and I shall come with the forms of cautery instruments, and other tools for surgery together with the fitting out of their preparation as required.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good master of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine has become elongated.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for whoever undertakes this to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that they know the judgment of limbs and their shapes, connections and separations; be aware of bones, nerves, veins and arteries, and have knowledge of the numbers and movements of them all.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And so Hippocrates said that knowledge without action is plenty, and with work it becomes little; especially in the art of medicine.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that one who is not knowledgeable about the aforementioned things, should be cautious to avoid error and harming others; as I have seen many times with those who venture into this science without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut an abscess on the neck of a woman and severed her carotid artery; so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he removed it along with part of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if they cut it out he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	I also saw another surgeon who took care of the Duke of our land, who had a broken leg with an open wound. The surgeons, full of ignorance, bound the fracture to the wound with strong ligatures and left no room for drainage, leaving it like that for some time. They instructed him not to remove the bandage, and as a result, his leg swelled up completely, his foot became damaged, and he came close to death.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to attend him, and I hurried to remove the bandage from his leg. When I did so, he immediately found peace and felt no pain whatsoever.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But nonetheless, the corruption was already established in the limb, and I could not heal it; and the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the entire limb was lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And then I saw another marvel which aggravated an abscess, and then it inflamed due to the wickedness of its nature.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a cancer, when it is caused by melancholic humor, it should not be treated with iron unless it is in such a place that all the corrupted matter can be entirely removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, my dear son, it is necessary that you know that surgical work is divided into two categories: namely, surgery where there is risk in several ways; and I will show you in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For this reason, it is necessary that you be aware and guarded so that the foolish physician cannot speak ill of you. Take your medicines with caution, approach your patients gently yet firmly, and employ the best methods so that by God's grace you may find salvation and praise; leave aside frightening diseases through great care; remove your weapons from anything that causes doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can journey from this world to another with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galien says in some of his admonishments: "Do not take on a difficult disease as your patient unless you want to be called a foolish physician.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauterization and the different types of medical instruments; it covers chapters from head to toe, along with the forms of tools and equipment for cauterization, as well as everything necessary for the procedure.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and concerning cupping, wounds, arrow extractions, and similar matters; this chapter details the order of procedures and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; it is ordered from head to foot, detailing the procedures and instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Before we embark on this work, it is necessary for me to explain the qualities of remedies and their potential harm according to each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of remedies and their potential harm are lengthy words, subtle sciences, and secrets that have been discussed by many wise men who agree on them; I will spare you their lengthy explanations as I fear to bore you with excessive verbosity.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cauterization helps universally for all complexions where there is matter, except for two complexions: namely, hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the case of a hot and dry complexion with matter, some argued that cauterization is greatly beneficial, while others said the opposite: that cauterization is not effective for illnesses arising from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to treat illnesses caused by heat or dryness, contrary to what those who argue otherwise say; they claim that cauterization provides great relief for hot and dry diseases arising in human bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	When you compare the body of a man to fire in terms of moisture and complexion, you find that the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And anyway, only someone who has experienced it and understands through long practice the chapter of cauterization, the diversity of human constitutions, their dispositions, the causes of their illnesses, their circumstances, and the time factor; we have no fear regarding other constitutions, especially in cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the doctors assembled and agreed on the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my son, that fire together with cauterization is one of the secrets of healing, and of greater benefit than burning medical cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and it does not come forth unless to the member that is cooked, and it harms no other member if left alone.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Burning medicines spread from member to member, causing illness and lengthy healing times; and sometimes they kill the patient. Fire in its height and goodness of substance does not do this unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found through experience and long service in the art, standing on the truth of things; and for this I excuse myself for the length of my words, as it does not please me to take away from you the secret that is held by fire, and the quality of its work, how it heals the illnesses of bodies, just as the philosopher says in his demonstration; now receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be done, choosing careful timing.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	I say that cauterization is suitable at any time, for the immediate harm it causes is outweighed by its aid; especially if the cauterizations are for necessary and urgent pains which cannot wait until a greater evil befalls the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think of it, dear son, as the foolish surgeon does; for the illness that is healed by cauterization has no recurrence; and they say this truthfully; but it is not as they believe, because cauterizations are a medicine which alter the complexion, drying out the humors that cause pain, being more effective than medicines due to its swift action, and due to the power of its work and its dominance.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is a remarkable thing that the illness may sometimes come according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the illness and its nature; and superfluities are gathered in them through the acquisition of food and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered where there is little superfluity and moisture, just as tooth cauterization for pain, and similar things, and such pains do not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the last resort of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cauterization comes after medicine, their understanding is false, and it is cauterization that is the last resort of medicine because when we administer various treatments for an illness and they are ineffective, then we apply the cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Thus it is clear that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterization with a gold instrument is more beneficial than with iron, and they stated this not because of the quality of gold or its high value but due to the nature of its substance; and they claimed that the site of cauterization does not become inflamed, although I have proven this to be untrue as it is indeed true for some people; and gold cauterization is better than iron, just as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	However, when you heat a gold instrument, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly; if one heats it too much, they will burn themselves on the fire; thus there are many obstacles to this method.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And so we use fire cauterization, which we have adapted to fit our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have ordered this chapter on the head to foot so that it might be easier for you to find your way through it.
dou cautere olivaire	Olive oil cauterization.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cauterization is effective for moisture and coldness in the brain, and there are two ways to perform it due to a disease called 'soda', and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, ears, causing multiple symptoms like dreams, toothaches, sore throat, and especially all diseases stemming from cold such as paralysis, sodas, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The method for this cauterization is as follows: the patient should be purged with solvent medicine that alters their head, three or four nights according to what their constitution and condition can bear; then have them rest for a few days.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on top of yours; afterward, put the root of your palm on the root of their nose between both eyes; leave your two thumbs there until blood comes out, then heat up the cauterization tool called "olivare," which is shaped like this:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	Place it on the spot marked with ink, and make downward and squeezing movements with your hand back and forth repeatedly; then lift your hand slightly, and check the spot: if you see a little bone there, stop; but if not, repeat the cauterization until you do see the bone as I told you; afterward, take a small cup of fine wax, put soft cotton in it, and place it on the spot, leaving it for three days; then apply moistened cotton wool soaked in butter; leave this on until the burning sensation has passed; finally treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmakon" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the elders said that the longer a wound remains open, the more it purges; and for this reason, healing is aided.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some said that one must leave the cautery in place until part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone, and it shall be treated.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one must leave the cautery in place, pressing down so hard that bone is abraded away as wide as a vertoil which women wear in their sleeves, because humours must escape more fully; and one must then leave the wound open for some time; after this, it should be treated and sewn up.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me to be good in all cases, unless there is reason for fear; and it seems to me that I must leave this alone; because the shoulder has become weak through natural processes, just as we have observed in other limbs; even when the patient's shoulder is naturally weak, and the first type of cautery seems more safe and effective to me, which method I use here to bring healing.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	Of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the whole head is afflicted with chronic pain that lasts for a long time, the patient must use herbs and pills called "cochie", and purgatives for the head, oils, and poultices; and if one performs the cautery as we mentioned before, but it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care if the patient's shoulder is of strong constitution and not too cold; then cauterize beneath that same cautery a little as we mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	Afterwards, perform the cautery on each corner of the head up to the bone, as we mentioned before, and then do a cautery at the place called "vasselz"; which are those places where one cups; and lighten your hand so that you do not reach the bone: the patient will feel much more intense pain in this cautery than with others, and I shall speak further of it; and the corners' cauteries must be less deep than the middle ones, and here is how to perform them:
dou cautere dou chief	For the head cautery
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in one part of the head and extends to the eye, and the head has been cleansed by medicinal purgatives, and other treatments I mentioned earlier for treating diseases have been applied without success: then you should apply cauterization according to two methods, namely with hot iron or medicines.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery with hot iron is done as follows: take a piece of elm and remove the bark, cut it into two pieces the size of an egg, then make a slit in the temple where the pain resides such that you can place the piece of elm under the skin; once placed there, bind it tightly and leave bound for 12 hours; thereafter unbind and treat with garlic juice, leaving exposed for 2 or 3 days; then apply cotton soaked in butter until healed.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment, wait until it is healed; and if you wish to see some of the combustive medicines I have written about in the twelfth treatise on combustive medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is performed in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery, which has this shape:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	It is called a "clasp" due to its head being shaped like a clasp with a small curve at the tip and an appearance in the middle; place it on the painful area, hold your hand steadily, and turn the iron slightly so that half of the pointed end burns; then lift your hand before the artery catches fire, which is outside, and blood flows abundantly.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After place cotton soaked in salt water, and leave it there for three days; then apply moistened cotton with butter, and clean the wound of ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this migraine using a cautery called "cultellare", be careful not to cut the artery in this fresh migraine.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine as we have previously mentioned in the division of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the aforementioned cauterization methods of medicine and iron are not sufficient, then you must heat up the "cultellare" cautery until it turns white; make an incision on the skin forming a half-inch long line, remove your hand once, and be careful not to cut the artery nor reach the bone; beware of the mandible's movement when chewing, and that the nerves do not react by spasms or causing pain to the patient, and take care not to spill blood from the artery if it is accidentally cut, as this has great consequences especially for those who are not knowledgeable or experienced; leave the operation halfway. But I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it is mentioned in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauterizations are not sufficient for the illness, and the patient is still suffering, cauterize him on his head as we have said before, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you wish, apply the cautery method we mentioned in the chapter about arterial extraction, using the cautery tool with two blades; this method of cauterization is better than the previous one and more effective.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	From the pain in the ears due to coldness.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear arises from coldness and one has applied solvent medicines and other treatments as we have mentioned before but the pain persists, then heat this cautery tool called a "point", of which the shape is as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After prick around the sick ear, or around both if the pain persists in both, and move a little above the root of the ear once you have marked the place to incise; make ten pricks around each ear; after treat the place until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	Of mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that should be treated with cauterization is only for those that are caused by flux, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not use cautery for similar conditions that come from dryness and nerve spasms.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this similar form of torture that is caused by ejections and purgings from the head, and gargling, and it does not improve, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, another slightly outside the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; place the cauterization on the part that appears healthy, and apply the cautery near the head of the ear a little below the corner of the head, and another in the temple as long as a thumb; leave the cautery until half the heart is burned; this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is similar to the cutellaire we mentioned before, but it is a bit more subtle and the knife must be slightly thicker; after treating the wound as I said earlier, until it heals.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is an old condition and you treat it as we have mentioned earlier, and the patient does not improve, nor do they have a fever, then make four cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, one in the middle of the head, and one at the place called "vessel" as we said before, and the last cautery is done over the mouth of the stomach; treat them as we mentioned earlier.
de litargie	Of lethargy.
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, give the patient large herbs and pills that cleanse the brain; afterwards, cover the entire head of the patient with oil, and place on their occiput the sinapi plaster which is written about in the treatise on plasters; and here is how to perform the cautery: do it as I said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healed like this, it is good; and if not, make three cauterizations within the head descending to the neck, with a two-finger space between each cautery; treat them as you would others, and if you wish to adjust it, and the patient can tolerate it, make one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, make two more on the two corners, treating until healed; and let the cauterizations be of the type called "olivare," as I have previously said.
de la froidor dou chief	From the coldness of the head.
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	The head must be cleaned of hair and as previously mentioned; then shave the patient's head, followed by a cauterization in the middle of the head and on each corner, one behind, and three on the spine of the neck; if you need to do more, and their body is moist and they can tolerate it, make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; let it burn until the strongest part of the heart is burnt, then lift your hand away; treat until healed, and let these cauterizations be of the type called "olivare" as previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptic should not undergo fire cauterization unless they are phlegmatic; and it is necessary to first temper the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, when the patient is an adult and can take medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot withstand it, perform gargling and chewing to temper the brain often with good meat; then raise his head in the middle, and apply the cautery as we have mentioned before, also on the vessel and each corner; and if the patient is strong and can take medicine, apply cauterization as I said for one who has paralysis and body weakness, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cautery be olive-sized according to the method I described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, perform a subtle cauterization according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy, excesses or corrupt humidities and thick phlegm are present, then cauterize with multiple cauteries as we have mentioned for one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the excesses decline towards it and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink so that their brain is cleansed, according to what was mentioned previously in this division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Next, clean the patient's head; then make a well-formed linen cap, like a ring, and place it on their head; have the patient lie down with crossed legs, keeping them still from all sides; apply ointment made of good old sheep butter; heat this gently over a fire so that it is warm enough for application without causing pain when applied to the head; empty the ring inside the cap onto the patient's head and let it cool; perform this treatment once weekly on the patient, along with other appropriate remedies, until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you wish to cauterize, do so by making multiple dots along the entire length of the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautery moistens the brain equally, then apply cotton moistened with butter and chicken fat on top.
de l’awe des eulz	the awe of eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the awe first comes to the eyes through the signs I mentioned in the classification, then begin and give the patient something purifying for the head, protect them from all moisture, and make them sweat in the bath multiple times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After, command him to lower his head, and cauterize between the temples, doing two cauteries if the descent of awe is in both eyes together or one if it's in one; cut along all veins and arteries that are below the heart with the cautery being long according to the width of the temple. Be mindful of blood loss, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it as best you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will instruct you in the extraction of arteries and the incision, cautioning how you will stanch it; and sometimes a cauterization is performed with an instrument below the two rear bones.
dou cors des larmes	The body of tears.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and lie over the veins, or near the arteries that appear outside the head; and one sees that they are from cold, phlegmatic superfluities, then perform the cauterization as I said at the beginning, descending onto the eyes: One cauterization in the middle of the head, two on the two temples, and two with an instrument below the two rear bones; and if more is needed, carefully cauterize above the eyebrow with one small cauterization.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	From the body of tears through within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat him according to what we have said in the division, and he does not benefit from it, then give the patient to drink three nights of cock's meat; afterwards, raise his head, and cauterize him in the middle of the olive bone (i.e., the nape); and make two 'clavilis' cauteries on the two thumbs, a little below the hairline; and beware of the artery so as not to cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery called 'clavilis':
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called 'olive'.
de coi ci est li forme:	Of which this is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that two cauterizations should be applied above the two thumbs as long as the thumbs are; and do not take your hand away until one-third of the paper is burned, according to the method I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	On the hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	At times the eyelashes turn inwards and prick the eye, for which one makes cauterizations in two ways: with fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are equal, then place the patient on your bed; afterward, draw upon the eyelid a figure similar to that of a myrtle leaf, and let the beginning of the sign be close to the hairs; then put moistened cotton in egg-white and parsley poultice onto the eye, then heat up the cautery for which this is its form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the figure you have marked little by little many times until the heart of the area is burnt; and the sign of a successful operation is that you see the eyelid retract, and the hairs rise to point at the pupil; then raise your hand, and leave it be for three days. Then put moistened cotton in butter as long as the scald has been removed; afterward treat with ointment until it heals.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hairs grow back and the skin is softened, then resume the cautery on the same spot as before; just as you did initially. If the hair has fallen out, cauterize until the skin rises to its natural place, and becomes even, without irritating the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cautery of medicine is what you instruct the patient to do: let the hairs grow large and even, then take parchment and make the shape of a myrtle leaf; also take French soap and live heat, each in equal parts, and grind them together well. Do this swiftly so it doesn't cool, then spread it on the form you've made like the myrtle leaf, and place it on the skin around the eyes. If the patient's condition is limited to one eye only, work with that eye; if both are affected as well, do likewise. Place damp cotton soaked in egg white beneath the eye, and ensure the patient's head is steady. Put your own finger pointing at the medicine and press a little pouch each time the patient feels the cautery taking effect—for they will feel it like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for some time, remove the medicine with your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the cauterization is complete, lift up the wound, and check if you see the flesh raised as it was lifted by the fire or through incision; and if so, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, apply the medicine again to the place where it was opened, until your work is even and your eyes are precise; then put on moist cotton wool soaked in butter until the burning wound is healed, after treat the scar with an ointment called 'dyafenis' or another, until it is cleansed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you must be mindful of your work, take great care that none of the medicine gets into your eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterward, and hairs prick in the eye, so resume the medicine on that spot which is softened by the paper precisely, as you have done before; after the cure until it is healed; and this is the form of the myrtle leaf.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this be your constraints; and let not the right path be denied to him who studies this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the treatment of fistula by cautery.
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit it, then you must apply cautery according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Command the patient to place their head on your hand; hold the ministers' heads between your hands in such a way that they do not move or dislocate their heads; then apply moist cotton wool soaked in egg white or parsley juice onto the eye; next heat the cautery which is like this: and it has the shape of an arched roof feather together with the cauterization; if you want, make it pointed from one end to another, and also as a tent; but nevertheless, that arched roof-shaped one is better for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After that press the fistula if it is open and remove the pus and dry it; and if it is closed, operate on it and push out the bowels; then place the hot cautery above it carefully, and keep your hand near to the cautery at the part of the nose above the eye, so that your hand does not become tired; and put the cautery in the fatty tissue of the eye, thus corrupting it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the bone with the cautery, it would be beneficial.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, restart the cautery again and do it once more if needed, leaving it for three days. Then apply moist cotton with butter on top, and treat it with drying ointment until it is healed. If forty days pass without healing, use a corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered; then proceed according to what comes in this chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	There is also a type of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	For a fistula, open the area, then insert into the slit one subtle chamois horn from which it is formed:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and it is made in the quantity of one third of a pound; and hold your hand or clamp firmly, and do not move the patient at all, so that the molten lead does not run into his eye; and you must place over the patient's eye moist cotton wool soaked in egg white or water: the lead will reach the place of the fistula, and the wound will heal with marvelous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, you must administer a perforation with a knife, and return the fistula to the body of the knife according to what is necessary in its proper place.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks occur on lips, which are called "scabs," especially in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have described in the previous section, and the treatment is not effective, then heat a small knife-shaped cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	Place it firmly on the cracks until it reaches the bottom; then treat the area with wax until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from an abscess in the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess forms in the root of the throat or uvula, palate, or tooth roots, it causes decay and becomes round, inflamed, and turns into a fistula; you treat it as we have described earlier, but if it does not improve, then you must use a cautery according to the size of the fistula; open or pierce the fistula, and keep your hand steady until the hot iron reaches the bottom or back of it; do this once or twice after treating it as mentioned in treatments until it is healed; and if it heals well, that's good; if not, then you must expose the area and remove the corrupted bone according to what you find described in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	By the movement of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it is ineffective, then place the patient's head on your lap; afterward, heat the cautery which will be formed below in this manner: place a stick over the tooth; insert the hot cautery inside until the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth; then remove your hand and repeat the cautery as you wish; after, fill the patient's mouth with salty water, let it stay for an hour, and rinse thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	In this way, the moving tooth is confirmed to be stable, the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of pain in the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain arises due to coldness, whether from air or water, and medical treatments are ineffective, it then requires cauterization in two ways: butter cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Butter cautery is such that you take cow butter and place it in a spoon made of iron or brass; afterwards, take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a stick, dip it into boiling butter, and apply it to the aching tooth until it cools down; do this often enough for its essence to reach the root of the tooth. If you want, dampen wool and cotton in cold butter, place it on the painful tooth, then put a hot iron on top until the heat reaches the end of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cauterizations with fire are such that you should take a cane of iron or brass, and make it thick so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth; afterward heat the cautery, from which the shape will come after, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand there until the cauterization is cooled; do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And the patient should fill their mouth with good butter during the urgency of this cauterization, and then cool it afterward; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make the cauterization of whatever tooth you wish, and according to your ability; and this is the shape of the cane:
des scrophules	Of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is caused by phlegm and cold moisture, and it does not respond to digestion with medicines, then heat the cautery chimney from which the smoke arises hereafter comes its form, and make two openings for the smoke to escape at the other end of the cautery; place the hot cautery on the abscess once or as often as is necessary, until you reach its base; if the abscess is small apply a cautery according to its size, and leave it like this for three days; then apply moist cotton with butter until the burning sensation subsides; afterwards treat the area with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture affects the channels of the lung, especially when it originates from a cold constitution, then the patient must first be emptied by using dissolving medicines; afterwards perform cauterization at the root of the throat, but beware not to reach the throat itself, and do not burn the heart more than a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then perform another cauterization at the junction of the neck and skull on the spine, and let the cauterizations that are called 'clavicle' be as we described before; treat the area as mentioned earlier until it is healed.
de la toust	Of the cough.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all lung diseases are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and it is an old disease, then perform two cauterizations on the forearm in their sight; another cauterization between the breasts at the chest's center; and let the 'clavicle' cauterizations be as described before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see fit, perform the fire cautery by puncturing at all points where there is a 'point', as described before in ear diseases; and let these points be thirty or so around it.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the site according to what has been said before, let there be three rows of cautery marks in this shape:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because these cauteries are lighter, you do three at a time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Of the shoulder dislocation.
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After, remind the patient to lie on their back and side; then lift the heart which is within the thinness of your left hand's fingers; and if the joint is dislocated internally, heat the cautery which has two iron wires. This is its form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	And cauterize the heart until it is pierced completely to its side, and there would be four cauteries forming one figure; and for this, make a cautery with three iron wires, so the figure of the cauterization consists of six cauteries; and the nerves are arranged according to the delicacy of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery with three wires:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And sometimes it is adjusted to this one nerve, so there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After apply on top of the cautery ground up sorrel with salt; afterwards let the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well supported.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated again soon after, then this indicates that there are underlying problems; thus perform a cautery on the thick part above the clavicle, or many cauterizations when needed.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture has been removed, and the patient healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach coldness and too much moisture come such that it is extracted from its complexion, and the catarrh multiplies for him despite usual treatments providing no benefit, then the patient should be reminded to lie on their back with legs and arms stretched out.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	Of this thereafter make three cauteries one below the spoon of the heel as large as a thumb, throughout the entire cautery clavicle, and two cauteries outside the two sides such that the shape of the cauteries is at three angles, and there is some space between them so they do not join together when throwing out pus; and let the cautery be so perfect that it purifies the two parts of the heart, and let the figure of the cauteries be according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and for he who will have fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and bleeding on the stomach at one point according to the quantity that you wish as much; then cauterize it throughout the entire "point" cautery.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound we had previously, let it heal.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver is troubled by cold and moisture and excessive gas, it becomes displaced from its natural state due to excesses; and the patient is treated as we have mentioned in divisions, but it does not benefit them, so the patient must be reminded of their ailments; and mark with three cauterizations according to this form, figure, and quantity on the liver, below the hypochondria where the backbone comes down; and leave a space between each cautery equal to the thickness of a finger; let the cauteries run parallel to the body's length, without pressing your hand hard across the entire cautery; only burn half of the heart-shaped mark, and let the patient stand upright on their feet; if they cannot, then lay them down, stretch out their legs, lift up their arms; this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your desire is to cauterize these knife-cautery areas, do so if you are skilled and wise in the art, and be wary not to burn the entire heart, for you would cause all of the body to dry up; nor should it come near the mouth, as the heart is very delicate there, and know this fact due to experience.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess on the liver, and you wish to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient will feel a not-so-intense pain; and if it is in the membrane, they will feel excruciating pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this treatment is due to the eye, it's necessary for the patient to be reminded of their head; then draw blood from the place where the abscess is located, and heat up a cautery similar in shape to a ray, which looks like this:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize the wound until the heart is burned, and it reaches the bone, so that all raw material is consumed; afterward treat according to the treatment of wounds until it is healed; and no one should use this cautery besides those who have studied medicine for a long time, and through whose hands these illnesses were sometimes cured.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can operate boldly, and yet it seems to me that it is better to leave him alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	The cautery of hard wax
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should make wax cauteries with the roots of aristolochia, and in this way: take a long root of aristolochia, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, also as thick and as long as your thumb; moisten it with oil, then hold it to the fire, and cauterize with one cautery between the armpit and the neck, and two small cauteries a little below in the part that is below the beard; and make two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining slightly behind; and one cautery on the breast, and another on the stomach, and one between two shoulders, and two at the two sides of the breast outside the cautery which is between two shoulders; do not press your hand hard, but rather perform it gently as in smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And some ancient physicians said that any man should use a fire cautery like a razor, heating it and placing it between the ribs until reaching the abscess, and drawing out the pain as we have said in treating liver abscesses.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula develops which cannot be healed.
de la mice	Of the mouse.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the illness of a mouse according to what we have said in the section on treatments and it does not improve, then there are three methods of cautery which are all beneficial.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	The first method is to make three or four cauterisations in a line along the length of the mouse, following the shape of the liver cautery we mentioned earlier; do not press your hand on all the cauteries at once, and let the patient lie prone on their back; another method of cautery is to heat up the double-nerved cautery as we showed for shoulder dislocation; lift the heart which is towards the mouse, or from where the patient's pain comes from towards the left side, and let the elevations you make when lifting the heart follow its shape along the length of the body, while the cauteries should follow the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has removed putrefaction over a long time, and this is better than other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	Of dropsy.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not suitable for dropsy, except in the case of the method known as 'ascites'.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods we mentioned earlier in the divisions, and your treatment is not effective, then you must perform four cauterizations around the navel, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back on the spine, and one near the udder; and ensure that the cauterizations are close to the heart's apex.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After that, leave the open cauterization for a long time to remove putrefaction, and do not stop treating the patient after the cautery; healing will be hastened, and the two intentions will be combined with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly should be as we have shown before with the clavicle; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what was stated earlier.
de l’enfleure des piez	The swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in a person with dropsy and are full of yellow water, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; lift your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, lest you burst the yellow water; let the cautery be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After that, make two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the little finger; let one cautery be below the knee in front and the other above, midway up the leg; leave the cauteries open for a long time without cleaning them until the water comes out; then treat with the other treatments we have mentioned.
de la menoison	From the residence
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the cause of abdominal pain comes from coldness and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestine are weakened, and it cannot be cured by conventional means; you see the patient suffering greatly with strong constitution, then perform a large cautery on the stomach as mentioned before for the stomach cautery or circular cautery; and four small cauteries around the navel along with one clavicle cautery, and two more cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you observe abundant moisture and the patient suffering, perform a cautery on the wrist, one cautery above each elbow, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	For the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are located at the base of the rectum, either one or multiple, and they are old, consisting of large cold and moist corrupt humors, and treatment as mentioned in previous sections is not beneficial, then apply cauterization: III cauterizations on the spine of the back, the first outside the lower back bone and another diagonally across it forming a triangle, and I cautery below the navel two fingers; if you suspect that the stomach has become cold and food is not being digested properly, with visible swelling of the face, then apply I large cauterization on the stomach as mentioned before, and I other on the liver, and I more on the spleen with all the cauterizations clamped; leave the cauterization open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, let the wound heal completely.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Of fleshiness which is named 'thelul'
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you treat 'thelul', heat the cauterizing iron which resembles a razor, and then place it fully heated onto the treated 'thelul'; leave your hand there until the cauterization reaches the base of the wound, from which blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is more 'thelul', cauterize each one as we have said; afterwards treat with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large iron on alchamen, it will bring greater relief.
de plaie mal curee	of poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure suturing nor incision, which we shall relate in its place, such a sickness comes that can only be healed through cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When any person develops a fistula and it is filled with pus and putrefied moisture, you should first try a subtle treatment, and make sure that you know all about the treatment's effect.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery like a razor, push it into the fistula according to how much the treatment has entered, and repeat the cauterization until all the corrupted pus is burnt away, once or twice or three times depending on need; and be careful not to burn any nerves or large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and intestine, take care of these places, and do not cauterize it in fleshy areas, but rather think that it is not penetrated; after treating the place until it is healed, and if the sore is salted, and the matters are removed for a long time, then know that the sore is entirely healed; and if the matter has not been removed, know that the sore is opened up, and the bone at the bottom is corrupted; and so with one of these that we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and there is excessive flatulence, and it does not take on a feminine temperament, then you must perform cautery on the kidneys, one on either side of the clavicle cautery we mentioned before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will provide greater relief.
de la vessie	from the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak due to cold and moisture, such that the patient retains urine, then cauterize in the outer part above the bladder, where the hairs of the forearm begin, both on the right and left sides, each cautery should be as long as the length of one thumb; make two cauteries here, or three if needed; the cauteries should be clamped according to the form described previously.
de la marris	from the uterus
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the uterus is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers (menses) are corrupted and their end is delayed; when they come, great pain is felt: then it is necessary to make three cauteries around the navel, as we have said about the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries on the back; the cauteries should be clamped, as we have described.
de la hainche	For the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends to the hip joint, and due to this it dislocates from its position, the sign is that one thigh becomes longer than the other when measured together; and you will find the place of separation near the pubic bone, in which case you must cauterize the patient on the hip joint with a circular cautery, bleeding in front of the joint around the bone as it turns, so that the bone lies within the circle; and let these cauteries be similar to those used for stomach cauterization.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauteries are not present, make three large olive-shaped cauteries, and let the cautery be as perfect as all hearts; and treat until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain in the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain arises in the hip socket, which is caused by cold and moisture, and the patient has been treated as we have said previously but without success, and the illness is chronic: then it is necessary for you to purge the patient of thick foul humours with fetid pills or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the above treatment, you should proceed to cauterisation; and the manner of cautery is twofold: that is to say, using burning medicinal substances or by means of fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery may be performed in many ways, one of which is as follows: you should cauterise over the hip socket with three triangular cauteries in this form, making them deep and large, with each cautery spaced from its neighbour by the width of a thumb; the cauteries should be olive-shaped. Sometimes a cautery is made in the middle on top of the head of the femur, in which case there are four cauteries arranged thus:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see fit, cauterize with the circular cautery we mentioned before for the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles encompass the entire hip joint, and all the spines of the heart are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is how it is done for sciatica, when the pain is in the hip and does not reach down to the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	If it reaches down to the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations where the patient indicates that the pain is felt, and four cauterizations above the ankle on the left side; burn the heart's thickness, and let the cautery be a 'cutellaire'; if the patient feels that the pain extends to the toes of the foot or nearby, cauterize them at three or four points with the so-called "point" cautery.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if necessary, do more; and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, perform a knife or circular cauterization on him, and be very careful with all your cauterizations so as not to leave it too long lest you burn his nerves and large arteries, and cause greater harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who were cauterized on the ankle of the foot, and they left it for so long that the entire leg became swollen, as did the foot, and was perforated and completely ruined.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an abdominal operation from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, cauterize one and then the other, according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise men said about the cauterization of the hip, this is how it should be done: make such an iron instrument and let its head be as big as a date seed or slightly smaller, and between each end have openings that are equidistant to one thumb width; and let these openings be in two parts, and be like knots, with a good handle of iron. And this is the design:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Heat it up until it is completely red and throw away the shavings, then place it on top of the diseased hip bone, turning it onto its sound side; cauterize once the cautery resounds, and leave it for three days; afterwards apply an ointment plaster, leaving the wound open for a long time; after curing with ointments until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its appearance, and we rarely see those who use it; yet it is one of the good cauterizations, which can be endured if applied properly.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cautery of burning medicine is such that you make an instrument with crossed bars in which the margin of the door descends, and it should be made of brass or iron with one long side, and at a height of two thumbs, and have between each [bar] the thickness of a finger; and they are open from above and below, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	Then place the box of the hip on the patient lying on their sound side, and press your hand firmly on top of the hip box; after, pour between the two circles of the awl hot wax that has been heated by the fire for a short while, and leave it there for an hour, letting the patient endure the heat and burning.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is treated like a fire cautery; and when the treatment has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and gently raise the hip with soft movement, and leave thus for three days, then apply butter until what was blackened by the scald is removed; and leave it for three days to rot out any remaining matter; this would be the last treatment after ointments have healed so that it becomes healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or the leg, make them a soft instrument like what you did for the hip equally; and it is the method of warm movement, which I have described in the treatise on medical correction.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, equal amounts of each, grind them together, then put in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	where there is a small opening that allows the point of a razor to enter; place on it another pot well-leaded, and put over it alkalai, heat, and pour some mild water over it until you have two fingers worth above the powders when you grab it with your hand; leave it thus until mild water mixed with wax descends in or around the leaded pot, then take all this water, throw it on a hot surface over an alkali like before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	and then it will be softened and can be used in many medical procedures and cauteries of other members; for it performs the same work as fire, and has other medicinal uses where one cauterizes with wax well on the hip like these oils: acacia and heat with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a cure where a man was healed from the pain in his hip and sciatic vein, and he praises it greatly, saying that no other treatment was required, and that he was cured immediately upon completing this cure, and then he bathed as he instructs below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	He says in this manner that you should take fresh and dry verdigris, and grind it very well with one pound of fat, and apply it to the hip, thigh, and leg where the pain is felt, then bind it; leave it for three hours or until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then have him enter the bath so that his body is slightly moistened, and then let him into bed, and the pain will disappear completely and he will be cured.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such medicinal cauterization without prior bodily evacuation.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat dung, it greatly helps; and the cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen and smear it with old oil, and place it on the depression between the big toe and the one next to it, which is called 'foscile'.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Then take dry goat dung and ignite it until it becomes charcoal, place it on the linen, and leave it there until it extinguishes; repeat this process, continuing without ceasing until you perceive through sensation that it reaches up to the hip, and the pain subsides. This manner of cauterization is called 'goat cautery'.
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether due to falling or impact or excessive bleeding, or from any similar matter of cold spreading material; for none of these situations is cauterization beneficial except in the case that it arises from an influx of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary that after the patient has taken purgative pills or other similar treatments, we apply above their back, where the pain persists, three lines marked with ink, and in each line place five cauterizations or more depending on their constitution and ability to endure; and perform these cauterizations according to the method called "point"; and if you wish, make three or four medium-sized clavicle cauterizations following this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this illness occurs in small children, and the signs of its onset are narrow shoulders when they rise, and fear; and you find in the last vertebra of the back and in us the appearance that comes upon other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this one and wish to treat it, cauterize it with the full-circle cautery in this manner.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	Ensure that the cautery touches each part of the vertebra evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you wish to treat it, cauterize around the vertebra with two or three lines of pricking points, and let these be close together.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Afterwards treat the area until it is dry according to what we have said, and ensure you do not apply cautery over any swelling that is on a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	From the pain of joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of joints is due to moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when the pain comes in the foot, which doctors call "podagra" properly, and when it is caused by coldness and medicines cannot cure it, then it is treated with cautery in this way: make a line of cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a need to treat the front of the foot, make a cauterization on what they call the "point.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	If the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens frequently, make three cauterizations on each knee or four on each part, with all olive-shaped cauteries; if you need more, then do more, but do not hold your hand too close so that the heart's metal does not burn.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pain extends down to the knees and back, apply the cautery as we described in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	If the pain is in the hands, make two lines of points around the knuckles; and if there remains any pain in the fingers, make points over each joint and on the hairs of the hand; and if the pain reaches down to the wrists or shoulders, cauterize each affected area, and ensure good care for the patient and administer medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you provide good care and remove phlegm, the patient will recover with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	On fractures of the jawbone.
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When there is a fracture in the jaw and the bones descend to the neck, if it has recently occurred, on the day you treat it, make sure he does not eat; have him use things that empty the stomach so that the food passes through; then sit him up between your hands with his back against you, instruct him to hold his breath while you realign the bones by holding them in your two hands and reducing the fracture from beneath the dislocation on the jawbone and all around until a sign similar to half of a circle is made over his body; then heat this cautery as follows:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	So long as they are white and shed no scent.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Put the balls back into place; and the assistants hold his hand down so that it does not move backwards; and assist the patient well with their legs, placing a cushion beneath them and a strap on their thighs, and another on their feet to hold their hands; then apply the cautery to the sign for as long as your whole hand fits over it, and keep it straight and in place until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it at first, repeat again until you come right up to the bone; and be careful that the ball does not pop out when you are doing the cautery so that you do not burn it, which could cause the patient's death or other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	Know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And the cauterization for children should be done carefully according to their size, and for adults it should also be proportionate; after three days, treat the place with butter until the burn is healed; afterward, apply other ointments until it is completely cured, and have the patient lie on their back for forty days so that the wound may fully heal; their nourishment must be sufficient to prevent them from rising too quickly.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	After forty days, when they wish to get up, provide them with a well-made bandage and wear it for another forty days; ensure they have good rest, take little work, and avoid overindulgence in drinking or eating too much, as well as excessive shouting; once these instructions are followed, the patient will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will now say the treatment for amputation within its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Of abdominal rupture.
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other parts of the abdomen and are known, and you see that they do not increase further, if it requires fire cautery according to its quantity, and let one third of the heart be burned; afterwards treat as we have said; and some ancients say that one must cauterize with a three-angled iron tool in this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But first mark the place of incision and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another below it, then hold your hand in the middle to secure the iron tool throughout its use.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first set of cauterizations should be lighter and less severe.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and medical treatment is ineffective, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called 'point', and the cautery should be applied according to the length of the limb, its smallness, weakness, strength, and location of torsion, as well as the intensity of the pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the first cautery is effective, it is good; if not, apply another cautery on top of the previous one, as it is customary to move towards a nearby member, thus you must perform cauterizations until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	of the mastectomy
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The months are aided sometimes by cauterization with great relief, especially illnesses that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	If you are going to cauterize her, pay attention if the disease is still in its early stages and whether it has been treated as we have described earlier with regards to categorization, and does not recede or remain, but rather advances, and you doubt that corruption will completely take over this patient. Then make five cauterizations on their head: one at the top of the head nine inches back from the forehead; another towards the front where hair ends above the forehead; two more on both sides, and a fifth behind them above the neck vertebrae. Apply your hand firmly such that the cauterization goes all the way to the bone, deep enough for skin layers to come off so vapors from the thick humors can escape; then you can apply the treatment according to what has been explained earlier.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	Et si la maladie est répandue partout ; et elle perd manifestement, il faut alors que tu la cautérises avec ces cautères que nous avons dit pour le chef, un cautère sur le nez, deux cautères sur l'épine dorsale du cou, six cautères sur l'épine dorsale du dos, un grand cautère sur le haut des reins et un autre à côté, deux cautères sur les deux épaules ; deux cautères sur les cotes, deux cautères sur les tendons de la cuisse, un cautère sur chaque articulation des mains et des pieds, et sur les creux des mains; garde-toi des nerfs qui sont sur le talon arrière en marchant, que tu ne les brûles; et parfois on fait un cautère sur l'os du poignet, un autre sur l'os de l'estomac, et un autre sur le foie.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more you perform cauterization, the more help and benefit it provides; and understand that patients feel no pain from cautery as healthy people do, because their bodies are already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cautery be large or small depending on the limbs and joints, according to what you find appropriate for each type of iron tool.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After the operation, dress the wound with flour paste mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices but does not heal, then perform a cautery on the limb according to its size; let the cautery penetrate slightly into the flesh near the bone; afterward, dress it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes cauterization is performed on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; however, no one should intervene unless they are knowledgeable about limbs and the paths of moving nerves.
de albaras	For skin disease.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called 'albaras' has worsened and medical treatments are ineffective, then cauterize it with a deep cautery according to the severity of the heart condition, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changes; then treat it with a mixture of flour from vetch and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and pigeon blood and songbird blood, one part each; mix everything together, wrap it in a cloth, and apply it to the affected area until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of cancer by cauterization.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When cancer appears at its beginning, and you want to stop it from spreading, cauterize it with a circular-shaped cautery, all around the edge of the cancerous area.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And still, the wise ones say to also cauterize in the middle of the cancerous area; however, I do not think this is good, as I fear it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen this happen before; a more appropriate method is to cauterize around it with the circular-shaped cautery, as we mentioned earlier regarding different types of cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of swelling that cannot die.
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has an illness called "adubelati", and it is taking a long time for them to die, whether due to the excess of matter that they produce or because of the water in their body when they are decrepit (meaning very old) and have little blood, or because of the season; and you want to hasten their death: then cauterize around with many small cauteries, pricking [the skin]; afterwards leave them be.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing through at all the cauterization points, heat the cauterization tool that is shaped like this:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	Place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" until the cauterization tool has pierced the heart, and let the cauterization be such that the patient feels it externally in a way that slows the course of the rot.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment, wait until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The fire cure with iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	There is another kind of illness called "corrodens", which is nothing other than the wasting away of limbs, for it consumes the limbs just as fire consumes dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this illness in a place that can endure fire cautery, then heat the small and large clavicle cauterizers according to what is suitable for the location where the illness is; afterward cauterize it from all sides until you eradicate all corruption, leaving nothing of it remaining so everything that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	Then leave it for three days, and apply to the cauterized areas a soft paste made with oil until the scalds from the fire are removed, along with all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	Afterwards treat it with ointments that generate flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days you see no healthy flesh has formed, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted areas.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this treatment was sometimes cured with medicine instead of fire cautery; however, fire cautery is more effective, and I have already described the medicinal cure in the previous section: take it when you need to.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the swellings that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often it happens that on the feet, due to some external injury, a disease arises which we call "claws", and this is a faulty growth that wounds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And there are two ways of performing cautery for this disease.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Cautery of fire is when you heat a cauterizer shaped like a dove's feather; it should be made of good iron to fit the nail from all sides and have fine edges. Afterward, place it hot onto the nail, and turn your hand around it until it reaches the bottom of the nail. Leave it for three days until it starts discharging pus; then apply an ointment made of wild mallows crushed with salt, leave this on overnight, and the nail will fall out, uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by the force of the body, and appear often in hands and feet, then you must apply hot water cautery to them; it is done like this: take a brass or iron rod, or a dove's feather, and place it on the nail and wart - that is, verrucas. Place the rod so as to cover all around, then add some hot water, hold your hand still, and press it by turning so the edge of the rod reaches the root of the nail, allowing the hot water deep access to the roots. Let the patient endure its stinging for an hour; leave them be after that, and they will soon fall off with all their roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another until you eradicate all those that are in the body, then treat them with ointments that generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	The doctor of shaking.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some shake due to coldness of nerves, or quartan fever or other, you must apply four cauterizations or five on the spine of their back, one between each vertebra; and one on the foot, and one on the stomach with an olive-shaped cautery; this will stop the shaking, and hasten health from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	Pustules that stink.
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	At times when the body breaks out in baths or stinking pustules, this comes from gross corrupted matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	so it is appropriate in the first instance when they appear that a cautery be done on each head of the pimple: a subtle cautery with myrtle wood, so that the point is taken by fire, or with long aristoloche root, or with lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and it prevents their growth from hereon out, but the superfluity from which they come is broken, and they are healed; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	There are often great outflows of blood from the artery that is cut in the wound that comes afterward, or in the incision of the abscess, or in the cauterization of the limb, and similar things; and it is very difficult to stop [the bleeding].
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet when this happens to someone, quickly place your index finger on the wound's injury; press hard so that blood is calmed beneath your finger and no more drops fall out; then take many small and large olive oil-soaked cauteries until they are all red hot; then take one, big or small according to the wound and the artery in which it was cut, and place this cautery on said vein where you hold your finger, holding the cautery there until the blood is stanched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if sparks fly when you lift your finger from the wound, and the cauteries are extinguished, quickly take another one of the cauteries that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	Do not cease doing one after the other until the blood is staunched; and take care that you do not burn the nerve which lies nearby, or cause any further harm to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be properly stanched especially if the artery is large unless by one of four methods we have mentioned: either cauterisation, or extraction if it has not been treated, or tight binding with thread, or medicines placed on it which are capable of staunching blood; and make sure that it is bound and tied accordingly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever introduces bandaging with tight linen strips or applying hot compresses, or other similar methods, will not benefit much from it.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to someone and there is no surgeon or medicine available, they must put their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it well until it is bandaged over the wound and over the vein; do not move your finger but wet it with cold water often so that it is very cold until the blood becomes frozen and thickened and coagulated; then make preparations for what is needed in terms of cauterization and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book on treating hernias.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We told you in the first chapter about all diseases that require fire cauterization or burning medicines, and we discussed the indications, causes, instruments, and techniques for cauterization; I placed this chapter on the head down to the feet, and in this chapter, I will go through them again by the same route so that what is sought can be found more easily.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so as I begin this work, my dear son, you must learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the previous one on cauterization, and thus it requires even greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to attempt folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For people come for treatment in many different ways.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	They come with such fear of their illness that they die quickly from the shock and severity of their disease, and one must be afraid of this outcome.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these there are those who give you their sense, and say: "Wait, I am healed"; and the illness is deceitful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	You should not consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put greater concern for your honor than your greed, and do not work foolishly but wisely on what you are certain of, and from which you can gain profit and reputation; and use prognostication and indication in the treatment of your patients towards their recovery; and this will help you acquire a good reputation, glory, and a memorable legacy.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, may our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and may he will to inspire you with the holy inspiration of his hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter in a way that divides it into sections, according to how it is presented before the chapter on cauterization, which I explained to you from head to toe, so that you can find more easily what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Water-filled head.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness often comes to children during childbirth, when the midwife grips the child's head too tightly; and sometimes it happens for reasons unknown.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this illness occur in anyone other than children, and all of those whom I have witnessed it afflict have died; thus, it seems best to leave aside this work on such treatment.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw that the child's shoulder was full of water, and his head swelled each day so much that he could not bear it; and the moisture increased until he died, and this moisture had gathered beneath the bone on the scapula, between the heart and the bone; and when the operation is such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should make an incision in the head a width of two fingers, as long as necessary so that the moisture drains; and see here the form of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess larger, make two incisions in the form of a cross, according to this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see that the sutures of the head are open on each side, and the water jumps forth when you press it with your hand inside, but it does not return to its place; then you must make three incisions in the head as follows:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision extract all moisture quickly.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After applying dressings and powders, bind it with wine and oil, leaving it thus for five days; then remove the bandage, treat the wound with regular cleaning and dressings, allowing the head to move freely, and feed the patient dry meat of little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	Another method of incision is to look where the swelling and collection of pus appear; for sometimes it is in front, at other times behind, or on the right, and yet again on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut there where the abscess appears, and drain the pus, making an incision as deep as you are able; take care not to sever any artery; should a stream of blood flow forth, then let it, for the patient may die from loss of blood and expulsion of moisture.
de reume	Of rheumatism
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When someone has a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or throat, and the illness is chronic, and medical treatment is ineffective, then the final remedy is cauterization along with the cutting of two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Thus, when you are to cut the veins, have the patient lean back their head; afterward rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries are exposed, then restrain the patient's neck with a cloth; next look where the vein beats, and the spots on either side are behind the ears, and poke them in response; then mark these spots beforehand, and cut one and the other with a sharp spatula of two parts, such that the incision reaches down to the bone, and this is done across the breadth of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see it, push the spatula under the artery and cover it above, cutting as deep as necessary across it.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut open, blood spouts upwards continuously outwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the artery does not open on its own, you must measure the distance of three fingers deep and cut down to bone; what is needed for blood to flow out is six fingers wide, maybe a little more or less depending on how much the patient can endure it, and how full the artery is; then inspect the wound: if there's nothing left over bone level, cauterize it hot so no abscesses form, then extract any remaining parts of the wound and bind it up with an ointment until it heals.
de emigrainne	Of migraine
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient migraine comes with acute catarrh due to moisture of tears and warmth in the temples, along with old and persistent madness and similar things, and it is treated with various medical cures but nothing helps, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of their extraction is as follows: the patient must shave the hairs from his temples and pay attention to the artery which appears in the temple, for it shows itself well by its beating, and it may be more recessed in some men who are too cold; if it is recessed, then the patient should tighten his neck with some cloth, then rub the place with a coarse cloth, and warm the place with hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible; then take the spatule which has this shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then draw it upwards with pincers, and remove the tendons that are underneath on each side; and if the artery is delicate, turn it to the point of the hook, then cut off this part according to the quantity of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, the blood cannot flow out completely everywhere.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	Draw out the blood from six fingers length until three; and if the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread, so that inflammation does not come before the wound heals, and the blood flows properly; then cut off the superfluity which is between the two ties at the same time, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with the hot iron until the bone is reached such that the fingers are cut; and this is a dangerous operation if the patient has no fever and is of a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cauterization is helpful to remove excess moisture, thus it is of great help for treating moisture-related conditions.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries, one should fill the space with old cotton and place well-made bandages on top; and when they are released, ensure treatment with dry medications that promote tissue growth, and with bandages, until it is healed; and if there is bleeding from the artery while you work, quickly cut off the flow by cauterization, or use vitriol and pinch the area with your hand to stop the blood; and if you lack these materials, place your thumb over the wound until the blood clots, then pour cold water onto the area until the bleeding stops, and ensure it is properly compressed; what is key in artery extraction, and easier to manage, is that you cauterize the vein with this sharp cautery from two sides, but make sure the incisions are wide enough to retain heat for longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too thin, they hold less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must have a piece of iron between the two blades, and when you have struck to join their places, and place the burning iron upon it until it reaches the bone, cut the vein into two places; and let them be separated between the two shoulders as this cautery is not complete throughout. And here is its form:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When tears flow down from the veins above the top of the head, and no medicine is able to help this condition; you see the patient's face turn red, and feel a sensation of trembling across their forehead; and if their eyes are thin and moist so that the hair around them has fallen out, and the skin is scalded by the heat of tears, then this treatment is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», and it is that you do to the back of the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has on his forehead, then make three incisions on his forehead equally according to the length of his forehead; and one incision should be like two fingers wide in the middle of the forehead going down towards the nose, and the other two at the two temples above the eyebrows, and beware of cutting the arteries which are located at the two sides above the eyebrows; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and each wound should be the size of three fingers across together; and have a piece of sponge ready and lots of cloth without holes to dry the blood, then insert the sharp spatula which has this shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; and scrape all the core that is between the two incisions to the entire surface that is above the bone, then do likewise from the middle incision to the other second one, and then remove this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you insert into the first incision the instrument called 'scalpel', which is very sharp on one side and soft, not sharp, on the other, this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the cutting edge towards the flesh near the heart, and the soft edge towards the bone, insert it until it reaches the middle incision.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to what appears of the heart, and then do likewise in the middle incision up to the other exit; and then extract blood equally, and press the place for the taken blood; then insert into each incision a tent made of old cotton, and cover with damp cloths soaked in wine and oil and egg white, and ensure that hot abscesses don't form there; on the third day untie the binding, and immerse it in warm water, then treat it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other treatments used for wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	The realm of eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When someone has chronic catarrh with familiar symptoms, and you see their eyes droop and become small, their vision weakens, and their eyelids burn; the hair falls out, and on the head intense pain arises, and the patient sneezes; then know from these symptoms that this mucus and catarrh comes forth from multiple sources, and the moist membrane is affected, if it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And so instruct the patient to clear their forehead, then make a wide incision in the middle of the forehead, and another from ear to ear.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	Beginning with the incision on the left temple to the right temple, let it be deep enough to reach the bone; avoid the nerves that move during eating; once the bone is exposed, wipe away all blood with a sponge, then insert old cotton and linen threads between the two lips of the wound; next bind damp cloths soaked in wine and oil on top, taking care to prevent hot abscesses; when it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat it with drying substances that promote healing.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of colophony, make a plaster of it; apply to these wounds to encourage flesh development throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	The cleaning of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of four things: either grains, or beasts, or mine-stones such as iron; or seeds, such as oats, beans, peas; or fluids like water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When a stone or other object that does not fit or grow in the ear falls into it, place the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you can see the stone, drop a few drops of violet oil or oil of sisymbrium, then apply extraction; have them sneeze with force, and plug their nose when the sneeze comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and suspend the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Very often fire is used in this treatment; if fire cannot be applied, use the following method of extraction with fine pincers which is thus described:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it can be extracted with pincers, that is good; if not, use the following method of extraction with a fine sharp-pointed hook; and if this does not work, make a small iron rod and insert its tip firmly into the hole in the ear; block up around the rod with soft wax so no air can enter alongside the rod; then pull hard as fire is often used as we have said; and if it cannot be extracted by these means, use glue of which you will take an instrument that serves to catch birds, and place a piece into this; insert some cotton at one end; press the glue onto a stone or other such thing and extract with force.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot be healed by all these things that we have said, then hasten to split the ear rather than let an abscess form with heat and spasms; and the manner of the splitting is such that you should first bleed the patient with a cephalic vein incision, and remove blood according to its potency, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn their ear upward, and cut a small slit in the root of the ear at the fatty place where it depends; let the slit be like a moon, so as to reach the stone, then remove it with your strength, and suck it swiftly into your mouth; and cure until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a swelling that has occurred and it inflates, then administer an extraction; and if it cannot exit, then use the slender spatula in this manner:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many incisions; then remove it with subtle pincers and by sucking, as we have said, so that the extraction is eased.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	Therefore, in the case of water falling into the ear, the patient should first use sneezing as a remedy, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let them lie on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If this should work, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, take many thin and light pebbles according to the length of your thumb, and warm them slightly over a fire; place these for the patient in the hole of their ear, and jump on it with their foot from the other side, pressing another pebble onto the one inside the ear; do not cease this pebble-by-pebble action until all the water is out, thus ensuring its total expulsion; if you wish, take a reed, and insert one end into the ear while holding the other end over fire until most of the reed burns away; then repeat with more reeds until all the water drains out, as we have said for stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	For the removal of the beast, if it is small-bodied, like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have mentioned in the division; but if it has a large body that can be felt, apply extraction with pincers; this is the lightest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When extracting worms embedded in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and discuss distillations, and the cure is not effective, then you must examine the ear in sunlight: if any worms appear, remove them with fine pincers; but if they do not show up, take a thread of this form.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And thrust the most subtle tip into the ear according to the extent of the patient's suffering, then suck vigorously throughout the canal; do this often until all the wax comes out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey and come out, then pack the canal with cotton as I have said for stones; and if they still do not exit as we have mentioned, then administer the distillations that the ancients have proven for worm extraction, and you will find them in the treatise on distillations; and distil your oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, which is formed like so:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And whether it is made of silver or copper, narrow below with small holes and above with openings for distillation; and to press the distillation into the instrument, use a well-made copper tool designed for this purpose, and if you wish take a razor and wrap cotton around its tip; then pour in your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you wish from your supplies into the canal, and let the canal be inside the ear; then insert the razor with all the cotton inside, and press your hand steadily so that the oil is distilled to the end of the ear; and the patient will feel it within, and keep the distillation only slightly warm when you distill it into the ear; and ensure it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stuffing of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without a hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men due to the stuffing of a wound or something wedged inside the ear, and this blockage sometimes becomes complete within the ear so that it cannot be seen; and sometimes the object protrudes outside the hole, and can be clearly observed.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which becomes complete and cannot be seen requires urgent treatment in many situations, and for that which can be observed you must place the patient's ear in the sun; look inside: if you see an opaque appearance, treat with this entire remedy as follows:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be sharp and cutting at the front and back all around, so that it does not injure the ear; if the opacity is due to something lodged or embedded in the ear, then take subtle pincers and gently remove it until all of the object is extracted.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the earwax is completely blocking the ear, take a thin and light scraper, heat it slightly over a flame, then insert it into the ear canal.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you detect wax causing the patient to experience itching upon examination, gently perforate it, taking care not to damage the ear nerves; then insert into the ear an absorbent material according to the size of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not remove it until the wound is fully healed; take a piece of absorbent material and moisten it with rose water, then dust it with ground vitriol; if you notice any swelling in the ear, you must first remove the old dressing and apply a new one moistened with ointment made from rose oil and beeswax, until the swelling subsides; treat as needed until it is fully healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and small cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and employ other treatments that stop the flow of blood as described in the section on distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the paper flesh
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This elder that comes in paper flesh from the eyes when they are moist and dry, should be removed with tweezers and pincers, and cut away with a spatule from its roots; then place ground vitriol on the affected area.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if there is any remaining matter beneath, then use the subtle lenticular cautery; and after the incision, the cauterizer must be moved; and often repeat this process, as something may remain of its roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned away and will not return.
de la gresle	Of the hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times, on paper, there appear things that seem like hail in form and hardness, and this illness is called "grandine," an assembly of thick moisture on the paper above and below; its treatment is as follows: watch if the grandine moves from one part to another, which is a simple thing to know; therefore make it wider, then peel each side lightly, take pincers and remove it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	if you cannot remove it without piercing the paper a little, this will cause no harm to the patient; and if the tear is large, bring it together with a suture, treating it until it is healed; and if small, make no effort as ointments restore it quickly and grow flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the cataract descends inside the ear towards the upper part, it overturns the eardrum, and one must grasp the cataract with forceps, and clip and press it from side to side; and if the eardrum is torn by incision, this does not harm; and once the cataract is clipped, wash the eye with salt water, and treat the place of what engenders flesh until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	from the fat around the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinac is a fat that engenders in the earflaps of children and no one else, and it greatly harms their eyes, and they have catarrh in the mornings, and cannot bear to look at the light of the sun because tears come quickly to their eyes; for this reason, they lie on their faces facing down, sleeping supine, and their earflaps under their eyebrows are moistened that the swelling and appearance has covered with exinac which appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the place with your fingers and feel the bone between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	The way of the operation is such that the patient places their head in your lap; then take a linen cloth and prepare a funnel-like device shaped like a circle according to the size required to contain the bone from each part, then place it on top; press with your fingers from one side to another so that the bone is gathered within the circle; then make an incision in the center of the moisture using a sharp spatula, but do not make it any larger than the wound made when opening a vein; and cut through the skin perfectly until you reach the bone; and in many cases, the bone will come out of the incision, resembling a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract it then entirely with a piece of cloth wadded between your two fingers outside, and turn your hand to the right and left so that it is spread out; be careful not to adjust into the fissure, lest you reach all the way to the spatula up to the eye, lest you injure it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the splinter does not come out at first in the opening of the fissure, then increase the fissure slightly until it appears; then extract it as we have said, then moisten the cloths with oil and water, and place on the spot, and restrain with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And for such men who grind salt and put it on to corrupt that moisture which has remained.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat [it] until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the place of an abscess with heat, treat [it] with soothing emollients until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	Of the hairs on papules.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When papules appear with hairs growing in an unnatural way and they are inflamed, they harm the eyes and cause various ailments such as accustomed tears and softening of the papules and albuginea, leading to eye destruction; treatment occurs according to four methods: cauterization by fire, application of medicine depending on what was mentioned previously or described in the chapter on cauterization, done either by incision and suture or with canes, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must place the patient's head on your lap, then turn the eyelid towards your left hand; if it does not comply, insert a needle with thread alongside the margin of the eyelid where the hairs emerge next to these lashes, and draw the thread above throughout the entire lid, and turn it over at the razor; then make an incision in the lower part of the eyelid under the eyelashes, cutting all along the width from the larger hinge down to the smaller one; remove the thread, and put beneath the lid a small tent of cotton and linen fabric, then sign above the lid with the shape of ivy leaves while still keeping to the quantity you wish to elevate the divided lid.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if it so happens that you need to cut off a large amount of the lid in accordance with how much the eyelid is softened; then make an incision along its width over both lines that you have marked and begin from the larger hinge down to the smaller one, and let one of these slits be near the natural lashes like the thickness of a root, next insert the hook into one of the two angles of the heart, then remove all the skin; afterwards join up the two lips with a suture using a needle and thread made out of fine wool, wipe away the blood, and dry out any excess fibres from both eyebrows with anything that is sticky if you wish to do this; otherwise pay it no mind, simply leave the stitching and threads for three or four days; then treat the wound without stitches by applying drying and constricting substances, since the eyelid regains its shape when the wound heals and the eyelids come back together, but sutures cause inflammation (as ancient texts say), and these are procedures that need not be feared. There is also another way: one could sign above the lid with a figure in the form of ivy leaves as we have described previously, using three hooks separated according to this pattern:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cut what is above with small scissors evenly according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the forceps, and the thing is not even, take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the wound; insert one end of the thread near the large flap, and the other end near the small one, then gather the threads evenly between your two hands; lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin onto which you have stitched, as we have described; then join together the lips of the wound by suturing, and treat it until it is healed; if an abscess forms at your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointments; sometimes, hairs grow from scabs: in this case, you must follow what has been said about incisions; but the suture on both sides is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of wounds is done in this manner: you must convert the paper and make a slit inside according to what I said, then make two cones by artifice, and also two fine ties as long as the paper and as wide as the width of your little finger; cut at both ends where you hold the threads; then assemble one with another carefully on that which rises above the paper of the eye, and stretch the two cones from the two parts formed; leave them thus for some days, and the skin which is stretched will die and blacken and rot until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes a long time, cut it with force, then treat until it is healed; and when the wound is closed, remove the paper, and the hairs will no longer be able to grow; this is the form of the two cones that you will make according to this figure, and according to these quantities in length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	li ovraiges est telz that you take a subtle needle, and place within it soft and delicate silk thread; then gather the heads and knot one to another delicately, and let the length of the threads be a palm's width long; then arrange in the shaft another fine silk thread briefly, and tie the ends of the thread; then have the patient place their head on your lap; and sit facing the sun so that the work is illuminated, for this is subtle and delicate work, then push the needle through all of the shaft at the root of the hair close by, and make it pierce the paper swiftly until you draw it up onto the natural hair; then pull out the hair right up to the shaft, and insert into the shaft that same hair, whether there be one or two or three or more; then withdraw your hand so that the hairs come free of the shaft at the paper together with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the abscess is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you will treat the abscess from below along the entire length that you have ordered, until the abscess comes out of the orifice above and you see it by the sight of the eye; then you will treat the abscess and thread, and close the eye and let it remain closed for two or three days, until the hair dries in its place and flesh grows over; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long natural hair with them, and raise it up along with that which you leave, until they are elongated and then remove it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the decay of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or decay, comes to the eye, there are two types of it: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly due to a wound, or from a surgeon's knife, or from cauterization, and through similar means.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way to proceed with this work is that you must split open said suture, separate its lips, and insert linen threads, binding it until it heals; and one should never use things that dry out or constrict in treating it.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do not, the disease will return worse than before; but one should use softening things like fenugreek; and boil water or other liquid with flax seeds, then mix in softened diaqilon wax dissolved into any oil, wrap a thread in this mixture, and treat it thus.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the secret to your cure lies in ensuring it does not heal following its previous form; and these treatments we have discussed are only preventative measures against this disease's recurrence according to its former shape.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh which comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This illness, which is dislocated and truly called 'axacrati', is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from a wound, split and cauterization and similar things; the way to treat it is as follows: you take a needle with double thread on it, insert it into the flesh, pierce through from left tear duct up towards right tear duct so that both ends of the thread come out at two points in the eye's flesh; then stretch this flesh above all over the needle and cover it with 1 spatula width.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape on the paper returns according to what is required, that is good; if not, take a razor and place it in the split, turn over the paper, make two splits at its edges inside the paper; let both ends of those two splits be from corners of incision you made, and do so with angles such that when they're put together, their figure looks like the letter named 'I griesche'; then remove this flesh according to how much is hanging down below what follows after paper's edge, then join up both divided parts, sew them up with a thread of wool; then treat it with softening medicines and bandages until it heals.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the illness comes from a crack, suture or cauterization, you must make an incision full of folds underneath the hairs of the skin papers, and according to what is mentioned before; then separate between the two lips of a membrane, as I said; and one must carry out the work according to the form of the illness, because it has many diverse forms, and wise masters prepare all their power any kind of device in order to make the figure return to its natural form; and sick people themselves, according to what they need regarding work and instruments and various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	suddenly from the skin paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this fusion happens in men's hands in such a way that the skin paper is fused with the white of the eye, and it cannot move or perform its natural functions, you must therefore insert the tip of a razor underneath the paper and lift it up; stretch it with pincers until you cut off what is adhered to the fine spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too blunt so that the patient does not suffer from the overly sharp spatula hurting the eye; make your incision in order to remove this assembly gently, so that the skin returns to its natural form; heal all of the aforementioned assembly, and sometimes saline is applied on the eye, as well as a poultice of warm water and salve; then place between the paper and the eye a linen membrane, and apply moist woolen cloth impregnated with egg white on top of the eye; after three days stop using the salve and any hot applications until it has healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the fingernail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	You are a nervous one and similar to hard skin; and another that is not nervous, but resembles white frozen moisture, which when touched by iron and assumed to be removed with pincers, cannot be; both types start near the large tear duct, and grow little by little until they cover all vision, light, and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of incision is as follows: have the patient put their head in your lap, then open their eyes for you; lift up the eyelid with your hand, then coil the claw-like nail around small pincers, and extend it upwards; then take a needle, and place within it a horsehair, or that of a cow or ox, along with strong thread; double over the tip of the needle slightly and insert it into the claw, piercing all the way through with the needle, and tie up the claw with a thread and extend it upwards, then scrape away all the hair on the side of the claw where it meets the eyelid and the pupil right up to its head, then cut off the remainder at the root near the tear duct using a very fine spatula and small forceps, and leave the natural flesh by the tear duct so that bodily fluid from tears may not flow through the incision; and sometimes the claw is extended only with an onion and thread, as we have said; then scrape it away with a very soft spatula of this shape:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And ensure that the spatule does not touch and rupture the fleshy membrane, and that the plum-stone is not pierced; afterward, pour into the eye a pinch of crushed silk, and from the litharge collar, leave it until the next day; then cure it with what is needed until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, and the uncines cannot enter, this similar appearance of a nail is often cured by medicines; it grows as I have described in the division, and if you see it cut, treat the patient's eye, and take a light sharp spatule according to this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And lift the nail carefully, and if you see that it does not diminish and the root approaches, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litharge and red collar and crushed silk, and pack the eye until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same procedure until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes you in the eye, like a warm abscess, then lance it, and treat first the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of flesh in the eyelid harms the eye greatly, suspend it with a hook, and cut away a part but not all, so that no flow of tears comes; then distill into the eye red ointment made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	Of the flesh that grows on the cornea.
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	In some men's eyes there is sometimes born red flesh, which covers the cornea and rises above the sclera until it turns outward, resembling a rose petal; and thus they operate as follows: place his head on your lap, then open his eyes, and with suitable hooks remove all this flesh, holding it firmly; first cut away the top layer of flesh, then keep cutting with a razor right down to the end, being careful not to injure the eye in doing so; let the incisions be made with a spatulate blade as we said for an incision on the nail and with small forces which one removes the sebaceous matter, just like the diagram hereafter demonstrates; when the incision is complete and all the flesh removed, fill the eye with ground seal or distill red ointment and similar corrosive medicines into it, then place over the eye cotton with egg white so that it is protected from a hot abscess; if nothing remains, and warm blood comes forth, and you suspect a hot abscess, leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with soothing things for a hot abscess; then return to your work until it has healed, and do likewise whenever such flesh appears in the eye by this procedure.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nonetheless, you must ease the treatment of each weak eye by natural means and in case of accidental injury, with iron tools; and do not put your hand into any of these procedures until you see that this limb is ready for such treatment.
des voines des eulz	eyelid veins
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Beneath the eyelids are red veins that cover the eye, obstructing its function and weakening vision over time.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is therefore necessary for you to first examine the eye itself in terms of where these veins are and whether there is another underlying condition apart from just the veins; then proceed as follows: instruct the patient to place their head into your care, and suspend those veins entirely according to your knowledge, making sure that the sutures be double-threaded following this pattern:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two ounces by degrees in I body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then carefully coil the forces around those veins subtly, and wipe away the blood hour after another, until you see the veins move away from the eye; be careful not to injure the eye with the points of the spatulas, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, being very precise in your task so as not to cut into the veins; and once you have done this, instill green and red collyrium into the eye to corrupt that which remains from the tumor.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you are unable to gather all of this in that hour, make a plaster over the eye with things soothing to the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain subsides and the abscess has cooled, then begin again according to this method which is mentioned before until it is healed; and here is how you shape the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the eye fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The surgeon calls this "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cauterization and burning medicine as I have previously mentioned, and it is not healed, there remains pus in it that you must cut open over the abscess, where it should die, and drain all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then remove all the instrument of which this is made; it is called an "aspre chief" (rough head), and should be made of iron up to the head, pointed like a file as it appears in its current form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place on the spot of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers and press your hand a little until you know that corruption is removed; do this several times, then restore the location with drying medicine.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	if the wound is healed, and flesh has grown, and the bowels are also healed, and it remains so for forty days, and does not recur or become inflamed again, and no evil accident comes to pass, know that he is cured; if this is not the case, then there is another means of bringing about healing by making the fistula open into the navel according to this form: you must uncover the bone a second time with an iron instrument and appropriate medicines. When it has been uncovered, take one stick like this which has three angles at its end;
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then place the stick over the bone near the socket and keep your hand one palm's length away from his eye. Then turn the stick until it pierces the bone so that the patient feels air pass through if he holds his hand over his navel; you can then restore the location with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens around the opening, the material will go to the navel; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eye opens from everywhere in all directions, and there is no obstruction of the nerve nor diminution, you must bind the patient; then treat it, and apply cups or haterel without harming to suck out [blood], then put on the eye a poultice made of acacia juice, aloe, incense, and storax, then strain the eye, and place a plaster on top with bandages and soft cloths; and regarding the way of using the cloths, you should take some very soft cloth and double each one into four, then put one upon another according to the amount that the eye needs; then tie it firmly from above with a strong piece of bandage, and resume cups to suck out [blood] without harming; then remove the cups and leave the eye bound day and night, and if the bindings become loose, you must tighten them strongly; then remove the binding after daytime and nighttime, and if you see that it is healing, this is good; otherwise repeat the poultice, the cloths, the binding, and the cups until it becomes healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Of tearing of tough membrane
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When ruptures occur in the tough membrane, it opens up and expels some material like resinous grains, which is dreadful to behold; if you see this happen, the procedure involves inserting a needle into the root of one part underneath until reaching the upper end, then insert another needle where there is double thread from the eyelid margin; pierce through with this, leaving the first needle in place according to its position; cut the thread at the double-threaded part and wrap a piece of membrane around it, tying it tightly; extract the needles and apply damp wool soaked in egg white over the eye; leave this until the threads dry up along with the membrane, then treat the eye with strengthening substances until the wound heals. In cases where the wound is constricted by the membrane on all sides via a circle of cloth, let it heal as such without further treatment.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes give great trouble, pierce them with a subtle spatula that comes from within the eye, and remove the white moisture and bring down the eyes, entering immediately; then extract it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the eye's bowels
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease, called 'alcunnati', is only the bowels of the eye that are gathered within it, resembling descending water, but it is not water; and to treat this illness, have the patient sit on a straight chair with the necessary equipment, then take their head between your two hands, moving it until you see the bowels coming above your eyes; then fix them there, and let the light descend and uncover, and let the patient see things as they used to; but if the bowels do not descend below, know that this is water, and should the descent of the bowels be arranged differently from what we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you seat the patient between your hands, then take the fine spatula and make an incision on the corneal membrane with one stroke along the continuation of the conjunctiva up to the cornea; when it is out, drip into the eye warm water mixed with honey, or water in which fenugreek has been boiled together with honey, then treat with another remedy until it is cured.
des aigues de l’oil	Eye waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have described the similarities of eye waters in the dissection, and what is required to pierce them; we act according to health [or: medical science].
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	You must make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from light [or: sunlight], and tightly close the healthy eye; then place the paper of the [affected] eye in your left hand if the eyes are left-sided, or in your right hand if they are right-sided; then take into your right hand, if the eyes are left-sided, the instrument called an 'almagda', or into your left hand, if they are right-sided; then place the tip of the instrument near the cornea with the thickness of a line in that white part of the eye at the level of the lower punctum, then push the 'almagda' virtuously and turn your hand so it pierces the white part of the eye until you feel the 'almagda' reach the empty space; the instrument must be exactly as long as the distance from the cornea to the end of the black part, which is the iris; then you will see the bone through that paper because of the transparency of the corneal membrane, and then place the instrument up to where the water [or: aqueous humour] is, and press it under a way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the swelling subsides now, the patient sees it before them and the instrument in their eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting briefly, and if the swelling rises again, put fire with the instrument, and when it is inserted but does not rise, extract the almagda lightly by turning your hand back and forth; then replace a small amount of powdered gem in the eye.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then apply to the eye dressings or moist wool in rose oil and egg white, binding it with a healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, apply ground cumin with plenty of egg white on top.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, as there are some men with very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called 'alberit', of which this is the shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Et so perce therefore the conjunctive solely, and do not go too deep, but make its place subtle, then pour in almond oil as we have said; and upon completion of this work equip for the patient an appealing darkroom, where he will sleep on his back at a place without light; be careful with all movements, take soft food, do not move your head to either side, and keep him tied according to its condition up until three days; then untie him in that same dark house, test his vision, show him some things, and then re-tie the bandage up until the seventh day; and make sure you do this neither during nor after incision treatment now, but rather ease it so that water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	If an abscess is hot and comes close to the eye, then untie it before seven days have passed, and treat it with remedies for abscesses; when it has healed, then release his sight by removing any bandages and placing gold leaf on his face in order to cover this up over a day or two, and be so in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then leave the house step by step, and turn towards your affairs; and know that no disciple should interfere in this matter.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from Iran who told us that in his country they make perforated alembics, from which water is extracted, but I have never seen any in our land, nor have I read about them in the books of the ancients; perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the likenesses of alembic forms so that those who do not know them may see them; and they should be properly made from bronze:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And the top part of this should also be made from the same subtle material, while the bottom end is three-sided in shape.
de la char sor le neis	de the flesh above the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes there are born or emerge flesh-adjoined things diverse, of which some appear as scorpions with many feet; and among these are those whose flesh is adorned with colorful fur, and others have soft flesh of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	For this soft and unadorned flesh, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; open their nostrils, and push those things into the flesh, pulling them out forcefully; then cut away what you can manage with a fine sharp spatula on one side until you know that all of that flesh is removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if anything remains that cannot be cut away, open it entirely with delicate and light instruments so that nothing is left; and if you are not overwhelmed by the abscess, treat it as required; but for malignant abscesses, act quickly and cauterize until the blood is extinguished and all flesh is removed, then apply fresh lint and wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the nose bleeds and moisture reaches the palate, know that it has healed; and if the moisture does not perforate properly, know there is cartilage on the bone above, preventing the instruments from cutting: then you must insert a thread of linen a little thick, knotted at one end with a knot as big as an egg or smaller; and let the patient place the head of the nose over this thread until it reaches the brain, and pull by sniffing until it comes out through the nose inside the mouth; and children in school often do thus, and it is easy for those who want to do so; then hold one end which came out through the nose with one hand, and the other end which came out of the mouth with the other hand, and draw one after another carefully looking at the knots on the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this so that you know that the worms have corrupted this flesh, then pull out the worm, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and reinsert it into the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all remaining flesh; and then insert a bronze tube into the nose for some days until it is healed, and if necessary use drying medicines; and that is how to make an instrument to purge the head, with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be made of silver or copper, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and its conductance is also the same; and if you see it, make a closed tube, and let the instrument be full for purging the head; and have one handle to hold onto the head when heating oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	From the flesh above the nose.
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Often there arises on the head of the nose a disease called "telul", and it grows and becomes large over time, becoming quite visible; for this, you must cut it out at the beginning, and remove it all quickly, then apply a cautery or burning medicine to its place; if one waits too long to cut it while it is still small, take note if it is hard, of dark color, and without feeling: do not touch it with iron as this would be an abscess embedded deep within the flesh, for when such an abscess is cut, great malice can come upon the patient; but should this abscess feel soft to the touch, being neither dark colored nor deeply rooted, one may see it all cut away safely and without fear, then treat the wound with drying and constricting substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when bone-joint treatments come to one of these cartilage works, it profits little, except in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, when this happens to anyone, one must look if the wound is fresh and full of blood; then you stitch together both lips with a suture, treat it until it heals; and if the lips are already torn apart from each other, then you must peel all parts of their heart until they bleed, then bring together both lips in a suture, hold them tight, put on top some powder of dragon's blood and powdered incense; place over the powders a piece of strong or another sealing plaster, let it dry by itself, and then treat with ointment until healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of suturing is such that you gather the edges together: either with needles, as we have said in abdominal surgery; or with thread, as I have shown you.
des apostemes des levres	From abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Men who have hard abscesses inside their lips, similar to grains of barley, some small and others large; then you must turn back the lip, cut open each nodule, take it with pincers and crush it in every part; then apply to the place after incision a paste of powdered vitriol until the blood is stanched; then remove it easily, and dress the area with dry things until it heals.
de la char des gencives	The flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times, flesh grows on the gums, which the ancients call 'albulus'; you must hold it with forceps and cut it at its root, letting out pus or blood; then apply powdered vitriol or other astringent and drying powders; if this flesh returns after incision, and does so repeatedly, cut it again and cauterize: it will not return after the cautery; these are the types of instruments used for cutting.
des sordens	of wounds
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes, scurf accumulates at the roots of teeth inside the mouth between gums, which is ugly and coarse; sometimes teeth become black or yellow-green and foul, to such an extent that corruption reaches the gum, making the tooth stink; you must make the patient sit in your hands with his head resting on your lap, and extract those teeth where scurf appears, leaving nothing behind; do likewise for cases of blackness, greenness, yellowness or other defects, until they are cleansed; if what caused this is removed at first instance, that's good; otherwise, repeat the process on the second day or third, until everything has been extracted; know that teeth require various forms of instruments to extract them according as the work requires it, since the rasps used to extract scurf from outside the tooth are different in form than those used between the teeth; and these shapes and others must be at your disposal.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the tooth's pain that you delay its extraction as much as you can, for this should never be done; because it is a very vital substance until such time that one has no excuse to remove it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is compelled to extract (the tooth), you must be certain about which tooth is causing pain.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain troubles the patient, and they think it is in a healthy tooth, leading to the extraction of a good tooth; yet the pain does not leave because the bad one remains, as we have seen with these sufferers; and when you are certain about the offending tooth, you must scrape around the tooth with a strong spatula to protect the gum on all sides; then grip it with your fingers or delicate forceps at its first point of contact, prying it loose until it is well dislodged, then secure the forceps firmly; and have the patient's head in your lap between your knees, holding it steady so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it cannot be removed, then take one of these instruments and gently insert it into each side, moving it around like you did previously.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	If the tooth is perforated and worn down, you must fill it with small pieces of fabric where the holes are; then carefully grasp it with forceps so that it does not break when extracting; one must work very gently around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	Be careful not to break it, leaving a piece behind, for then the patient will return with even greater pain from the root.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	Beware not to act as the ignorant surgeons do, driven by haste and recklessness, sometimes breaking the jaw and leaving pieces behind that cause great pain due to infection of the roots or damage caused by the extraction itself, as we have often seen; once the tooth is out, clean the site with wine, oil, and silk; if there is any bleeding, fill the cavity with crushed alum; and if this does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of instruments, with which one loosens teeth first, should have long points and large handles so that they do not double when you extract the tooth; and these are the forms.
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should have large handles so that they do not bend when you extract it, and they should be well-made iron with teeth to hold [the tooth].
de la racine des dens	From the root of the teeth.
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains after extraction, it is necessary that you place wet cotton soaked in butter on the site for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the site is softened, you can place pincers called "algefri", which make the tooth resemble a bird's beak; and they should be shaped like a file inside with this form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with these pincers, then you must uncover all the flesh around the root, and place there an instrument which is called 'althali', that is to say, a saw, of this form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps due to this, it is good; if not, you assist with all instruments, of which the forms come hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps with this instrument which has two edges, of which the form is thus:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron instruments which are placed in front of the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pincers, of which the form is thus:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let these instruments be except that they cannot break, and know that there are many dental instruments; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise master find for himself his instrument according to what his works and the illness show him, because there are such illnesses in which the ancients did not teach an instrument for their diversity of use; and if one breaks a part of the carriage or other bones where it may rot, then seek the instruments that they need, which I have told you, and help with gestures, what is here the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be thick and hold well to keep the bone in place so that it does not escape but can be held and removed; then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone and it is small, remove it with all these instruments:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not according to their natural form, and they are ugly, especially in young women, you must know if the tooth is newly born after another one, and it is not in its rightful place, and cannot be treated or filed down. Then remove it; and if it is joined with a tooth, take this instrument shaped as described here, which resembles a small beak, and is made of iron sharpened at the end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And strike it several times with a hammer for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move other teeth. If it is apparent that it can be filed down, use this tool shaped like the one described here to file it:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	which is also similar to the tool used for making needles; and file down the tooth several times with this tool lightly until it wears off without moving other teeth. Then smoothen it at the end using any sharpener, and if the tooth is too sharp and wounds the tongue, you must file its roughness away so that it does not wound the tongue or disturb speech.
quant li dent lochent	When teeth loosen
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When front teeth loosen due to impact or falling, and the patient cannot bite down on food without them falling out, even after treatment with constricting medicines, which is ineffective, then they must be held in place with a gold wire, for silver wire turns green and decays, but gold never changes; and let the wire be neither too thin nor too thick according to the space between the teeth; if you wish to align the teeth, take the wire and pass it doubled through two healthy teeth, then insert the loosened tooth or teeth into the healthy ones on either side until you reach a sound tooth on the other end; then repeat this process covering the whole area up to where you started, drawing your hand gently yet firmly so that there is no movement; make sure the wire is secured at the root of the tooth so it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cut the gum of the tooth with a file using pliers, and gather it together, and replace it between the healthy teeth, and secure it so that it does not injure the tongue; then leave it this tight as long as it can stay like that, and if it comes loose or the thread unravels, tighten it with another thread; if it stays in place, it will serve thus for its entire time, and this is the form of teeth and the appearance of realigning two healthy teeth, and two moved ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when a tooth falls out, it is replaced in its place, fresh for fresh, as we have said; and nothing should be done by those who are not wise and skilled, and sometimes the form of a tooth is made from cow bone, and it is placed where the missing tooth was, and secured as we have said, and it stays in place and serves thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cut loose the tongue's bond
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	This link which comes from beneath the tongue by nature, one is born thus; or due to an accident of a healed wound; and this work is such that you open the mouth of the patient, have their head in your lap, and lift their tongue; then cut loose the nervous ligament broadly, so that the tongue may be freed from its housing, and if there is hardening or knotting, which comes suddenly with the wound, thrust a hook and sever widely this ligament; and take care that the incision not be too deep, for the artery beneath; and when you have done this, lift up water of roses and oil, or cold water, then place below the tongue a linen tent; and let the patient hold this each night so as to prevent the wounds from healing.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bleeding occurs, apply crushed powdered glass to the area; if the blood overpowers you, cauterize with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this purpose; then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see it is of false colour, black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer; if it begins to lighten in colour and becomes moist, remove the crust, scrape it with a fine spatula, and clean it out on both sides; if the blood overpowers you during your work, apply crushed glass until it stops flowing, then return to your work until everything is treated; then lift the skin gently with silk and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	From abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes there appear in the throat growths which are called "godaths", and we properly call them tonsils, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they do not heal, take care: if it is a hard abscess with little sense of feeling and pale in colour, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is swollen, do not touch it with iron, also to prevent bleeding; but leave it until it matures, and then you shall remove it, before it bursts by itself; and if it is white in colour, softens when pressed, and the root is subtle, prepare your instrument to cut, but first make sure that the abscess has cooled down and is calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, 
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	When you press the tongue with all these instruments, and you see the abscess, then take a probe and insert it into the almond, pushing it up as much as you can; draw something out of the cloth along with it, then cut at the instrument from which this comes, in the shape of tongs; but their heads are curved, and one is opposite the other, they are very sharp, and are made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this instrument ready, use the tongs instead, which are shaped like this:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	The edges of the tongs should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other; once you have cut into one almond, do likewise to the other in exactly the same way, then after making the incision gargle the patient's throat with hot water, and with a mixture of water and vinegar, and if there is any bleeding continue gargling the patient using only water or with pomegranate skins that have been boiled, or with myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding has stopped; then cure them until it is healed; occasionally other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two almonds, so treat these in exactly the same way as you would the two almonds.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that had formed inside her throat, specifically a small one; it had almost completely blocked her windpipe, so she could not breathe through it, nor could she eat or drink, and she would have died if we had left the situation as such for another day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	The abscess had risen so much that we had to insert two tubes through the two nostrils.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	So I hastened and immediately inserted one inch-long rod through one nostril, then pushed it further until a large portion of the tube came out from her mouth; next, I repeated this process in the other nostril, operating on her mouth as necessary and pressing down on her tongue with my fingers; after inserting the rod into the abscess, I cut away some part of it, only a little blood gushed out at first; thus we unblocked the woman's windpipe, she could now drink water then wine without difficulty, nor did I cease cutting this abscess for many months thereafter; as it healed, it filled up the space which I had earlier emptied until once again it became very large; so I inserted a cauterizing iron through her mouth into her throat and cauterized its interior; thus it stopped growing; then I left that place and never knew what God did with her after me.
de l’uve	Of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When rheum descends to the eye, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is below thick and round, it is called an "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is cleaned as we have said in the division, and the cure is not beneficial, and you see that the abscesses are eased, and it is subtle, then you must cut it; and that which is round, gathered together, and not long; and it is bloody or of false color or black, then you must avoid incising it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is necessary, therefore, when you see it according to the manner I have described, concerning its whiteness and length, that you seat the patient facing the sun, and press their tongue with an instrument as I have previously mentioned; then insert the needle into the eye, draw it out from underneath, and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned for incising the two testicles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cut away any flesh beyond the natural boundary, for if you remove more, it will harm the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said about the incision of the two almonds (tonsils), and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient is afraid of cutting, then it is necessary to use an instrument for cauterization to alleviate their fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is hot, very sharp, and penetrating.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And have the patient place their head in your lap, and then press their tongue against an instrument like the one we mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and secure it with hot wax, but not too thick or clear; use the following tool, which is shaped like this: [Description of the instrument]
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; 
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or cauterization; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calmative and hyssop, oregano, rue, chamomile, ivy, and similar herbs, and mix all or some of them in one pot, adding oil, and boil it; the pot should be well sealed with sturdy clay, and inside the pot have an instrument carved like so:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be made of silver or copper, and one end of the instrument is inserted into the patient's mouth so that vapor rises to the eye via the nose, until the eye is withered; afterwards repeat often, until the eye dries out, and make sure you do not perform this at the beginning of the occurrence of a hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not perform it other than in the decline of a hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and place a piece of egg shell inside the patient's mouth so that their mouth does not become too hot; for the egg shell will not allow the vapors to weigh down on the mouth, and it is a good treatment along with being safe.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Often something gets stuck in the throat - a fishbone or some object. Therefore, you must remove what you can see and press their tongue against sunlight to expose any other objects; and whatever does not appear and is stuck in the throat, the patient must vomit until food is cooked inside the stomach. Perhaps then this thing will be expelled by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a dry breadcrumb; tie a string to the sponge and then have them swallow it. Once it reaches the spot, you can retrieve the object, and then pull out the string. And if this does not work with what we've said before, take an instrument made of lead in this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instruments be curved at the end so that they can more easily enter the throat, and keep the patient's head raised upwards; ensure you do not touch their epiglottis, for fear of causing choking or pushing in the bone; it is better if the sick person inserts the instrument themselves, as they know where to place it; insert the instrument downwards or pull from below so that all instruments are level, until everything has been removed.
de la sansue de la gorge	Of the blood of the throat.
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	There is no need for medicine of the throat if it has been treated by a doctor; but when this treatment is ineffective, examine the patient's throat in sunlight after pressing their tongue with an instrument as I have described.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the leech, draw it out with a very small hook, or use delicate pincers suitable for the task.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, take a hair plait and insert it into the patient's throat; then attach the end of the hair to a heated iron, and do this frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is afflicted by water every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full glass of cold water and open the mouth, pouring it in so they swallow; and as soon as the leech senses the water, it will fall out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not fall as we have said, then smoke the patient with asafetida using the instrument I mentioned for fumigating grapes; do this several times, for it will fall without delay.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of fumigation is such that you take a pot with glowing coals, and cover it with a perforated lid in the middle, and the head of the instrument should be placed through this hole; then put your fumigant inside, and let the patient place the end of the cane into their mouth, closing their mouth so that no smoke escapes, but rather goes down to the lungs; and now the phlegm will fall out, and if it does not, repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, eat salty things, and do not drink water; and thus it shall be necessary for the phlegm to come out by this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument with which one treats phlegm, is such that when it can be seen, it resembles curved tongs to fit into the throat; and it has a resemblance to the beak of a bird, and there is roughness like a file, so that whatever it grasps, it cannot release; and see here the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters of abscesses.
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are many variations of abscesses, according to what the following memory brings from one to another in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; they exist in two ways where one is in its appearance itself, and of what it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for their locations where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	Because abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and abscesses in fleshy places differ from those that appear in joints, each requiring its own judgment when treating them.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And abscesses should not be pierced when the bowels are dead according to their completion; and for those that require piercing when they are ripe, but do not die according to their fulfillment, such as abscesses near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses occur near joints, and they are left until the surrounding area is rotten, perhaps the ligaments and nerves of the joint have been corrupted, which causes contractions in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	If the abscess is near the main part of the limb, and you delay perforating it until it dies, it will harm the primary limb; if it is near the foundation, pierce it before it dies; one must not puncture an abscess without completed digestion unless that which is near the foundation decays completely, becomes elongated inside, and turns into a fistula; then it cannot heal in due time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the opening of the abscess's perforation when dead according to its completion; this happens when pain eases and fever lessens, and soreness and redness reduce, as well as trembling and the sharpness of the abscess head decrease and other signs; then make sure the perforation is in the lowest part of the abscess, where it shows movement; let the length of the perforation be along the body, and if the abscess is on hands or feet, or joints and nerves and arteries, and equal places where there are no bends.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those that bend, according to this member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in the fleshy place, it is better that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed with complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it beforehand, the body of the poison would be elongated and full of much filth; and by chance, the lips may harden and the depth of it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And for any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	You must treat small abscesses with small openings and large abscesses with larger ones, making multiple incisions according to the size of the abscess; and for those that need their core removed, you must do so when they become like a cloth and die off, treating them as boils; there are also those split into three angles, some treated like myrtle leaves such as abscesses from thorns, others with circular cuts or other types of incision.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; 
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For spirits sometimes convulse with bowel movement, which may cause the patient's death, and you will not perceive it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and once you have pierced your abscess, wipe the wound clean, and examine if the abscess wound is small; if it's a full tear, arrange linen threads or old cotton pieces inside; but for large abscesses with many holes, place a thread in each so they come close together; if you've cut part of the skin around the abscess, fill this void with old cotton or dry linen fabric without moisture, and tie until the third day; then remove it, and clean the wound with ointment until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs during your work, bring cold water and apply it gently, dampen the cloths, and place them over the bleeding site repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the bleeding persists, apply compresses and poultices, and use the powders I mentioned in previous chapters of this book. If it is wintertime, and the skin or abscess is very delicate, you should place warm tents and cloths moistened with wine and oil over the wound; however, if it is summertime, and the skin is fleshy, then apply cloths dampened with water and oil, or cold wine and oil, for up to three days as previously stated. Afterward, uncover the abscess, dry, and treat it accordingly until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know universally about the treatment of abscesses; now I have told you how one should proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where small abscesses come from on the head and are like threads, just as the yolk of an egg is, and there are many similar cases.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and like meat where there is moisture just like pulsation; and there are some which are hard and stony to the touch, and there is no doubt if the arteries do not behave contrary.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of cutting into stones is such that you should test all instruments which are called an "entromissoire", from whence its form comes after, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, they do so above the long bone.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is drained, carefully scrape away any remaining skin covering that area, as it will return if nothing is left behind; then apply Egyptian ointment soaked in cotton, if available; if not, use a mixture of water and salt, pack the wound with it, and leave it there until the next day; this will draw out whatever remains from the night before.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then repeat the process with fresh cotton on the second day and again on the third, until you are certain nothing remains from overnight; afterwards treat the wound with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess contains soft matter, lance it in this manner, from the long side; insert your thumbs, and scrape away all of its lining; apply all your effort to extracting the core where it lies; but if an artery presents an obstruction, then follow my instructions given previously.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do this for the abscess if it is malignant, and about cutting and treating as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the incision on the malignant abscess and the moist area is lighter, for they contain little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if in some of these abscesses where there is no moisture and I had to cut an abscess from the head of an old woman, I found the abscess like a hard stone, rough and white, and it could not be broken; and if one had struck it with any implement, they would have made as much of a wound as with a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming to the head, those that come to children's heads and at the roots of ears, the incision should always be made in the lowest possible place, so as to let out the pus; and they should be treated as is required.
des scrophules	Des scrophules
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Maintes fois viennent ces abcès dans le cou, et sous les aisselles, et dans la poitrine, et parfois ils apparaissent ailleurs sur le corps, et il y en a beaucoup, et ils sont interconnectés les uns avec les autres.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	Et chaque scrofula est correctement située dans son emplacement, comme le nodule et l'abcès du crâne, comme nous l'avons dit ; il y a beaucoup d'affections similaires à celles-ci.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are others which are malignant and do not want to obey the rules of health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In those which you see are of good disposition to the touch and match the colour of the body, and have changed from every direction but are not near the veins of the neck or the artery or the windpipe, nor are they deep; it is necessary for you to cut into them from above, and remove the skin on either side, stretching open the two lips of the wound with pincers if need be, as we have said for abscesses of the head ; then scrape repeatedly, making sure that you do not cut the nerve or a vein, nor must your lancet be too sharp lest it slip out of your hand and go in too far so that you cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to operate, apply ground glass or some powders that stem blood to the wound, and hold the wound tight; leave it be until the abscess is calmed down, and the wound has softened, and started to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	Once the bleeding is stemmed, return to your work until you complete it; then check with your index finger if there are any small ulcers remaining, cut them out and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large wound in the root of the ulcer, it should not be cut out at its root, but tied with a strong double thread, and let it fall off on its own, without causing harm; then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut out the entire scrofula, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound, sewing them now since there is no extra space due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	It is necessary for you to understand that it involves cutting the root of it and pulling out its hair, then sewing as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulous sores with extra tissue should be pierced where the dead matter appears; pierce it like before, depending on what is underneath, then apply ointments and similar things so that they can heal the remaining corruption; once the wound is clean, cure the ointment until healthy flesh forms.
de squinance	For eczema
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancient ones spoke of the operation on the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is a record of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those with difficulty breathing, the opening of the throat, which is called the epiglottis, must be cleared; and no aid should be given by others, for all the veins and passages of the patient are affected by this abscess that is hot in their mouth, or throat or both tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the channel of the passage, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid the danger that comes from suffocation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, we should make an incision below three circles or four along a small transverse slit between two circles or by the quantity of the slit on the surface, not in the cartilage; and these cuts are suitable for the sectioning of the epiglottis where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long within.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, he must stretch the skin of the throat entirely and cut through the heart until it reaches the windpipe; remove the blood vessels, should you see anything, then incise the syfac as we have said; it's demonstrated by the break in phlegm from the windpipe which escapes via the opening that has been torn, and also by defects of voice; leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed that one suspects strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound in the heart, suture it entirely without cartilage; then administer medicine which promotes flesh growth until it heals.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says one should not do this until the throat is entirely stuffed up and the patient is judged to be dying, when all hope of breath has been lost.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw a young lady take a knife and thrust it into her throat, cutting part of the windpipe; I was called to treat her, and found her as good as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found blood pouring from it, I knew she had not cut a vein or pierced her throat, and air was escaping through the injury.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried and sewed up the wound, treating it until it was clean; the young lady only had to recover her voice, and returned afterwards to her senses; thus I say that there is no fear in cutting through the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	On swelling of the throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», and is uns grans apostemes in color d'une jaisse, and est molt en femmes; and est selonc II manieres: naturez, and accidens; ou natureil n'a point d'engien.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l'une est semblans a gras nous, and li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d'artere; and il i ait paour, and ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, and le prueve et cerche a tout l'intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, and ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, and le trai a tout sa coife, s'il en i a point; and encerche bien tot, and le cure si com il covient, tant qu'il soit sanez parfaitement.
des nous	From us.
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways to treat us, which I will explain in detail, and now it is necessary for me to tell you all the differences between our method and theirs.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that their method is hot and feverish until the boiling passes, and the decay is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	Our method has no heat, fever, or pain, and it contains I syfac, which is its own sac and varies in colour according to the body, beginning like a yolk and growing larger; there are two types, either hard or soft, with many variations of colour as I have mentioned before.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to our treatment, it is necessary that you first examine and inquire about all the instrument called "entromissoire", according to its form as described in the following chapter.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method of investigating abscesses is as follows: take the moistest part that you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little until you feel that the instrument has pierced the core; this should be according to the size of the abscess. Then remove the instrument and take care not to pierce too deep.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If running moisture is present, regardless of its color, treat it as I have explained for other abscesses. If after the extraction there is no discharge, know that it was fatty, so make an X-shaped incision and take it with forceps, lightly stripping away layers from either side until only the skin layer remains; if you cannot remove all of it in one piece, cut it into smaller pieces to ensure nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if anything remains, it returns the nail many times; and if a small piece remains, and the blood troubles you, then fill the wound with some sharp corrosive powders, compress the wound, and apply warm poultices to soothe the abscess, cure it with other cures until it is healed; and if the nail is large, cut the two lips of the wound, and treat it with what promotes flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the bleeding wound bothers you or is contrary to another, hasten and apply crushed vitriol, and leave it tightly bound for two days or three, until the wound rots, and rests the boiling of blood; then return to cut away that which remains of the nail.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Look at the shapes of the instruments used for incision, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small; and there are three kinds of squares called "albaret", and one called "breb", also in three sizes: large, medium, and small, to probe abscesses and fistulas; and they are like needles that cut sores, made of yellow brass, iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are better for probing the boils of a fistula; and these too come in three sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of the ones are very similar, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; there are also ones with two curves in three ways; and some have three curves, which are also of three kinds; then there are those with one curve only, but these too come in three types; all of them are necessary for their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of these has what one makes sharp, and there are some that only cut on one side, so as not to slice the veins or nerves; this kind is made blunt at the ends for use in many places, such that the patient does not feel them when opening an abscess; they come in three types: large, small, and medium, as you can see; these are only used in fleshy areas like legs, arms, breasts, shoulders, and similar places; sometimes another small instrument is made, resembling a kind of corkscrew, according to this form, which is used to staunch blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is sometimes placed where healing occurs through the closing of veins and arteries, and other times according to this larger form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so that they appear like women's breasts; and they remain ugly and swollen, and for those who wish to cure them, it is necessary to treat them according to this form from point b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	then remove the fat, and treat the wound with a medicinal preparation made from flesh, then bring together the two lips of the wound by stitching them up, and cure it until it is healed; and if the breast hangs down, and is softened due to its size as happens in women, then make an incision into it through two similar cuts; so that one part rests against another at the end of each, with the larger line containing the smaller according to this form, from point b up to g; then remove the skin which lies between the two lips, and take out the fat, and apply what we have said about stitches and powders, and whatever is necessary for its cure until it is healed; and if it isn't healed, or the incision hasn't been fully made, because the patient won't rest still, or due to blood loss, then you should fill the wound with a corrosive ointment soaked in cotton wool; and leave it there until it drains away any remaining tissue and fat, before curing him until he is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	From abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from under the armpits are like hard scrofula with sides, and if there is one containing moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore, those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the entire mass within the abscess is emptied, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton and treat it with ointment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is like a scrofula, treat it as we have said for scrofula slits; and if the wound contains mass, apply cauterization as mentioned earlier.
de la routure de l’artere	Of an artery's rupture
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When an artery is ruptured, and the skin above it has clotted, abscesses often form, and likewise, the vein becomes swollen and infected; and thus can one know that it is indeed the artery, for the abscess runs lengthwise perfectly; and when felt with two fingers, you feel constriction; and if it's the vein, then there are apparent protrusions; and it is foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it is below the axillae and groin and neck and in many other places, as it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	You must therefore avoid iron treatment, and for the one at the head you must also do so, and in that of an artery rupture you must make an incision through the skin lengthwise; then open the cut with a pair of scissors, and carefully separate the artery from the tissues, until it is exposed; then insert beneath it a needle, and pierce it all the way to the other side, and bind the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have taught you for the extraction of the two arteries in the temples; then open the place between the two bindings with an introducer, until blood flows out which is inside, and let go of the abscess; then bring forward the treatment that causes growth, so that the bandages fall off; then treat this with ointment, as befits it, until it heals; and if the abscess is due to a vein incision, you must hold in your hand what you can of the abscess along with all the skin, then insert a needle beneath the place which you are holding by hand, and pierce it, and have a double thread there, so that you draw it from the other side; then bind the abscess as I said to you, binding one end of two threads in two parts into two knots; and if you doubt that the thread will come out, insert another needle entirely beneath all the abscess by way of the first needle's incision, and tighten the threads in four places; then cut away the abscess until superfluous things are removed from it, then remove the extra from the heart and leave what is bound; then put a cloth dampened with wine and oil on top, then treat him with tents and ointments until he heals.
des apostemes des ners	Of abscesses from nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Likewise abscesses occur in arteries and veins, abscesses form on nerves when they are injured or through excessive hard work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	They occur more frequently in shoulders and arms and all places where there are joints, and these are serious abscesses, and their colour resembles that of the body, and they are found in various locations without pain; and when pressed firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not located on the surface of the body but beneath the heart; and it spreads everywhere, neither forward nor backward, nor below nor above, and one which is in a joint should not be cut with an iron instrument: perhaps contraction would result; and those that are on the head or forehead, make the skin ulcerous.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, hold it with forceps and cut it at its root; if it is large, suspend it using a hook, peel it off, remove it, and stitch the wound together, then treat it until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	Large boils hanging down.
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	They occur sometimes in the belly and not elsewhere at all, this is a disease called "fungus" due to its resemblance, and it has subtle roots and large heads; there are small and very large ones; I saw a man who had two on his belly that looked more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, had fine roots, were slightly split, and moisture came out continuously.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I cut them open and found one weighing 18 ounces, and the other VI З., and for the operation of incision do as follows: observe if the patient is moist, and the color of the artelous is white and moist with a fine root; cut it open with a broad spatule, and apply the fire cautery in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	In cutting there is often great loss of blood, and if you faint from it then cauterize quickly; and if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the incision with iron, use a well-made thread to bind the artelous as we have said, leaving it for two days; afterwards hold it tight and do not cease binding the thread until the artelous is cut open without trouble; and if the roots are large be careful when cutting especially near the belly but you can safely cut half of it then cauterize so that it does not grow back; then treat the wound, taking care not to cut the reddish colored thelul which has a poor texture and milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess aggravated, and I will come to the treatment of cancer thereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	when it breaks open at once.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the abscess comes about through cauterization of wounds or fissures in sores, and it is on the belly or some of its parts, as happens with other ruptures, or when blood flows from veins or arteries according to what was described before, or due to windiness; and if this is because of a rupture in the sore and an outbreak of the bowel, then the color of the abscess will be similar to that of flesh, it will be slight without pain, and visible through several openings.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to an outbreak of the intestine, then it becomes more diverse, and when you press it with your fingers it will retract, but come back, or possibly it would be tightened, and greatly enlarged at the entrance of the bath after strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a minor issue, and it shows when you press it with your hand, as it does not constrict; but if it is because of blood, then these signs appear: abscesses that are large and hard, and punctured in varying quantities; and if it is due to windiness, it feels soft to the touch, so consider whether the appearance indicates arterial or venous bleeding, or wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	You should leave the treatment alone.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For he has doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance indicates an issue with the intestine or rectum, you must instruct the patient to hold their breath and lie flat and straight; then bleed around the abdomen entirely; then command him to remain in your hands often, then go around the place you marked before with a span; then extend half of the abscess above the whole large inch; then bind it with a strong thread or firm silk rope, and let the knot be on top; then operate on the extended half of the abscess atop the knot, inserting your index finger, and seek the intestine; if you find it caught by the knot, untie it and push the intestine out of the belly; and if you find the rectum, grasp it with your fingernail and cut off any excess; and if the artery or vein gives trouble, gently go around it, then return to your work and take two needles, inserting two thick threads through them, and thrust the two needles into what was pierced before in a cross shape; then drain the abscess in four places over the needles, and if you can see, remove the needles, leaving the place until it rots, and cut away dead flesh as it occurs; or treat it when it is soft and rotten, then treat the abscess as we have said; draw out blood or moisture that you find, then treat the place with what is needed, and close the abscess as described before; finally seal the place.
dou chancre	From chancre
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have spoken about the similarities of chancre in the division, and how it should be treated with medicine, and how one must avoid iron-based treatments; and we speak of chancre in an awkward place in the flesh, requiring great caution when treating, and the ancients say that when a chancre is in a location where it can be scraped out like a chancre on the breast, groin or similar areas, then it should be completely removed at its beginning; but when it grows large and old, one must not attempt to treat it for I have never been able to cure such an affliction nor has anyone else before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment, when it is in a place where it can be removed as we have said, involves purging the patient with black bile at first; then make them bleed if they are bloated, and prepare the patient to lie comfortably for the procedure; then cut away your ounces of flesh or the chancre, removing all hair from around it, taking out all of the tissue without leaving anything behind; let blood flow freely until it stops on its own, and press the area well with your hand or something similar, and if the bleeding opposes you, cutting into an artery or a vein, cauterize until the bleeding is stopped, then treat them with another cure until they are healed.
de ydropisie	From dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have previously mentioned in the division the similarities of dropsy, and how the accumulation of water is formed, as well as the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is achieved through medicine, and those that are cured by iron; so only these two similarities are written about; and one must not use iron for these II similarities: namely, tympanites and yposarche, because they are mortal things; therefore when you treat this similarity of dropsy called "eclites" with medicines, and the cure is not beneficial, then consider if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides dropsy, such as constipation and similar things; do not use iron, for there is doubt; and if you see that the patient is strong and healthy, and he only has dropsy and no other illness, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you should proceed like this: lift the patient upright with your hands, and have attendants press on his stomach by pushing the water to the lowest part of the belly, then take the spatumile spiny according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And divide [it] into two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	A point, yet not so deep that it can reach the intestine when you insert it, and cannot cause injury; then observe if the dropsy is connected to the intestines: if so, make an incision three fingers above the navel on the right side; and if it is due to liver disease, let your incision be on the left of the navel three fingers down; and if caused by mucus, be on the right. It is not fitting for the patient to lie over the incision such that the superfluidity flows into this weak spot; then pierce through all skin with an instrument, push it in, lift your hand up against the whole spatumile between the skin and fascia like you would in flaying by a finger's width or so around; then pierce the fascia until the spatula reaches the empty space, which is where water gathers. Then pull it out and insert this instrument of which here is its form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a subtle silver cane, and is made of light brass or copper, and has on the bottom part one small hole; and on its side from one corner three holes; and two other parts, each with one hole; and the head is shaped like a feather, which corresponds to the form of the incision that scribes make when cutting feathers.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	at the top is the handle, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it descends onto the instrument immediately; empty half or a third part, because if you empty more than necessary at that moment, perhaps the patient may die due to the loss of their spirit from the wound, or they become lost, or they approach death; but empty according to his condition's strength and according to what his condition indicates along with his pulse; then draw out the instrument and hold back the water, and it is retained now for the heart which blocks the hole that I mentioned above, which you pierce in this manner; then resume the instrument the next day if you see the patient suffering from this, and drain a small quantity of water; do this every day, and be careful not to dry out more than just a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt the patient's condition, and you leave a lot of water inside them, cure them with burial in hot sand or clay, and through profuse sweating or bathing and exposure to the sun, and deprive them of drink; cure him with drying medicines until he is dry, and cauterize over the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting the water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Of the stopping of the penis.
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born who do not have an opening in their penis, or the opening is very small, or it is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	It must be pierced as soon as possible with a very thin spatula, following this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then put a slender lead plug into the opening, and leave it there for three or four days; when he wants to urinate, remove the plugs so that he can pass urine, then replace them; but perhaps this is not necessary, as the urine which comes out will keep the plugs open.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the orifice is small then this (i.e., the lead plug) has been medicated as we have said; it will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the orifice in its place are deformed, for no one is born with an orifice at the top of the penis so they cannot urinate until they raise their penis upwards; nor can they ejaculate because the substance cannot reach the urethra; this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the work is such that the patient often lies on their back, then extend the head of the penis and the scrotum like the size of a feather, so that the opening closes in the middle as it should; and be careful of the discharge of blood which often occurs, and if it happens, stop it with what stops bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	Pimples on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often this albathe comes to the penis, and it is an appearance of ugly flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so you must take them with a subtle needle, and cut and clean them all, then apply moist cotton with Egyptian ointment; then treat it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the cancer is malignant, of a foul colour and stinking, you must treat it with cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cauterized it, and if the cancer is on a limb, and has penetrated partly into the flesh and partly outside, you must remove the cancer that is inside first; and when it is healed, treat what is outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it together, the head of the limb is not assured that it will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption occur within the limb and in the flesh; so you must cut away all that is black and corrupted, then bind with a plaster of honey and flour made from pomegranate rind and fig bark, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar cautery as follows:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauteries aid in two conditions together: that is, for bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, you must insert a lead pipe into the penis, and let the patient urinate through it; and when the skin at the tip of the penis becomes dry due to those who have not been circumcised, or due to wounds or abscesses, then you must peel off the skin with an instrument that is sharp enough so that the ligaments are loosened and the head of the penis is freed from all sides; and if this is a serious matter to determine whether it is caused by a wound or an abscess, then you must peel it with a spatula on some part of the tip of the penis and the skin; then carefully separate between them, and place a thin piece of damp linen cloth in cold water so that it does not dry again.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision.
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a breaking of continuity like other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this work willingly, especially on children, it is necessary that we do our best work and the lightest touch for their well-being.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision on their children, for it was not used in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For the majority of masters and elders who performed circumcisions would do so around the age of one, using forceps and an entire lancet; thus avoiding the heart as it has two veins, and perhaps cutting the one above and leaving the one below intact.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or la recovient coper, and is the pain doubled; and in the cleaning which comes from the point of the limb, it is not secure; and in the cleaning of the nail maybe the iron escapes, and they run away, and often so arises that there is no need of cleaning and I want this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the cleaning that is done with threads, I have found goodness in this experiment, for the threads cut as cleanly above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, you cut evenly in all directions with equal tension; but let the thread be tightly wrapped around the skin, and make sure the first action is to make the child think that you are only tying a thread around their penis, and then you can move them however you wish; then have them stand between your legs, out of sight of any instruments or threads; then put your hand over their genitals and blow on the heart, pulling it upwards until the head of the penis is visible; clean away all debris, then tie a place marker with double thread at the base, securing this below another loop; hold them by the second band between thumb and index finger, cutting through both threads in one motion, then lift up the glans and draw out the head of the penis; allow blood to drip freely for some time, as it is good for you; apply powder over the wound, followed by a cloth covered with egg-white glue, tempered with rose water, mixed with red oil ointment that is good and fresh, then leave this on until the next day, healing them with other remedies until they are healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of forceps for cleansing is as follows: the two blades should be curved and sharp, and the blades should be as large as the handle evenly.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of cleansing is when the core inside escapes the incision; therefore, you must extend it to your nail, rather than letting the flesh form an abscess; cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, then use pliers, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it exceeds three days, and that which is below the rod is swollen, let it be until the hot abscess is calmed, and lightly scrape it; cut it as you can, and take care not to damage the part of the rod, for it will cause no harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure therefore the place of things adjoining wound with powder, as we have said in the treatise on powders, and if it breaks out from the heart excessively, and goes beyond, it will not harm; cure it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	treatment of urine retention
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is caused by obstruction due to stone, or frozen blood, or a bowel, or newborn child, or similar things, as we have said in the classification; and if the urine is not released, and you see that it is retained because of a stone which is in the neck or opening of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over their knees; their feet should be placed on their back, and their belly extended from the upper part towards the back, and the patient's anus restrained as much as possible; thus the neck of the bladder is forced to express the stone above, whereby the urine is released; and if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you should administer extraction with all the instrument which is called a 'syringe', of which this is its form: made of thin silver, light as bird's feathers; its nozzle being one palm in length and half, and finely pointed at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, and tie a doubled thread to the head of a small bag of wool or cotton; boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; insert the head of the thread into the syringe; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, then cut off the excess wool and push it until it reaches the tip of the syringe, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, next anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg-white; et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, make the patient sit on a seat, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; anoint his bladder and penis with moist oil, olive oil, and warm water; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, gently insert the syringe into the penis, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, until it reaches the base of the penis, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; then bend the penis upwards towards his belly; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, advance the syringe forward up to the bladder, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, and have him feel it until he voids his urine, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; but if this is not done in the prescribed order because what guides it is twisted, puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, then stretch out the thread with all the small bag of wool stretched too, et li urine en suit la laine, and his urine will follow the wool, puis l’estrai fuer, then extract it gently, et fai corre l’urine; make his urine flow, et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, and restart with the syringe until his bladder is empty, et soit aligiez li malaides. and may he be relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	Of bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scalds or blood enter the bladder, and putrefaction gathers there, if you wish to distill water and medicine into it, use an instrument called a "clepsydra," which is shaped like this:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed and has three apertures: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see. The nozzle through which the medicine flows should be shaped so that it stops up the penis without any addition; then a small quantity of liquid can be withdrawn from it by suction when required. When you wish to instill medicines into the bladder, immerse the end of the nostril in water and draw on the other side until you have drawn enough water through the instrument; then insert the nozzle again strongly so that air does not get in. The liquid will thus enter and reach the bladder at once, which the patient will feel; this is the form of the subtle clyster with which we can enema the bladder: it looks like this
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is made of silver or copper, and the head is higher up; below at the level of the chest where the cords fall; then take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture you want to use for an enema, then tie it between the two breasts firmly with a good double thread, and warm this moisture in a pot over the fire; next insert the head of the enema into the anus, then press your hand on the bladder until all the moisture comes out suitably, so that the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder; if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make it circular, pierce it round about; insert a strong thread through these holes, put together the circle like one would sew a purse, fill this with what you wish of oil or moisture or water, and tie it to the instrument; act as if you had made a bladder, pressing by hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already spoken about the types of stones and their treatments in the division, along with medicines; I have explained the distinction between kidney stones and bladder stones, all signs, and which stones require surgery; as well as those in the bladder and urethra; and I will tell you this clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that stones which form in the bladder occur more frequently in children, and this is a sign that urine escapes from the bladder similar to water in its subtlety; and it appears as sand, causing the patient's penis to itch, and they may urinate often, then become constipated; and many of these cases cause inflammation of the anus; and healing is easier for children up to four years old, while it is a grave matter in the elderly, and average for those in between; and treatment is more straightforward for those with large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the bile that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For sometimes it hinders the removal of the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, lift them up and move from underneath so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it comes out of its place; then have him sit between your prepared hands, with his hands placed below his thighs, so that the bladder is completely tilted downwards; afterwards search for the stone and feel inside; if you sense the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut above the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not fall at the first touch, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand if the patient is an infant, or your middle finger if the patient is a young adult; and push it into their anus, search for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, guide it towards the neck of the bladder; then press on top of your finger, and push it out at the place where you intend to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the testicles upward, and with his left hand remove the skin that is beneath the testicles in the area where the incision is made; then insert the spatula, which has this shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	Make an incision between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the scrotum; it should be straight above the stone, and both your thumbs must be next to or near the anus, and the incision across should be such that it appears wide from outside, while inside it remains narrow, according to the size of the stone, not too large; perhaps the pressure will push out what is in the anus without any effort; know that there are some stones with angles and edges: they are easy to extract; and those which are underneath, resembling a nut, round in shape, with a slight opening.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; 
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, you must take care of it, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either they die, or urine returns through an opening that the flesh cannot close; yet try your best to extract it, either by pulling or scooping with forceps, until you pull it out in pieces; and when you have finished your work, fill the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, then bind it tightly, and place a damp cloth on top soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then settle the patient back onto their neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you untie it, thoroughly wash the place with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of daffodil and basilicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if an abscess becomes hot and causes corrosion in the wound, or blood coagulates in the bladder, blocking urine flow, which is known to happen as a result of this: press your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will infect the bladder, and rot it; then clean the wound with water, egg whites, and silk, and treat him in all ways you know until it heals; and ensure every time you treat him, you bind his two thighs together, and apply the medicine to the place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small and lodged in the urethra, preventing urine passage, you may excuse cutting it out by this treatment: perform multiple incisions as I say so that he urinates.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven this thus.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	If you forge an iron tool according to this form, let it have three sharp edges like a spike:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot move backward into the bladder; then insert the tool gently into the penis until it reaches the stone; turn the tool in your hand within the stone back and forth, until you can pierce through to the other side; urine will come immediately, then press your hand on what remains of the stone inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it breaks quickly and comes out with the urine, then the patient is healed; but if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie one thread below the stone and another above it, then slit the penis where the stone is between the two threads, extract it with the tool, untie the thread, and clean the clotted blood from the wound; treat it until it heals.
de la piere des femmes	From a woman's stone.
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Soon a stone may be found in women, and if it happens occasionally, the treatment is difficult due to three reasons: one being that perhaps the woman is a virgin; secondly, one cannot find a skilled woman who would expose herself to inspection, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third reason is that one may not be able to find an expert woman in this field; and the fourth reason is that a woman's stone lies deeper than that of a man, hence requiring a deeper incision which is feared greatly. And if necessity arises for such, then you must seek out a knowledgeable midwife, and since it is hard to find one, or perhaps there isn't any chaste and subtle inspector available; present the case to an experienced wise woman in women's affairs, or a woman who knows some of this art, and instruct her to do as you command regarding the examination for the stone; and look closely if the woman is a virgin: then she must insert her finger into the vagina and search for the stone; and if found, force it downwards under her finger, and advise her to place her finger where the patient has pain, and press firmly with her left hand upon the bladder region.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	S'elle la trueve, si covient qu'elle la mueve de greit en greit des l'entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu'elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; 
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know the symptoms, then you will understand the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if blood defeats you, place some ground vitriol where needed and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your work so that the stone is pushed out, having with you the tools I mentioned previously when extracting a kidney stone from men in order to aid you during your task; if the blood defeats you again and this is due to damage of an artery, place powder on the wound along with tenting cloths and strips of fabric, do not start over or pull at the kidney stone as it may kill the patient; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed down, and healing takes place, return to your work until the kidney stone comes out.
de hernie carnouse	Of fleshy hernia.
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Watery ramus is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white puss, which is beneath the heart of cows, contained within the egg; and it is called "puss", and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, such that one might think it to be another egg; and this has no name.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramus is due to weakness that comes from cows, and this matter is spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on cows, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a shade tending towards yellow, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and these happen more; and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is in the white puss we have said, then the abscesses are rounded, rather long like the shape of an egg, and it does not open the cows, for it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the surrounding tissue, the abscess swells along with part of the egg-like formation, and so one might think it is another egg; but if the moisture is between the skin and the subcutaneous fat, it can be felt well enough; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, try this test that shows its form as described above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what follows this test, judge by what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, the patient must be bled according to their condition and the fullness of their body; then lay them on their back, on something slightly elevated, and place a lot of cloth underneath them; then sit on their left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on the right, and extend the rod towards one of the two sides of the heart in the loins; then take the lead spatula, and cut through the skin over the loins along the length down to the elbow, making a straight incision while removing the skin up to the white subcutaneous tissue, carefully scraping according to your skill; then pierce this with a water-filled tube at one large opening, and extract all the water, then place your hands, and extend the white part upward; do not touch the heart of the loins, only the white part; cut it all away in pieces especially its thin side, for if you do not cut it carefully enough, water will return; and if the egg-like formation should pop out during your work, replace it where it was once you have finished working on the white part; then bring the two edges of the heart of the loins together with a suture, then treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the testicle corrupted by another disease, then you must bind the vessels that are suspended, fearing blood loss; then cut away all the surrounding tissue, extract the testicle, and treat it as we have described.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the water has gathered in two parts together, know that these are two roots; so cut away the other part as you did with the first one evenly, then wipe off the blood, and place on the wound wet linen soaked in rose oil; put over another piece of woolen cloth moistened in wine and oil, and cover both testicles, then put doubled cloths over them, and bind it all above with a bandage that is shaped like this:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two pieces of cloth, and fill them with woolen stuffing shaped like this and sew them together at the waist of the pants; one piece covers the base up to the back, while the other reaches from the groin area down; another pair goes over both shoulders, and all these are fastened in the belt loop; sometimes, this root is treated not by iron knife but with cauterization, which you do like so: take a thin lancet-like cautery tool, cut open the skin of the testicles as we described earlier, then heat it up according to what has been said before, until the white substance that contains water is exposed; now use this cautery shaped like thus, and pierce through that white substance in an onion-like manner, then scrape away the flesh with this sharp hot cautery tool:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And strike it in all ways that you can, so that you crush everything; and make sure the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is safer; and be mindful of blood loss, and treat it like surgical procedures; and if anything opposes you, or an abscess becomes hot or there is blood loss or something else, then treat what opposes you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	If the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this procedure due to its horror, then administer perforation as I have told you; when you are certain through the signs we have mentioned that watery matter is present, make the patient sit on a raised seat; pierce the abscess in the part beneath at any place across the entire width of the spine; let the openings be wide so all the fluid flows out; then apply cotton to the spot and bind it up; leave it for the rest of the water to drain away, then treat until the wound is healed. If the white cloth does not allow the water to escape at the mouth of the wound, you must insert a feather or an instrument used for draining water from dropsy patients such as that described above, and enlarge the wound; know that the fluid will return, and it assembles again after six months or thereabouts, when it is assembled like before, then let the patient pass his days in this way.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of abscesses of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the treatment of this subject there is fear in many situations, which is why it seems better to leave it alone; and I will tell you about the work and similarities of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say, therefore, that many abscesses come from the body, especially in the testicles; and this is a common occurrence.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is known to be caused by excess bile and acid, which spreads to the testicles, or due to impact; and the colour of the abscess matches the body's colour; it does not cause pain, and is a severe abscess; sometimes these are serious, hard, and stony, with an intense color, and can arise from arterial blood or swelling in the veins.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When this is due to an arterial issue, it is recognized by the hot, tender abscess-like swelling when you press it with your fingers; and you should not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	One who is suffering from a swelling of the vein is recognized by its tender feeling upon touch, and you can easily perform the operation on this likeness, and on other flesh; and it is that you cut out the heart of the tumors, then burst the egg upwards, and draw forth the white matter, and release the yolk from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already hardened with its flesh grown together, then you must draw out the egg and cut it; and if it is aerated on the surface or inside vessels, you must release all that tense matter and cut it roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is behind, you must cut it all away, and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	When your work is completed, fill the wound with wet wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other cures until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of abscesses on buttocks.
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a poultice similar to barley gruel, with the softening of the buttocks, and the patient becomes very ill when they defecate; and the cure for this disease is just as fearsome as the one before, yet we will tell you the procedure according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	You must make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then place the scrotum suspension around his hips with your two hands, holding all vessels that are near to the penis and stretching them firmly; next, cut transversely across these vessels with a wide-bladed spatula until they are exposed, then peel back the skin on each side as we have described for extracting arteries in the temples; insert a needle there where you have double thread, and tie it at the first place where the vein is revealed, then secure again to the other end; cut them directly in half according to the length of the body and remove the corrupted parts; treat the wound like others that require stitching such that no vessel seeps fluid into one of the testicles; for by this there comes about no harm whatsoever, but if venom has invaded all vessels then it is necessary to draw the testicles from every vessel so as not to deprive the organ of its nourishment on account of cutting these vessels and drying them out rendering itself incapable of helping.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the fracture of the cheekbone
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The occurrence of this branch is due to the section that affects the cheekbone or the extension on the abdomen in the region of the intestines, which causes them to descend from this fracture towards one of the testicles; and this fracture occurs either in the cheekbone itself or in its extension, and it comes about through these two types of excessive force: from percussion, jumping, lifting a heavy load, or similar actions; and when it is caused by an extension of the cheekbone, there are signs that it happens gradually over a long period of time, rather than suddenly; and abscesses form equally around the fracture because the cheekbone presses against the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are that when it is caused by a section of the cheekbone, it leads to sudden pain at first, and abscesses appear in various places under the skin close to the surface, which is due to the intestine protruding from behind the cheekbone.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the muscles descend with the intestine, getting stuck there and causing great pain to the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments with fear, it is necessary to escape from them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the method of treatment is such that you instruct the patient to retract the intestine with their own hand into the wound if they can reach it; then have them lie on their back between your hands, lift their thighs; extend the heart upwards, and cut all the skin of the testicles lengthwise; then insert the forceps into the navel as much as you need in order to open the wound, ensuring that the opening is such that the intestine may pass through it; then remove the skin on top of the white membrane underneath the skin of the testicle, between the second membrane and what lies behind the testicle; with your right hand inside the testicles' heart, stretch the white membrane upwards using your left hand, and lift the testicle along all its membranes towards the navel; instruct the assistant to extend the testicle upwards and undo whatever is hindering it from behind; search with your fingers for any piece of intestine entangled in the white membrane, and if you find anything untangle it, pushing it back into the belly; then take a needle threaded with four threads made up of ten individual filaments, insert it through the posterior part of the membrane, beyond the scrotum's skin, behind the navel, pierce the testicle's roots appearing from the filaments until there are four filaments; gather them together in cross form and bind the membrane we said was underneath the scrotal skin with a strong two-fold ligature; wind the threads around the filaments and tie them firmly in two parts so that none of the vessels which feed it can enter through, to prevent an abscess forming; finally, place another ligature following the first one lengthwise for two fingers' width and then on all other places according to the testicle's roundness; cut into the part underneath the scrotum's skin until blood and urine flow out as we said before; then apply oiled woolen padding onto the wound and bind with the ligature we mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes, the white surface is cauterized as we mentioned earlier, after incision, due to fear of blood loss.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and leave the ligament until it tears by itself; and if it delays in falling, let it be washed with warm water, and apply what we have mentioned earlier, until it tears; then treat the wound with another remedy, until it heals perfectly.
de hernie carnouse	Of hernia cruris.
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to treat it with iron instruments.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is treated like the branch which has a worm inside, in such a way that you cut the vessels, after the size above slightly below; then cut in half, and treat the abscess of what is affected, until the vessels fall out; and heal it as we have mentioned earlier, until it heals.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Any time a rupture occurs in the groin, as we have said, and the tissue opens up; but none of the intestines descend into the cavity, and if they do, it is little, and heals every hour; even so, if it remains too long at this stage, then the wound or fistula grows, such that the intestine descends; and this happens because of the extension of the fistula which is in the groin, as we have said, for it becomes extended, then softened and swollen tissue opens up; and treatment can be by cauterization, as we have previously mentioned; and sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: the patient lies prone on their back between your hands, then cut away the swollen skin of the rupture according to how large it is, about three fingers wide; and then remove the fistula which is beneath the skin that covers it, then take a rod and place it over the visible part of the fistula; and press the other end against the abdomen, then cut both sides of the fistula along the axis of the rod, and stitch them together; then extract the rod, but do not cut away any part of the fistula nor stretch anything or make an egg-shaped extension, as I have explained in the treatment for enterorrhaphy; then treat it according to wound healing.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the boys' hair, clean it up and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The knife is forced in without breaking the surface, and cauterization is better suited here for healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of softening the skin of the calves
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often the skin of calves is softened in certain people because the bones inside are softened and it can be seen; and when you want to treat it, make the patient lie on their back, and cut away the softened skin over the natural skin; then join the two lips together with a suture, and if you wish, sew the superfluous part of the softened skin with three or four firm stitches; then cut between the sutures, and treat like other wounds until it is healed, and remove the thread.
dou chastrement	Chastisement.
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Know that chastisements are forbidden in our law, and for this reason, it would please me not to speak of them in this book; and it is not necessary except for two manners: one being that the doctor should know how to respond when asked about it, and know its cure; and the other, because we often need to chastise certain animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, cows, and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that chastisements occur in two ways: either by traction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the method we perform by traction, have the animal sit in warm water until its muscles are relaxed and soft; then grab them with your hand until they are reset and you no longer feel any dislocation.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Du chastrement de taille: You must hold the animal down, and press its scrotum with your left hand, then tie the tether, and cut each testicle once with one blow, when you have thoroughly skinned them; leave some of the skin of the penis and prepuce which is on the vessels; this manner of castration is better than that done by traction because it leaves no remains of the scrotum from which the animal might want to feel lust; then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Ce sont des animaux qui ont les deux coions et les deux oefs, ou qui portent de chescuns une partie; et par le droit de nature est que li males n'aient pas les vases de la femele en eu cors, ne les females les vases de li males.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	There are two kinds of hermaphrodites among men; one is when a man has something like the image of female genitals between his testicles and it sometimes secretes urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And another type occurs in women, situated on the forearm like a rod and two knobs.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	The treatment for men and women is that you join the chapped skin together, and treat it like other wounds; in the second type, for men whose urine flows through the hide of the knobs, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	Of the swelling.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Swelling is chapped skin on the natural part, so large and ugly to see; some women have it as big as a hand, and that is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You must hold the excess of the swelling with your hand or pincers, and join it lightly; do not go too deep lest blood flows out, then treat another cure like any other wound until it is healed; and for another type of chapped skin that forms at the mouth of the vagina, expel it, and perhaps fire it, as it resembles cow dung, thus the ancients called it "cow-like disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	You must cut it off, as we have said for a growth caused by itching, and treat it until it is clean.
de erratique	Of wandering.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Wandering is the case when the woman's nature is not pierced or the opening is small; and it is natural by birth or an accident due to illness that has occurred; whether it is through a joined charm, or subtle touch of evil spirits or species, and it happens perfectly in the womb, on the sides, below, or wherever; and prevents conception, childbirth, and perhaps having flowers [childbirth]; and the knowledge of such is by observing the belly.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the obstructions appear nearby, then they will reach your fingers or rod [instrument].
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is of delicate tissue and close to the two lips, hurry up and do this: place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with legs spread; then stretch the two lips widely so that the delicate tissue is round, and covers the openings; then take wool, moisten it in oil, and place it over the spot, and make the woman lie to the man every day until it cannot close.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the tissue is hard and thick, you must cut it with a spatula similar to myrtle leaves.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the obstruction is of flesh that has not yet born hair, suspend it with a hook and cut it; and have ready some medicines to staunch blood, such as dragon's blood, incense, mixed with white of egg; then apply a broad leaden plate so the wound cannot close; and let it remain for long enough, and provide a dry linen dressing; then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when a new flesh grows in the wound, it should be cut according to this method, unless there are embedded abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an embedded abscess in the wound, one must not attempt to cut it open.
des emorroides	Of haemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Haemorrhoids are openings of veins that usually bleed, and when they are old they become thick; I have previously mentioned their similarities to other conditions, and the signs, now I shall speak about those which can be cured.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that haemorrhoids and thick growths, when they are completely inside the anus, and cannot be felt, should not be treated with a cauterising iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the swamp, where one can feel, are those whom one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	You must therefore put the woman in a cold house, then extend the ulcer with tongs, and cut it at its roots, then sprinkle powder on medicines that restrain blood, such as dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then press her feet against the wall for an hour, then place her in cold water; and if there is an outflow of blood, have her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate rind, galls, and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and egg white, and make a poultice on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, have him undergo cupping therapy on his back and breasts without hurting them; then take linen, soak it in plantain juice or elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the affected area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Once the abscess heals, treat the area with ointment until it is cured; and that which is called 'albathir' is red, and resembles a rough head, must be cut as I have said before about the tumor; and then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	Abscesses of the marrow.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	There are many types of abscess that can occur in the marrow, such as cancer, stone abscess, herpes, tumors, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscess, and several other diseases that I have mentioned in the classification.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is necessary therefore that I speak in this treatise of the hot abscess which forms in the groin, which is not one of the abscesses that settle low; and if you wish to know the work of iron, then look to see if the abscess is acute at its beginning, full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red as you can see.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore do not hasten to pierce it, but let it die until the pain is eased; then have the patient sit on a seat, and place two small seats beneath him so that he leans back, supporting his back and gathering together the parts below his legs; and let his thighs be spread apart, and place his arms underneath his knees, binding them well with a good bandage. Then suck out towards the right side and introduce the instrument which is used to open the mouth of the abscess, from whence comes its form; and when you wish to introduce this instrument, it is necessary that first you trace an outline so as to know the depth of the abscess, lest what enters into the instrument go in too deeply and injure the patient. If the instrument is larger, then cover the depth of the abscess with cloths so that the instrument does not harm him; and let he who holds the instrument place its horn above it while holding onto it.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; 
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is swollen with pus, you must avoid treating it with hot iron; instead, treat it as we have described in the section on [wound treatment].
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth.
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	First, the midwife must know the natural process of childbirth and recognize its signs: when you see the woman's water breaking, and she desires to smell her waters; then be aware that the child is hastening to come out quickly; henceforth, understand that these are natural births, with the infant born headfirst, and the second stage occurring alongside it; and as soon as you see these signs, you must gently press on her belly so the child comes out swiftly; for when its head descends, the second stage begins alongside it, and the mother's uterus is cleansed of excesses by a thorough cleansing process; whereas those born differently are not born naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it sometimes happens that he comes onto his feet, and then his body falls forward or backward, and the hands, or he comes down on his belly, often, and is turned by chance over onto his neck, and into other evil positions; so here we need a nurse who is wise and subtle in these matters, and beware of error and deceit, and I shall show you all the positions how one must help him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out onto his head by natural delivery, and the woman labours painfully in childbirth, and her strength is weak, then have the midwife sit her on a saddle, where women hold her; and stimulate her nature with some oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, then insert the small spatula between her two hands which looks like this: [describe]
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and split the caul, and cut at her nail so that the moisture which is within runs out; and press on the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must give an enema to the woman with a mixture of fenugreek and sesame oil; then make her sneeze by giving her some sneezing powder, and hold her mouth and nose for one hour: now draw out the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if both hands emerge first, you must gently pull them out a little at a time; and if they cannot be pulled out, place the woman on a seat, and lift her feet upwards; then lower the seat to the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall during this process; and if the hands cannot be extracted, and the child is dead, cut open the hands with the knife provided here, and extract the child, pulling evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child is born on its feet, push it upwards and then turn it a little at a time until it is level; then take one foot and stretch it gently.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	When it reaches up to the thighs, instruct him to grasp [it] and make him sneeze forcefully; if it is fever, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not fever as we have said, then turn him on his side and side again until he is in his natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then he will be lightly dislocated.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if fever does not come as we have said, take the extract of a herb called altea, and oil of sisam, and melted gum, and grind all this in a mortar; place it on the woman's vulva and outside this ointment, then make her sit in warm water up to under her armpits; and when she is moistened below, make a myrrh collar for her, and put it underneath, and leave it an hour; then make her sit on a seat, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and press her belly gently, because the child will now be born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the birth of the child upon their knees.
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this manner, place the nurse's hands here and there; then let them lean on their neck, and hang their feet down, and lay them on the bed; and fold their hands thus and so, and then press their hands onto their stomach, and remove the cushions from beneath, until they are prepared below; and if the child does not suck, take its feet and move it vigorously, then move their belly upwards, then put in all your hands; encourage the child here and there; and tell the woman to hold herself so that the child exits.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the birth of the child, which comes from the wide part with one hand hanging.
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I must prepare to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, make the woman get up and walk; if she can't walk, make her lie on the bed, and stretch her legs vigorously; then administer the medication that I have described; and if she does not give birth, make her sit on a chair, then try to bring back the hand; encourage the child according to natural form, and make her sneeze, and tell her to hold herself so that the child exits.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the exit of the child onto its neck, and has spread out his hands, and his face turned towards the back of his mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I agree that the nurse should hold his hand, then turn it a little and gently stretch it; and when it is equalized, apply some of the natural muscle ointment we mentioned earlier with oil, then instruct her to move it slowly; and once you have done this, make her sit on a chair, order her to grab onto something, and then make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way for every midwife
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes out this way for every midwife, pinch the midwife with your nail until all moisture is gone; and if the child falls on his face or neck, pinch him from behind so he doesn't get stuck there, then push the child inside again until you have properly repositioned him, and order the woman to grab something: only then can you gently pull.
de l’issue des gemelz	Of the dislocation of the wrists
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born together; this is not a strange occurrence, and it happens often.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Those are strange, and do not live if born thus; I know this, that they be multiplied, and are separated by the sutures which divide them, which is tied to the fontanelle; and sometimes they emerge naturally like a single child, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they are born severely afflicted, treat them as we have said, and let the nurse be skilled, doing quickly and lightly what is needed; act swiftly for their welfare.
de plusors enfans	Of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Are made in the year one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or many up to fifteen, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the glorious blood, and it is necessary that the nurse knows all this, for perhaps similar things will happen to her; so she should act accordingly.
de l’enfant mort	Of the dead child.
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman for a dead child in her belly, as I said in the section above, and there is no progress, and you must perform manual work; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or fear of death; then the woman should be placed on her back, with her legs elevated, and her feet pointing downwards. The minister should hold two parts to her, or she should be tied to the bed so she cannot move during the procedure. You should then moisten the mouth of the womb with oil, mixed with an infusion of altee, fenugreek, and flax seeds; anoint the hands of the nurse with these oils and mixtures; insert them gently into the womb, first checking that the place where they are inserted is suitable for this purpose. If the child is equipped with its limbs, ensure it descends onto its head; if not, insert the instrument through her eyes, neck, mouth, palate, below the beard, in the armpit or near the sides of the body. If the descent is towards the feet, secure the instrument to the calf and side of the leg. The operator should hold the instrument with their right hand, placing the curve between the two fingers of their left hand; insert it gently into any one of these places we have mentioned until you reach the empty space within her womb. This is what the instrument looks like:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then insert a second hook against the other edge, or use the third if needed, so that the extraction is equal; and then stretch it equally by moving from one side to the other, to remove it, and let the hooks be serrated to hold it, as this is their form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if any part remains, anoint the wound with some of your fingers' oil and push it into that part, then pull the other part; and if there is still a point remaining, place this hook or another higher up, and do so until it comes out entirely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	If one hand comes in front of the other and you cannot pull it back due to tightness, then you must wrap it with a cloth until it is completely covered; then cut through its jointure at the palm or at the heel, and so you must do for the other hand and foot as well.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is standing on its feet, then there is slight traction, and the guidance to the mouth of the womb is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	If it is trapped in the belly or the breast, then you must extract it with cloth wrapped around your hand; and cut open the belly or the breast so that the moisture which is there flows out; and if other parts have been removed, but the head remains, push its arm up from behind the pubic bone to guide it towards the mouth of the womb; then insert one or two fingers as far in as possible; pull it forth gently; and if the mouth of the womb is constricted due to hot inflammation which has developed there, it should not be disturbed but rather moist and fatty substances must be introduced; and introduce poultices, as well as water-based softening and moistening agents.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is lying on their side, and you can make them lie flat, then manage as we have said for a living child; but if you cannot do this, then cut it up in pieces, leaving nothing of the afterbirth.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	Once this is done, if it behaves as we have said for hot abscesses that appear in the body; and if there is an outflow of blood, then apply cold compresses to stop it, and treat with other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly a child had been dead then another was born on top of it, and the other died too.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came on her neck, and swelled so much that it opened up, and began to emit a foul smell.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat him, and I thought long, but could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong attracting plaster, and an bone came out, followed by others after several days.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly surprised, for the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it might be the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I probed the wound and withdrew many bones with my hands until the woman felt better; she lived for a long time afterwards with only a small hole where they were taken from; I have recorded this chapter because when masters find something strange, they must know how to help it.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To bring the marrow back to its place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Here comes the form of the pressor, which we have with our hands; and at II turning to the II heads of the II arms.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the horns should be more subtle than the restrictive ones, and they should be made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the trunk should be two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees one finger wide, and one palm and a half long; and in the middle of the two limbs there are two adjustments of this same wood, which must be firmly fixed on both sides, each being half a palm or slightly more long; and these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the marrow to open when you turn the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in its likeness, should be made of ebony or boxwood, resembling a pair of tongs; it shall have at the two jaws two adjustments, as you see, one palm long and two fingers wide; and when you wish to open the vulva with all this instrument, make the woman sit on the bed, her feet hanging down and her legs spread apart. Then push together the two adjustments into the vulva, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs. Then operate your hand throughout the instrument as you have done in tongs equally according to the quantity that you wish to open the mouth of the vulva until she achieves what she wishes.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is entirely surmounted and their forms are multiplied; when the physician has them prepared, it makes his work quicker and renders him more expert in proportion to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not despair of the instrument at your disposal, as their need is inexcusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the midwife is restrained during childbirth, you should instruct the patient to hold her breath, then make her sneeze vigorously, and press your hands over her mouth and nose; if she faints from this, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, take a pot, make a hole in its lid, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the sufferer, such as rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; cook all these herbs or some of them in water over fire; then attach a cane to the hole in the pot's lid, put the other end into the patient's mouth, and keep it there until the vapors reach inside her; then make her sneeze as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the secondary injury occurs.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if the swelling remains after this treatment and does not heal, instruct the nurse to dampen her left hand with oil of sesame or muskroot juice, then insert it into the body cavity, seeking the secondary injury; once found, she should grasp and extend it little by little in a straight line, ensuring the injured part is not twisted during extraction; instead, move it gently from side to side before pulling. It will come out easily and set itself free.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	If the mouth of the wound is narrow and constricted, we have already mentioned the treatment of inducing coughing and fumigation with herbs; if these methods fail as described above, be careful not to make a mistake while pulling [the arrow]; instead, secure what is at the mouth of the wound to the woman's thigh by binding it there, then administer an ointment enema made from four ingredients: this will rot and loosen the wound, allowing it to heal and eventually close; however, when this happens, a bad smell may arise in the stomach or head, hurting the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So it is necessary to have suitable fumigations for this: some of the ancients have tried fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to stop her flowering and menses is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	It is made of glass resembling a hen's egg, and one places the subtle chief in it over the fire; the fumes are above the charcoal, and let them be consumed until they are gone, then start another.
de percier lou fondement	to perforate the fundament
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born without the fundament perforated, but have a subtle skin-like covering: so at their bath you must pierce this covering with your finger, not a pointed spatula, and be careful that it is not injured; then place on moist wool soaked in wine and oil, then treat with ointment until healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not heal, insert a piece of lead wire into the hole, and leave it there for several days; remove it when the child wishes to go outdoors.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this sudden closure of a wound or abscess occurs; you must cut away the scar tissue so that it can be treated; as we have mentioned with regard to lead wire.
de la fistule dou fondement	From an anal fistula.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Anal fistulas are caused by inflammation and swelling that originates beneath the anus or in the space between the two parts; there may be one or more fistulas present. When this inflammation is longstanding, it leads to hardening, and sometimes a white, thin worm appears, and occasionally these fistulas penetrate all the way through. They can be recognized due to what comes out with the faeces or flatulence when the patient defecates; perhaps even a worm emerges.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that extend to the bladder, and halfway up the penis; reaching as far as the hip joint, and down to the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	Thus one can identify whether the fistula pierces through to the anus or not; it is when you insert your index finger into the anus, and gently push a fine needle of brass or iron into the fistula where there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is any twisting, insert instead a thin tent of lead or horsehair until you feel the tent or hair with your finger; and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge of excrement, wind, or urine as we have said: know that it does not pierce through; so refrain from treating.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula pierces through to the bladder or the urine duct, it leaks urine, and cannot be healed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it pierces through to the hip joint, then the wound reaches there; if there is no tortuosity and the source of pain is found around it, it must be immediately cut away, and neither medicine nor quick-acting ointment can help it; in these penetrating fistulas, there is no cure other than labour, and the vanity of foolish surgeons who intervene.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In those that are not penetrating and are not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back; you lift their legs up to their hips, and incline their hips towards their belly; then insert a bronze probe or an iron one if there is tortuosity, until you find where the wound reaches.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around the anus, you must insert your index finger there, if then you feel that the tendon has been pierced; and be aware of any gap between your finger and the skin or flesh beneath, then know that it is perforated; do not work on this wound as it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	It is said that one can indeed heal some of these injuries but this rarely happens; the treatment involves heating a thin cautery according to the width of the fistula as described earlier; insert it hot into the fistula until you reach the anus; repeat this two or three times, until you know that the unhealthy flesh which resembles feathers has been burned away; then treat the wound with wet bandages in butter, so that all the diseased tissue is removed, and dress it daily to heal the skin.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus cured, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If this cannot be cured otherwise, and if the tent enters but does not pierce through to the rectum at the bottom, place a thick covering of fat or suet between your finger and the tent, so that you see the fistula on which the covering rests; cut into it from the beginning of the fistula and push forward before the tent, then cauterize afterward until it reaches the top of the tent; the tent will be released and fall out. Then remove those faulty pieces of fat, which look like a bird's feather, and leave nothing behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood defeats you and escapes between your finger and the work, cauterize it with fire or astringent medication.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For fire cauterization brings together two beneficial effects: namely, the burning of adjacent flesh and the stemming of blood flow as well as drying up moisture; thereafter treating moist sores with butter or crushed substances until the skin turns supple, and once flesh is burned in a suppling manner; finally treat the wound with hot ointments hardening tough flesh, which are dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is cured and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula extends to the anus, and is away from the body, put your finger in the anus, and inquire there.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the sore, and there is either skin, sinew or flesh, which is close to breaking through, if you find no sign of improvement or hope by any of the three methods - cauterization as we have said, cutting deeply, or applying a dressing and treating it as before; do not go too deep so that you do not cut the muscle holding the anus together, and defecation comes out unwillingly. Then treat it as we have said, perhaps it will be cured, or remove this membrane and clean when it is cut near the anus, either with a dressing or other pointed instrument; then remove the faulty flesh which is in the wound as much as you can. Then turn to restoring the wound, and preventing the fistula outside of the anus; this would be easier on the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are formed in this manner: it is when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is located on the side of the anus near the skin above, take a perforated probe with a pointed end like this one:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And here you insert the wire bent at right angles in such a way that it enters through one hole and exits from another; then you advance the probe along the entire length of the wire into the fistula until it reaches its end.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it perforates the wall of the anus inside, then remove the wire from that orifice so you insert your finger into the anus; and pull out the end of the wire, and bring together the two ends and hold them tight to each other for one day or two; and sometimes bind it until the wire seizes those tissues which are between the two pieces, and they excrete; then treat the wound until it is healed and closed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not rupture, make it perforate by all means possible unless it is too deeply embedded.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not suitable to operate on the wound if it is too deeply embedded and then treat it as we have said until it heals.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spinalis muscle from which one makes a fistula is very sharp in some places and blunt elsewhere; and on another side it is not so, for this reason do not operate that which should not be operated upon as you see here:
des emorroydes	From the hemorrhoids.
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two types: either they are inside the anus like resin grains, small or large, and with them comes blood; sometimes there is one, others have many. Hemorrhoids can also be outside the anus and at its beginning; but those that are out have little moisture, and instead some yellow water or a bit of blood come from it, they have the color of flesh. As for treatment, if hemorrhoids are inside the anus, tell the patient to strain themselves by going to chamber pot until the anus opens up wide enough so you can see them; hurry quickly and use pincers or your nails to grasp them by their roots then cut them off. If they cannot be grasped with pincers because of their moisture, take a piece of linen cloth, cotton, or chamois leather and pull hemorrhoids out between your fingers before cutting it off; then cover area with hot powder that replaces cauterization as described in the cautery chapter; otherwise you can cauterize as explained there then treat them with other remedies until they heal. If the anus cannot be opened, enema the patient with sharp and bitter enema to wash out what is inside the anus so it can open up freely; when patients feel better and the filaments come out of their anus on its own, treatment will be easier: take hold of them by your nails or pincers then cut them off before treating them as we have said until they heal and avoid cutting with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: 
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	To dry up the phlegm or feces from the bowels
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often there is drying up of feces in the intestine, due to the constraint of nature and when the illness is old or medicine has no effect.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	You should apply the bark of a spathilia or your nail to the point, preventing it from moistening, and then treat it until it hardens as required; if it cannot harden, resume the shaving more vigorously than before so that it bleeds heavily and becomes raw; then cure it again until healed.
dou fremit	cooling down
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	A formica is a small erroneous appearance between the skin and flesh that penetrates deeply; sometimes it encounters coldness and one feels, like from cooling down, and it spreads throughout the body, mostly in the hands rather than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a cane made from a goose quill or a strong vulture feather, and place this cane on the humerus, so that the purple circles touch the humerus all around; then turn your hand over the entire cane until you grasp it entirely around the humerus, put it in perfectly, and pull out the humerus from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you wish, make one from a cane of brass or iron according to this form, and let it be hollow below and solid above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce it, so as to hold it with your thumb and forefinger, and squeeze it; And if you wish, cauterize the humerus, just as is explained in the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	Of the form of the clyster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never is the silver clyster made nor of tin, nor of molten brass or wrought iron; and never are these instruments small or large but fit to hand.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those which are fitted for the treatment of children and those who are weak and suffer pain are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the clyster large or small is broad above where the bellies are tied thus:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And it has an outlet where the bellies are tied as you see and its head is pierced within; and on one side have two holes and on another but one; and where medicines are put in bellies either of animal's bladder or parchment, and are pierced all around with minute apertures, and between each aperture is a thumb-breadth space then fill these apertures with strong thread coiled like X or crisscrossed around, and sew the belly together as is a kid; when medicines are within bind it with a strong thread to instrument in front, then clysterize; and this is form of circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the enema with oil or egg white, or something similar, then gently insert it; then the ministers squeeze his II hands together until all is visible, then remove the enema, and lift the patient's legs to the wall, and if the medicine wants to exit, hold him as much as you can; and if he sleeps a night nearby, so it is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you enema him with a stomach illness of obstruction, and the medicine wants to exit prematurely, then restart it until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if there are hemorrhoids at the foundation or abscesses, then let the enema be as gentle as for a child; and this is the form of the subtle enema with which the skin is tightened:
des plaies	Of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds; now we will discuss cures involving practical application and medicines according to their use.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and where the wounds are located, as well as what caused them.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	Wounds are caused by various things such as striking with stones, sword cuts and stabs from knives, or injuries from lances, sticks, arrows, or similar objects; wounds can also be classified according to where on the body they occur, like a wound on the neck, head, foot, belly, liver, or other parts of the body. I will explain the treatment for each type of wound and begin with simple head wounds since their memory will come up in its own chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head, and the bone is not broken, take note if it is due to a stone or similar object, and the skin is still torn with a large wound, and you have slight doubts about an inflamed abscess: then make them bleed immediately using the cephalic vein especially if little blood comes from the wound, and let the bleeding be contrary to the injured part; and ensure the patient avoids fullness of wine and fatty meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if they do not wish to bleed, let their food be reduced, and drink no wine, nor eat any meat; apply to the wound, should hot abscesses develop, only moist cotton in rose oil or astringent wine; but if there is no hot abscess, then place on the wound, while it is fresh with all its blood, and has not been moved by air, some powder which I will describe shortly; however, if the air has moved it, apply certain ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together with sutures, then bring them together with stitching, as I will explain for wounds of the abdomen, regarding the stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed down to the bone, and it bends, and only hangs by a piece of skin, then cut away that piece; then treat the wound with medicine, restore hard flesh in place of leather, and instruct the patient to eat coarse meats, such as beef and wheat pudding, as well as poultry, and similar foods.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find flesh that is rotten, and it has not reached the bone, then cut away all the rottenness, throw it out, and then treat the wound; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein which will not stop bleeding despite efforts with medicine, then seek out the artery, and if you find it severed, tie it up with a thread; and if this does not help, cauterize the artery.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light; it is that you apply this powder which seals as soon as the cold has moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The manner of the powder is thus: take one part incense; two parts dragon's blood; three parts live alum, and finely powder them, then apply it to the wound, holding it firmly in place until it dries well and adheres to all its blood; then bind it securely, and leave it without loosening, if there is no swelling; for the medicine should not be removed until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes only the alum is used when there is no incense or dragon's blood available, but the cold has moved from the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the fire has cauterized the wound, especially in winter, do not put this powder on it; instead, apply some digestive ointments or poultices made from barley flour with water and honey until it flows freely; then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, extract it with subtle pincers; I will tell you about head fractures later.
de la plaie dou col	Of the neck wound.
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is straightforward, there is no significant difference between this and a head wound; however, if the windpipe or artery in the neck is severed...
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the blacks, there is no other treatment than to let them heal on their own, and put nothing constricting on them, as it harms the blacks and makes them recede; and do not place anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the blacks is cold, and their continuity goes up to the brain, which is the highest organ; but let the medicine be soothing, just like heat washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and cooked licorice also washed in sweet water, and other stones of lead according to this method, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, cut it and bind with bandages, then let it heal until it is completely closed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and full of hair and pus, cut it more deeply where needed; and if the artery is severed, and blood flows out constantly, uncover it, clean it, and cauterize it if necessary; and if the windpipe or heart is pierced, yet the conduit is guarded, by which the meat goes down, then cut open the heart above the pipe of the throat, but do not touch the throat itself as you reset it according to its natural shape; then bind it tightly, and leave it a few days, afterwards treating with softening ointments until it heals; and if the wound has penetrated into bone, clean out any pieces of bone in there; if you can remove all fragments, then take them out forcefully, but those that you cannot have, leave untouched until the wound rots away by itself, relieving and alleviating the discharge; and if the wound is fresh, dust it with the powder I mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has formed a fistula, treat it as I have explained in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	Of wounds from lances or knives.
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a lance or knife and the injury is deep, observe if there is wind escaping as the patient breathes: you will know then that the wound is mortal. If it isn't deep, and it's fresh with all its blood, don't apply powder at first nor bandage it so the blood doesn't escape fully lest it returns to the heart and kills the patient; but do use an attracting ointment, and bind it twice a day; if you have no ointment, place old cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture. Make the patient sleep on their wound for three days or four, or more: there will be no spasm nor bad heart tremors nor strange feelings; when you see good recovery signs, know that the wound is safe.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat it with dressings and other treatments until it is healed; if it cannot heal, and the wound opens up again, know that there is a fistula present; treat it accordingly as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	If the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, whether on the chest, back, or elsewhere, treat what is in front of you first; if it is large, use sutures; if small, powder; if bone fragments are imbedded and bits are missing, clean out the wound, realign the tissues if they have separated; if not, let the wound suppurate, it will lighten the extractions; for wounds on other body parts, follow the same judgments as we have stated.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Abdominal hernia.
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The breakings of the belly are large and medium-sized and small; from a large wound sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines can protrude due to their insertion points; and the suturing is more difficult, and at times, a small wound is worse than a large one because it's harder to push the intestines back in if they're not done gradually; for this reason, a medium-sized wound is preferable as you can move the intestine back into place easier than others. And know that there are four types of belly rupture: two common suturing methods occur during abdominal suturing, and the other two apply to wounds on other parts of the body but are also common with abdominal wounds; nevertheless they are more specific to abdominal suturing, I will discuss each one and clarify them.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and something from the intestine has come out, and it is a serious matter to replace it, this can be done in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this way: moisten a sponge or soft cloth in tepid water only, or cook in water with vinegar and pine resin, then wet the intestine until the swelling is reduced; sometimes use constrictive wine, and it helps to draw out the inflammation.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling subside, moisten the intestine with water or decoctions of mallows and other plants, as this soothes the entrance to a small degree; if nothing can enter, then make an opening in the wound with an instrument used for cutting hemorrhoids; and the first treatment is effective against hernia, one should not operate on it unless absolutely necessary; these are the instruments for incision: cut inside along the curve and outside, and see this form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines have fallen out, you must replace them back inside according to their natural form in its proper place, if you are able, for this is better.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is wide, and it is located below the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on their back, placing their legs higher than their head; if it is below the belly button, put the head and upper body higher than the lower parts; and also, if the abdominal rupture occurs in one of the two halves, adjust so that the injured part is higher than the other; thus, you should follow these instructions for large or medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, use whatever is available to you; then have a compassionate helper hold the entire rupture with their hand while you bring together its lips; this is the common way of stitching, and it involves taking a needle or multiple needles according to the size of the wound's width; leave two fingers' worth of space at one end of the wound and insert a needle there with some strong thread; pierce through both sides of the skin and subcutaneous tissue so that you pass through this layer, gathering together the four edges; then draw a double length of thread around the needle from either side, bringing the two edges of the wound together in alignment; leave another two fingers' width before inserting another needle; stitch as you did with the first one, not ceasing until the entire wound is closed off by needles; these needles should be medium-sized between thin and thick ones because thin needles cut through all the flesh while very thick ones cannot pierce properly: hence they ought to be middle sized; moreover, do not push the needles too far beyond the flesh and skin lest you cut open and re-open the wound before it has been sutured; then clip off the ends of these needles so that they don't hurt the patient when sleeping, placing bandages or linen over the needle points to hold them in place until such time as the wound is healed; this stitching method with needles is more suitable for small wounds seeing as only one or two needles are sufficient; secondly there is another common type of suture which consists simply of bringing together both sides of the skin and subcutaneous tissue with a single needle having medium strength thread; once you have pierced all four edges at once, pull the needle back towards where you started, like sewing cloth; leave as much space between each stitch as the width of your little finger; this kind of stitching is suitable for human beings, which I used to sew up a wound on a man's stomach caused by a knife cut that was more than one palm in length and had two palms worth of intestines protruding from it.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned his intestine after it had been outside for twenty-four hours, and the wound healed in fifteen days; I treated him and he was cured.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	The doctor had judged him to be dying, and it was a miracle; I did not treat him with ointment because I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine; instead, twice daily I applied old cotton to the wound and washed it with water and honey until he was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I shall tell you the two proper ways of suturing: take the needle and pierce from outside to inside; when it has pierced through the heart straight across, leave the tip of the needle where it is on the surface or where you have inserted it, and cause it to pierce from the other side from inside out; this kind of suture works like a pelt-maker sews pelts, leaving one edge of the wound open while taking another stitch on the opposite side until all suturing is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of suturing, as Galen rightly calls it, is like this: some [surgeons] bring the two parts together naturally and apply one head of the wound to the other, in such a way that they insert a needle into one head of the belly nearby, and pierce only that spot; they leave the two heads of the wound untouched. Then turn the needle and make it pass through from outside to inside, at the two heads of the wound; then make both [heads] pierced from outside inwards, on the other two sides of the belly which are opposite side; this is the muedre method of suturing and the most common one.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen speaks these words and many testify that one must suture the belly with two needles, each having thread; and you should push in one needle from one side, and the other from another, like those who sew leather straps; know that when the wound is at the center of the belly, it is more grievous than wounds on other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgments of the wound are similar to the judgments for other wounds: when you find the wound fresh and full of blood, whether it has been moved by fire or not, stop the bleeding from the intestine first; then apply a bandage; next put some powder on it that promotes healing of flesh, and if it has been moved by fire, apply any suitable ointment until the wound heals over; and stitch the edges together with silk thread so they are sealed; then treat the wound like others, until it is healed; and if you don't have medicines available, apply some old cotton right away as soon as the wound begins to heal over, move it twice a day until it is fully healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you will not need any other medicine in various circumstances when the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound might cause damage to the main limbs, then you must wet some light linen with warm temperate oil or red rose oil, and wrap this around the groin and under the armpits; and if they feel pain or inflammation in their belly, which happens many times, then cleanse them inside with a mixture of black wine and water, especially when the inflammation reaches into the intestine itself; and pierce it within, knowing that when it is the large intestine it will be easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines, which are called "jeun," cannot heal when injured due to the layout of their veins and the delicate nature of the entire body, as well as its proximity to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the fat jumps out of the wound, return it backwards, just like with intestines, while it is fresh; but if it is old and has turned green or black, you must tie up the black part to prevent any outflow of blood, as there are veins and arteries there; then cut away what lies between the tied parts, and suspend the two ends from below the wound outwards in order to ease its extraction when the fat falls out, and the wound sags.
de la routure dou boueil	From a broken jaw.
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is round and the wound small, it can be restored in some cases, for I have seen a man pierced in the belly by a lance; the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned to a fistula, from which issued excrement and flatulence. I treated him according to my ability, ceasing only when he was healed and the flesh knitted together.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him healed, I feared the patient had stomach pain due to this, but he did not suffer any discomfort, and remained in better condition, eating and drinking well. Certain experts said that when there is a small wound in the intestine it must be treated like so: take large-headed pins, then gather together the lips of the wound, and when the pin has opened its mouth, place it on both lips such that it clamps shut; then cut off the head of the pin, ensuring that it cannot loosen itself. Then insert another pin in this way until the whole wound is clamped closed. Suture the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	Cil chief si s'aerdent en l'intestine, 
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it heals, is universally called a "fistula", especially when it is complete and turns inward.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is truly a faulty knot-like formation that is hard and white, where there is no pain felt, and it is also complete like the quill of a bird; sometimes it jumps clear inward, and other times outward; sometimes small, and other times large enough; and I have already spoken about this in the division of wounds, that any wound which has not healed and lacks flesh is only unhealthy due to one of these nine causes: namely, due to insufficient blood or pus; or its malice; or because it contains hard flesh within, and on the lips, preventing new flesh from forming; or there is too much inward motion; or the sinews are rotten, and the matter of poor quality; or the medicine used for treatment is not good; or because the corruption has become a manner of pestilence; or due to the properties in that region being slow to digest, and delaying healing, and swollen by nature; or there are veins or bones involved: I have already demonstrated all these causes, and their signs, and the curative medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now you must let me inform you of the treatment for a fistula, which is performed by manual operation.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Fistulas occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, and nerves, or in the skin, intestine, bladder, ribs, spine, joints of hands or feet; and wherever they appear on principal organs or similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	All the fistulas that are of this nature have a poor prognosis and there is nothing but labor and ignorance involved; if there is any fistula which does not reach its place as I've said, and you have faith in its cure, and you recognize it, then take a probe of bronze or iron, if the fistula is straight, use the probe to investigate it; and if the fistula is twisted, search for it with a subtle thin probe made of lead, because lead can bend and follow the twists; and if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot properly explore it with probes, then clean out one of its orifices by introducing an enema-like instrument through that opening, since moisture will pass from one orifice to another, and purify it; then carefully probe as much as possible, so that you may know whether there is bone or nerve present within the fistula, and if it is completely empty, thoroughly ask the patient about any pain they feel when pressed with your hand, and the place where they feel this pain; and once you truly understand the location of the fistula, and its proximity to joints, nerves, arteries, veins, or other places I've mentioned to you, then treat it according to what I've said for you before, and remove any foreign objects and corrupted tissue that is within; and treat until it has healed, and if a straight fistula is very deep in one place, you must cut completely through with a knife as much as possible there, then insert moist probes soaked in medicine against inflammation, pushing them inside the fistula all the way to its bottom, so that this medicine may corrode away any superfluous matter at the base; and then use stimulating ointments for healthy tissue until it has healed; if it is not healed by these steps, cauterize as we've mentioned before, and cut out bone which might be corrupted by the fistula.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If neither wound nor pus troubles your main limbs, as we have said; and if the bone is uncovered, and there is decay and blackening, let it rest until the decay is completely removed, then treat subsequent things with resinous substances until it is healed; and if it isn't healed, and returns bad like before, know that you haven't gone deep enough: uncover and seek until you are at the bottom, and remove all decay, then restore its place; and if it is thus healed, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the decay is too deep for you to reach; there is another natural discharge; and if there is some small corroded bone, and you can extract it with forceps, then remove it with a suitable instrument; and if there are multiple bones, take them all out completely, leaving none behind; and if moisture opposes you, but there is no error or fear, then cut through moisture, flesh, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, apply something that encourages putrefaction to the wound, and let it rot around the bones until then the bones can be more easily moved; and if it is a large bone, such as the leg or thigh, scrape away the corruption only until the blackness is entirely removed, then restore the wound; but if much of its substance has been corrupted down to the marrow, you must carefully remove all that is corrupt right down to the marrow, and then treat it so that it heals up again; I will tell you about a fistula which occurred in a man's leg, from which you may take an example and aid your practice.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man about thirty years old who had pain in his leg from an internal cause, such that the matter came to the leg and it swelled with a large abscess, and there was no external reason to open it; but the doctors through their foolishness worked so hard on the abscesses until they opened up, and much matter ran out of them, and it became a fistula, and there were many openings that all discharged pus and moisture from his body; and many doctors put him under treatment for about two years, and there was no wise person in the art of surgery, so I was called upon, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was treated, and what came out through the openings in great quantity; and the young man's flesh turned red, and had a yellowish colour.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set up a tent in one of these holes, and then I searched all the holes, and found that each came toward the other from every part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hastened and cut into one of the holes until I exposed a part of the bone, and found it rotten and perforated, with corruption reaching deep inside; I cleaned what appeared to me as the rotten bone, and assumed there was no other corruption except for what I removed; and so I began to restore the wound with soothing medicines over a long time, but it would not heal; then I started again, and re-exposed the bone as before, finding that the corruption had spread further into the bone, so I cleaned it, then removed it, and tried to seal the place; yet I could not manage this unless I cut away about a palm's length of the bone, which was entirely soft, then I restored it with medicines; and it healed and sealed quickly, requiring no more work except for the patient's weakness, who couldn't bear much, and my fear of death from him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation, he often bled excessively, but he was completely healed, and in place of the bone, hard tissue grew, which was well-formed, caused no harm whatsoever, and did not hinder him at all, either going or coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated like this: take one linen bandage and bind it to the head of the protruding bone; instruct someone to pull it upwards; place another thicker woolen bandage over the flesh that covers the bone, stretching the skin so you can cut away the corrupted flesh beneath with a cauterizing iron or stick, taking care not to pierce the skin. The aim is to remove all corruption as far as one can see and feel it, then repeat the process again if necessary.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	Et se li os est corrumpus, et n'apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, and puis soie des l'une partie a l'autre la corruption, and soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, and soie l'os ou elle contient de l'autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n'i a autre angien que dou coper; and se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t'apert; and la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire and les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l'assise des os and l'aparance dous, and lor grossece and lor subtiliteit, and lor grandor and lor petitece, and lor duresce; and por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d'ovraige son estrument; and saiches que l'uevre te moustrera l'estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, and le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l'estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu'il le covient.
dou feu	Of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The head spoils either internally or externally; and when you have treated that erosion with medicine cures, and it does not improve, then you must amputate the limb up to where the erosion starts, so that the patient escapes death, or the evil, which is greater, of limb deficiency; and the signs are that the limb turns black, as if burnt by fire, and after blackening, the erosion spreads from limb to limb, taking over the whole body; be quick with the amputation, and if it is caused by the sting of venomous beasts, such as a sea scorpion or snake and similar, if the erosion is at the top of the finger, cut it off, do not give room for it to reach all the way down.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; 
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	Et si décairement de sang vient quant tu ouvres, si cautérise le lieu hastement, ou tu mets sus aucune poudre restreignant; puis reviens à ta médecine tant qu'elle soit accomplie, puis lie le membre nuiroit d'un lien convenable, et le cure tant qu'il soit sainé; et je te conterai qu'il arriva à un homme en son pied: il lui arriva une noirceur qui semblait brûlure de feu, et cette corrosion vint premièrement en son doigt du pied, jusqu'à ce qu'elle pourprisse tout le pied; et quand l'homme vit la corrosion, si s'empressa de couper le pied, et fut sainé; et longtemps après lui revint la corrosion au doigt de la main, et il vint à moi, et je lui mis sus choses répercussives après la mundification du corps, et ne put cesser les corrosions; et il vit que je lui coupasse la main, et je ne voulus, que j'eus espérance de repercuter la matière; et doutai aussi que si je taillais sa main, qu'il ne mourût, car les vertus de l'homme étaient faibles; et il se désespéra tout, et retourna en sa terre, et s'empressa de couper sa main, et fut sainé; et je n'ai ceu conteut fuers que pour cela fasse autrement, si on en a besoin.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Sometimes an abscess forms on fleshy tissue, and it remains for so long that it creates a large collection of pus; then it becomes round and ruptures, releasing the pus, and leaving behind a visible opening, like an empty vessel; the skin above is as thin as delicate fabric, not reaching down to the bone or nerves. Such illnesses are called 'sains', and they are not named 'fistulae'; but if they extend all the way down to the bone completely, then they are named 'fistulae'. The treatment involves cutting away the surrounding skin, especially when it is thin like fabric; take care that its decay does not spread.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you are concerned that the skin will decay, and the corruption is not deep, but the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with a clyster as follows: examine whether the abscess is large, and whether the pus inside smells foul; in such cases, prepare an Egyptian medicine made thus: take equal parts resin, oil, and litharge, cook them in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes thick like honey. Then take what you need of it, mix it with water and honey, and clysterize the abscess, pressing the opening shut; leave the medicine inside for two hours before removing it by squeezing; repeat this process many times until the abscess is softened and the pus removed. Sometimes, one may be clysterized with ash water when such medicine is not available, and you should take the ashes of grapewood, pour water over them, then strain and use to clysterize until you can see that the abscess has been well cleaned out; if the patient cannot bear this, or the Egyptian medicine, then they may be clysterized with water and honey mixed together where a little litharge is pounded in; or one may also use a mixture of honey and wine, which will have the effect of cleaning and washing, while the wine causes the abscess to dry out. When you have done this, and are confident that the abscess has been well cleaned, then clysterize it with what encourages flesh to grow there, and take diaphanous plaster made with rose oil and wine; or one may be clystered with some medicines and ointments whose properties I have mentioned in my treatise on salves. If the opening of the abscess is small, and the nozzle of the clyster cannot enter it, then enlarge it slightly with an iron implement, insert a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon into the wound until it has been stretched; if the wound is too wide, cut away flesh so that only enough remains for the clyster to fit in, and if pus is pouring from above the opening, cut below where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bowels are perforated, they do not allow any food to pass through; and if you cannot cut open the abdomen exactly as you wish, then arrange it in such a way that the bowel goes down into the lowest part where it is located, for when the bowel is pierced, no food can be digested and if you cannot cut the abdomen as planned, so prepare: let the intestine move slightly downwards, leaving nothing of the wound; take consolidating medicines to put on top of the wound, and place a linen cloth covering all the wound; then cut at the strongest point where the abdominal wound is located a hole wider than the previous one, spread some soft ointment onto another piece of linen according to the size of the wound, and apply it over the wound for easing the bowel, but do not remove the large external dressing until after several days have passed once; that which has been applied on top of the abdominal wound should be removed often in order to drain out any exudate from the intestine, and verify if this is venom or little or a lot, digested or undigested. Keep an eye whether the patient feels pain or not, if there are signs of abscess or none; after your medicine has been applied as described above, you should see nature acting upon the wound, then know that the abdomen is already healing itself and approach to heal it; then untie this dressing in the morning on the third day, when you open up the wound change for another piece of cloth and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast discharges undigested food after many days, know that the breast is not healing.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if the subtle poison slowly diminishes over a long time, do not despair of recovery, for healing is near.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are men in whom the healing of flesh in their wounds is slow, and among those who do otherwise; and if undigested food comes out from the breast after many days, know that the breast does not heal; and if the breast takes a long time to heal, and it is far away, apply drying medicines moist in substance and dry in virtue, such as a definite ointment, for there is much vitriol in it, and this is the last medicine; take definitive ointment, and make it with rose oil, and sprinkle it with equal amounts of old wine; then bind and use it; and the same one prepared thickly is better when diaphanous ointments are not available, or you can take myrrh, aloes, and incense, grind them, powder them on honey while it is over the fire; and then glue a cloth to it, spread it onto the breast, and sometimes administer an aristologist long, and roots of celestial lilies, which are like flour from vetch and centory; and use simple or compound ones: grind them, make powder out of it, put it on the honey I mentioned, and apply it; and if the cure is prolonged, and it does not heal with this treatment, then know that corruption has penetrated deeply, making an impression on the bone, or hard parts, or ligaments; thus treat fistula as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of the abscess under the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that forms under the nail of the thumb, or of the foot, or sometimes occurs in other places; and when it is neglected, and no attention is paid to it, it becomes a deep-seated abscess, suppurates, and flows so long as it runs along the root of the nail, and may even run through the entire nail; corrosion then spreads to the bone, causing foul pain, and making the finger of the affected hand wide, with discolouration.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment is not beneficial, then you must cut away all that remains of the nail with an iron tool, then cauterise the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauterizations are a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is sound; and if the nail presses into the flesh, beginning to prick it and cause an injury, then you must put some red-hot iron beneath the nail that pricks the flesh, push it upwards, and cut away this flesh subtly and lightly, and apply burning and corrosive medicines on the remaining flesh to remove everything; then cure with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	If the corrosion has reached the bone, cut it away and treat with caustic substances, for as long as there is corrupted bone present, healing cannot occur; and if you see the finger turning black due to corruption, cut it off from us just as mentioned before, then cure until healed; and if it is torn or pierced, and feels great pain, you must first heal this wound; then remove the nail with a sharp chisel by cutting across it, being careful not to go too deep so that you don't reach the flesh underneath the nail because the patient would feel tremendous pain; and should this occur, put something on it which will ease the suffering.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain of the wrist joint from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	Some men have very fleshy index fingers that may contain bone and sometimes even a nail; they can be born with growths at the root of their knuckles or anywhere on their fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Fingernails that are born on the finger pad do not grow and those born at the knuckle might; if you wish to remove one of these fleshy fingers, cut it off at its base with a broad-bladed knife.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	It is tedious to treat those born at the root of the knuckle, so be careful when amputating it.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For those born on the inside of the fingertip, you must first cut away the surrounding flesh down to the bone and then amputate the bone with a fine saw; treat the wound until it heals.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The injuries that cause two bones to come together can occur through birth, or by sudden wounding, burning from fire, or similar causes.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	You must cut this suture so that the bones can repair themselves according to their natural form; then place between them two moistened cloths in rose oil, so they do not stick together; or you may use two pieces of subtle lead, until the areas are welded as befits them.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If a person has sutures in their palm, cut this suture as appropriate.
des vils	Of the wrist.
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are large vessels filled with excess melancholic humours, which come from many parts of the body; and they occur more often in the legs of those who walk on foot and labour, than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	You must therefore administer purging of bile to them at times, and then treat with basilicum.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment with iron is according to two methods: one is that you cauterize it, and draw out the black blood; and the other method is that you open a vein, and draw all of the blood.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The incision is according to this method: first immerse the leg in very hot water until the flesh softens and then extend the patient's leg from above the hip down to just below the knee; then cut open a vein at one place or two or three places with an incision wide enough for your hand, lift up and draw out the black blood by hand from one end to another until as much blood has been evacuated as nature can bear without causing harm to the patient; bind it up afterwards and instruct him to abstain from foods that aggravate bile-related problems. Repeat this evacuation and treatment when the veins are full but cause pain or discomfort in the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The care of the patient is as follows: remove the leg hair if there is a lot, then place it in a bath, and bathe the leg with hot water until it becomes red and the veins swell; and if you have no bath, heat it over fire, then cut along the vein from below the knee to above the ankle or on the underside of the foot; then scrape the skin with a knife, and peel back the vein from either side, until it is visible when touched; and one sees it red and black, and as it enters the skin it appears like a white cord; then push the end underneath, so that it is raised away from the skin, then cut it lightly at an angle, then make another incision above this three finger widths higher; then scrape back the skin over the vein until it is visible again, then lift up the vein as you have done before and cut it with another knife, as you did first; then make one or more additional incisions if needed, raise them, and cut at the toe of the foot, draw out and lift to the next incision; remove section by section, until it is all removed, then make a final cutting; and if you cannot draw it out and lift it, put in a needle with strong thread, tie and pull it, push under an end, turn your hand this way and that, until it comes out; be careful not to cut it for if it is cut, one will not be able to remove or lift it and the patient may be harmed; and when you have completely extracted it, place moist wool soaked in wine and rose oil on the wound site; treat them until they are healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is constricted and twisted and enveloped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it twistingly, but do not sever it entirely; pull on it as we described before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron with which one cuts the vein is curved and does not slice; it has a coarse curve because if it were fine, it would cut the vein. It must be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
de la voinne civile	From the civilized vein.
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is entangled in the legs, in warm parts where no grass or tree grows, and on land with little moisture; sometimes it appears elsewhere besides the legs, and this occurs due to putrefaction which comes from under the skin, like how serpents and worms arise within the body, bred between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the sign of the beginning of this vein is that a great inflammation comes into the leg, then its color changes, and the vein starts to protrude outwardly, just like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the vein appears, you must wrap around it a piece of lead that is 3 and a half to 2 inches long, tie it up, and leave the lead hanging on the leg; every time it comes out further, wrap it again with the lead and tie it; if it's too long, cut off a part of it and wrap the remainder, but don't cut it at its root until it is entirely outside; for if you cut it, it will go back into the flesh, causing an abscess or rot in that place, and a bad illness; for this reason, it must be treated little by little up to its head, leaving no part inside the body; sometimes this vein can be 5 palms long when treated, or even 10, and someone came to me who had one of 10 palm length: when you cut it, it shoots out 1 ray or hole, and pierces all the way through so that everything comes out; then empty the matter inside it, bring medicines against rot some days, then cure it as abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes this vein is very thin, especially when it appears in the ankle joint or near the foot where there are many perforations and thus it can be damaged; treat it therefore as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Worms that are born between skin and flesh.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called "ox disease" in our land because it often occurs in oxen, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, moving throughout the body up and down, and one can feel its movement from limb to limb, until it tears open the skin where it was located, and falls out; it is caused by the putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, serpents, and parasites are born in the belly; there is doubt about its malice, for when it travels through the body and reaches the head, if it enters the eye, it can destroy it; this occurs many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you cure and treat it, one cannot avoid seeing it: therefore, it is necessary that you bind the place above and below with a strong tight bond, then cut over it and draw out the vein, and if the poison has gone deep into the flesh, and you do not find it, cauterize it with fire until it dies; and its greatest harm is when it reaches the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming close to the eye, then strongly bind below it the eyebrow, then cut over it, and draw out the vein; and the patient must use purging medicines for bad humours that cause corruption, and avoid foods which promote putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	From pain due to windiness.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that affects certain body parts and can move from one limb to another; I witnessed what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to see a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, revealing a small swelling in the vein of the upper arm; I then saw it move like a worm towards the shoulder, more than anything else, resembling quicksilver when moved from one place to another; the pain left that spot and settled on her shoulder before spreading throughout her body until it reached the other arm. Then she told me it kept revolving around her body as I had seen it doing.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed by how it moved from limb to limb because I had never seen this illness behave in such a way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Toutevoie, I had wished many that well they wish to move pain from one place to another, but I didn't wish it, just as I saw in the woman; and I thought that it was because a woman has a dry body, and uncovered veins, and thus appears this constrained windiness; and does not appear according to this reason for those who are delicate, and have moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see to treat this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, so put liniment above and below until that constrained windiness comes out; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat it with what drives away windiness, such as fetid pills, and serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and the parts of the body they pierce.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of arrows is such that there are those with large points, small ones, barbed, and those that are smooth; some have two edges, others a long shaft, or parts to them; and the way they pierce any part of the body depends on two factors: whether it is in a vital organ like the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestines, bladder, or similar.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When an arrow strikes any of these vital organs, and you see the signs of death that I will tell you about below: you must be wary of extracting this arrow, as many die in such cases; and if these ill omens do not appear, and the arrow is not lodged too deeply, then draw it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when an arrow falls and pierces the bone, and ruptures the dura mater above the brain, is scotoma (loss of vision) in one or both eyes, vertigo, redness and swelling around the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms, confusion and loss of consciousness, vomiting bile; perhaps also blood flows from the nostrils or ears; perhaps they lose speech and voice; and white moisture resembling pus comes out of the wound, as well as charred flesh; if these signs appear to you, then refrain from treatment (i.e., surgery), and remove the arrow if it is accessible
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The signs of the arrow when it strikes the heart are that it is close to the left nipple, and they feel as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty; perhaps the pulse changes like the beat of a drum, and dark blood flows out, coldness and cold sweat come over them, and syncope: know then without doubt that death is descending.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign that an arrowhead has not penetrated is if there is no foam coming out of the wound, and the throat swells up, and the patient's colour changes, and they breathe heavily and seek cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow falls onto the covering of the chest, it is by the small ribs; and it causes great pain and great suffering, and all the shoulder limbs move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow falls on the stomach, perhaps something undigested may come out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow falls on the belly and no excrement comes out of the lower intestine, there is little hope for a cure or extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out forcefully, and the patient feels intense pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, like the face, neck, throat, shoulder, arm, spine of the back, forearm, thigh, and legs, as well as similar limbs, are safe according to various positions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you happened to me so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man that an arrow fell on his arm by the collarbone: I pulled it out and extracted it from another place below the ear's fat, and he was healed without any incident.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And thrust into the eye socket beneath the paper below it with an arrow that had been lodged there and whose point could only be reached through the base of the shaft, which was as long as a turkish bow and made entirely of light iron without barbs; The wound healed and no ill effects resulted.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and this was an Arabic arrow with barbs; I waited for the beard to grow back, and then carefully extracted it until finally drawing it out, after which the Christian healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And drew an arrow from a man which was lodged in his belly, and I thought he would die; but after thirty days his condition did not change; so I cut into the skin above where it had become embedded, extracted it, and he suffered no ill effects.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a man with an arrow lodged in his back or shoulder, and the wound has healed over it; yet the arrow remains inside him, and it does not alter its natural position, nor does it cause any harm to any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And you see another man, with an arrow in his face, the wound has healed over it as well; and he remains without suffering great pain or any other significant ailments.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And treat an arrow wound for the king's man, which pierced his nose and was slightly angled to the right; and the arrow was entirely lodged within him - I was called upon to heal him three days after the arrow was shot.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound to be very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I wanted to touch her with all my might, but I felt nothing; he felt pricking and pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of the arrowhead I applied an attractive digestive plaster over it so that the flesh wouldn't swell, and there appeared the flesh of the arrowhead.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I left the plaster on for several days, and the wound closed up again immediately, but the patient remained ill for a long time until he felt the arrowhead inside his nose one day, and he told me this himself.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it opened up again and I tried to feel around for the arrowhead, sensing its tip in the open flesh; then with that corrosive medicine, I widened the opening of the wound so far as the shaft of the arrowhead became visible to me; and after this process took about four months, the wound then expanded so much that I inserted a pair of pincers inside it, grasping from either side, but could not remove [the arrowhead]; thus I did not cease experimenting with all kinds of instruments until one day I grabbed it successfully using specially designed pincers according to a design described later in this chapter; and finally extracted the arrowhead.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the doctor judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored; so I restored it, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Now I have told you about the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you focus your care on what I do not mention, because books cannot cover everything; but wise masters observe very little and understand a lot, and for what is present and lacking, they invent new methods and instruments, to address strange occurrences in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not leave the members in which they are embedded except through two methods: either by the path of entry or through another part; and one that comes out by where it entered is an arrow penetrating fleshy tissue, and this sometimes happens now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if she does not jump now, let her be left until the flesh around is rotten and the exit is relieved; and also, if she is fixed in the bone and cannot come out, leave her there for some days and move her each day; then she will leap out, and if she does not, pierce all around with a very fine awl until the tissue around is widened, and then pull her out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If the arrow is fixed in the bone of the head and goes right up to one of the brains ventricles, and any of the accidents I have mentioned occur to the patient: do not pull it out, but leave it until after some days when it becomes even, because if the arrow comes up through the skin, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not stuck solely in the bone, and does not come out through the skin, and the patient remains well for a few days without any bad incidents, then devise a way to remove it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot be extracted through the skin alone, then apply caustic substances around it, as I have told you; afterward, treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is lodged inside the body where it cannot be seen, then search for it throughout the entire wound; and if you can feel it, then extract it with a suitable instrument; but if you are unable to due to the tightness of the wound, or the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein involved, then cut open the flesh until the wound is wide enough; remove the arrow if you can, and if it has barbs preventing its removal, carefully cut away the tissue that surrounds them on either side as far as possible, and then break or bend those barbs so that you can extract the arrow; do this carefully to avoid breaking the arrow, for that would make its retrieval much more difficult.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, leave it until the surrounding tissue is rotten, then pull it out, for its extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the flow of blood opposes you, bring about what we have said about the treatment in its chapter; and beware of cutting into the nerve and opening a vein, and use any means possible to remove the arrow without danger, either quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to how he was positioned when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest aid there is, and if you cannot, then follow what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	An arrow that comes from elsewhere and does not show anything of itself, but the skin is swollen where it lies if you see or feel it clearly: cut above until the tongs can grasp it, then extract it; this will now be easy.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained within the bone, rotate your hand circularly until you enter into the bone and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	If it cannot come out, leave it alone for now and then restart the extraction process until it comes out; and if there is an arrow within the shaft, push it through the whole shaft; and if it were blunt and you must administer a pushing action, insert an instrument that has been sharpened so that the point of the arrow enters the sharpening of the instrument; then push it forward, and if the arrow is already sharpened, insert the instrument with its point entering first in order to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	If the arrow is poisoned, you must cut away all of the flesh around it if possible, then treat the wound as necessary.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow falls on the foot or thigh or stomach or bladder or flank, and it is close to the surface, and you can cut above it, then do so; be careful not to cut the vein and nerve, then extract [the arrow] and sew up the wound if necessary; treat the wound until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to treat arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and here is its form [shape]:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many types of them: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the driving instrument is also like a bird's feather, to push against the tip of the arrow, as here [the figure] shows its form.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of pincers to use for insertion and extraction is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	The veins through which one is bled are thirty-one in number and sixteen of these are on the head: two veins that lie behind the ears, which are called "herbech"; and the two arteries which are found in the temples where they can be seen; and two veins lying below the eyelids (which run along the inner edge) which are known as "aspires" ; and a vein which lies between the forehead and skull; and the vein that is at the root of nose; and the two jugulars in the neck; and the two veins situated on either side above the lips, these being called "augeherich"; and two veins located beneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins that are commonly used for healing are five in each arm: one is the cephalic vein, which lies on the left side; lay people call it the "vein of the head." The median vein is called the "fast" by lay people and is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins. Lay people name this combination as the "vein of the heart." The basilic vein lies on the right side, which lay people call the "belly vein," and it is located above the elbow; this is the vein that appears clearly in the arm pit.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	The safeten vein is the one that lies between the little finger and the ring finger, it has two branches; in the leg and foot there are three veins: one lies under the bend of the arm on the left side, the second sophen which is at the ankle on the right side; the vein called "nesse", which is located at the other ankle; and in the other leg are three more veins below these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The bleeding of veins located behind the ears assists in treating longstanding catarrh and migraine; and regarding the characteristics of bleeding, as I mentioned to you, it entails that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a coarse cloth; then hold the patient's neck tight against a pillow, so that the two veins show behind the ears in two places dependent on the head: press them thus between your thumb and forefinger; then where you feel a pulse under your finger, make an incision therewith; next take the lancet, and thrust it beneath the vein down to the bone, then lift up your hand with all the speed possible over the whole length of the vein, and cut both the skin and the vein transversely with two fingers' breadth, making the incision issue blood as much as you wish; then bind it up tightly until it is healed; I have already described the procedure for incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The bleeding of the two arteries located in the temples is effective for chronic migraine headaches and acute ophthalmia and for the body of tears from eyes. And here are the qualities of bloodletting as I say: The patient must extend their neck so that the two veins are clearly exposed; feel the pulse beneath your thumb, then bleed above this point; raise the heart upwards onto the vein at your index finger, insert the lancet underneath and raise the vein upwardly, cutting it like you have done for the other two veins and allow blood to flow according to your needs. Then release the patient, and put your thumb over the vein for an hour before applying cotton, then bind firmly and leave until it is healed; we discussed their incision and extraction in the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The bleeding of the vein in the forehead is just as effective as bleeding from the cephalic vein for treating old facial ailments, headaches, and rashes; its quality being that the patient tightens their neck by turning it, so much so that the vein appears; then take the instrument called a "fosseur," whose form is this:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Place the point over the vein and press it down with your hand or something else, allowing blood to flow out according to the desired quantity; then release the patient's neck and bind the wound until it is healed, never working over a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, the flame must not be too sharp and it should bleed diagonally, as the bone is close by, and by chance may break the flame if it is delicate.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The bleeding of the two veins that are in the armpit helps with eye issues, scabies, redness, itchiness in the eyes, and facial diseases; the quality of this bleeding is such that the patient should tighten their neck by twisting it with a cloth, as mentioned before; then bleed them, and let the blood flow from side to side, slightly above the armpit but not too far away, for there is no meat there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the veins are delicate, they may break; then let the blood flow out until you have what you need, and then bind it with cotton, tying it firmly.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The bleeding of the vein in the nose is beneficial for fever, severe head trauma, and facial diseases such as migraine and redness that occurs on the face, especially when it is an old ailment; the quality of this bleeding is as follows: have the patient tighten their neck, then grab your nose with your left hand, take the delicate long vein, and insert it into the space between the two nostrils in the lip, for the vein does not open well towards the front, and the blood will start to flow now; do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then bind it for a night, as it heals quickly; this is the form of the vein:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The bloodletting of the two jugulars helps with narrowing the armpit, starting a boil, many diseases, abscesses, ulcers, herpes, and tumors; the quality of the bloodletting is such that the patient should straighten their neck underneath either side as we have said, and let the master be standing by the head of the patient and the patient sit on a seat, then open the vein along its length for about one palm width widely, then draw off the blood moderately or however much is necessary; next repeat likewise in the other vein, then untie the tie, and press gently around both veins so that the patient does not choke; leave him until morning when the wound will have healed.
de la sainie des leivres	The bloodletting of the lips,
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The draining of veins above the lips aids in healing mouth sores, gum disease, cracked lips, and their surroundings.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Have the patient sit before you and hold their neck tightly as I've instructed; then turn back the lip and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, which are known by being black and having small dark veins around them: so cut each of these, and if you don't know or doubt, cut the larger of both, and do likewise with the two above and below, for it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	On bleeding below the tongue:
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The bleeding of the veins that are below the tongue is helpful after the bleeding of the cephalic vein, and it is done at the narrowing of the throat, for diseases of the eye, and for mouth ailments; and the quality of the blood-letting should be such that the patient sits between your hands facing the sun, you lift their tongue, and look beneath each side a black vein: so bleed one and the other, but do not go too deep, as underneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the neck that are commonly bled are bled in two ways: either by making a very wide gash with a flat-edged knife, or with an olivewood-handled sharp lancet, which is called "anesil"; and they are broad or narrow according to the width and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of St Martin's flame is very renowned, and it is so broad as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the knotted veins full of thick blood that contains dark red and cloudy matter; this is the form of St. Olive's flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more pointed, slender, and for bleeding delicate veins or when there is delicate yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The bleeding of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that affect the throat, neck, stomach and belly; and when the bleeder must take care to avoid the artery beneath it.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he cuts the artery and blood flows abundantly, it must be stanched as I said; and the flame should not be held still but moved like a knife.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilic vein does not open clearly, you must extract it and replace it with another; or take a part of it, or heal the vein in its place in the arm: it opens clearly; and apply flame to the wound as we have said before.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you wish to know the location of the wound, you must either draw out the arm until you can feel the pulse in that spot; then mark the place and bind up the arm, and apply flame to the wound as we have said before; and be wary not to cut into the artery when you see the area swelling, for it is the artery: avoid it therefore.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it rise up like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from the artery: be quick then, and place your finger upon it for a while, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, which often happens; bind up the arm and leave it thus, and do not let the patient move it; and be afraid, and do not let them move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is not stopped, and it overpowers you, and there are no medical practitioners present, then cut the artery if it appears open, for this will stop its flow; and stem the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take a piece of fustic bark, split it open, and take one half, bind this over the wound until tomorrow; if bleeding has stopped, that is good; but should it continue, then treat as already mentioned with staunching powders; and note that staunching may be less effective in some conditions due to the small size of the wound or the strength of the patient's arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	Bleeding from the median vein is helpful as it drains blood from above the head and below the body, because this vein combines the basilic and cephalic veins, as mentioned earlier; and during bleeding, watch out for the nerve which lies underneath, and if you cut too deep and hit the nerve, swelling may occur along with numbness, and healing might be difficult; now this nerve often appears but sometimes it doesn't due to its subtlety in some people, so you must then treat it gently with an anaesthetic instrument; remove any part of the nerve that you can.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a wound between the two nerves, make it longer with a cut.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The bleeding of the superficial temporal artery is helpful as it draws blood from the head and assists the eyes; and one should bleed by making an incision with a hollow olivewood arrow or a myrtle shaft, for this is the safest among all veins, because beneath it there are no nerves nor arteries.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Nonetheless, one should seek the lightest place and not cause any harm if it fails the first time, just start again; perhaps for some people the site swells when pricked the first time, but this is of no consequence.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of bleeding depends on your judgment.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about bloodletting is that it is not administered except to preserve health and avoid future illnesses; the bloodletting should be done in one of three veins which are: namely, cephalic, superficial, and median cubital; and one should bloodlet at the beginning of Lent on an empty stomach, and in autumn and winter after eating when signs of fullness appear; and one should bloodlet either on the first or third day, two to three hours after the meal.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	Bloodletting administered for illnesses does not have a determined time of day but rather when needed, at any hour and all times; one should not bloodlet children under fourteen years old, nor pregnant women from the fourth month until the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	They ought not to bleed the elderly who have passed sixty years of age.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wishes to be bled, regardless of the method, it is necessary that they cleanse their intestines with a light clyster, if there is an excess of feces retained, so that the veins do not draw harmful superfluities from the intestines into the principal limbs; one should also not bleed those who are excessively filled with meat, or drunk, until they have sobered up, nor those suffering from dropsy; and it is inadvisable to bleed someone after a bout of colic, vomiting, diarrhea, frequent intercourse, hard labor, lack of sleep, fasting, or exhaustion due to any physical exertion; then purify the humors by thinning out the blood with meat, drink, and medicine if you have them at your disposal; then enter the bath, provided that nothing prohibits it, to thin the blood, and bleed from a vein on the back of the arm just above the elbow as we have said before; further, one must refrain from hard labor, exertion, lust, and similar things during this day; be calm and joyful, and let the patient lie down while the bleeder stand over them, then rub the arm twice or thrice, then tie a ligature moderately tight around it, for if it is too loose or tight, blood will not flow through it properly; thereafter one must rub the area with their hands until the veins swell up and can be felt; next moisten the blade with some old oil before applying its tip to the vein slightly below where you wish to bleed so that there will be no damage when it is punctured.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are wounds that leak like ropes into the drain, and some are filled with windiness, so when one applies the flame, it retracts from the flame, and cannot open the wound; thus, one is in this situation; and if one opens the wound, it is too narrow, for which the surgeons must be mindful of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the wound opens on the first attempt, it is good; if not, try again a little lower or higher, unless the site is swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the site is swollen and the patient becomes afraid, leave it for one or two days, do not bind the arm: perhaps hot abscesses will arise; do not enter the bath, then repeat the procedure if it pleases you; and if the aperture is small, let out blood discreetly and doubt that it won't come as much blood as you wish, be fierce with this same aperture until all flame directly; work a little higher, rather than where the site is swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the place swollen, do not reopen the wound, but apply a poultice of oil-soaked linen, for it lightens the body's blood, and the linen that is oily is beneficial in this place; thus administer the oil-soaked linen in each wound you treat to stem the flow of blood, and the same holds true for triacle and eggs, when applied to the place: they are so subtle as to thin the blood and separate it when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there arises a large abscess, which happens frequently, especially when it has not been treated before or the opening of the wound is small, then hasten and apply to the place moist sponge in water and saltpetre slightly warm, and hold it tight for an hour; this must be done after the flow of blood from the wound ceases, and if there remains at the place some blackness or greenness over a few days, it does no harm; but if you see it spreading, apply something of aloes or myrrh dissolved in galbanum juice, madder, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	For many times an abscess and appearance happen at the wound of the temple: therefore place your hand on it, and if you find the place soft to the touch of the hand, then this is that bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	So abstain from placing anything on it of what we have said, for perhaps there is a cut in the artery; but apply a dry poultice to harden the place, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw from each person's blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the colour of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, then let it flow until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And for the one who is full-bodied and robust, requiring blood extraction, a wider wound must be made, with broad flames; whereas in the case of the feeble patient, do the opposite: bleed them gently but frequently, and perform this bleeding by cutting across rather than pricking; this manner of bleeding is safe from excessive loss of blood or severing nerves, and better than that which cuts lengthwise or crosswise.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If the patient's body requires bleeding, give them bread moistened in pomegranate juice; if they are heated [i.e., too hot], withdraw blood three or four times; and for a cold-complexioned patient, give them moistened bread with treacle syrup, or spiced honey syrup containing pepper, cinnamon, ginger and chickpeas, before bleeding.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints during the treatment, after the loss of much blood, it is necessary that he drinks meat broth, and subtle fragrant syrup, and uses other things we have mentioned in the section or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to draw out the arm, and bleed again, it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he bleeds little by little, according to the quantity of his continued strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And for those who wish to draw out the arm after the first bleeding, and have a strong body, they should be bled seven hours after the first bleeding or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And for those who wish to be bled elsewhere, they should be bled on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For it has too much blood within the body which is already heated and causes fever; one must extract a great quantity of it, and enlarge the opening until it stops with pressure; then you fulfill all conditions for healing, and place your hand on his pulse as he heals so that death does not come instead of relief, and this happens many times when healers are negligent; and it is not good when you wish to unbind the arm and make blood flow a second time, if the opening is closed then do not press strongly upon it, nor if it is curved extend his arm quickly for this would be bad, but leave him until he heals the second time or prick him at the end of the wound so that the congealed blood flows out from the vein's opening and place on it a poultice soaked in water and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the wound is swollen, leave it alone and do not constrict it until the abscess subsides.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, let it drain from the same place, or another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein between the arm is drained in place of the vein of the head because it is composite.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	The method of draining is as follows: the patient immerses their hand in warm water until the flesh turns red; then it should be bound loosely so that the vein appears clearly, and now let the blood drain horizontally, not lengthwise or widthwise; the opening must be wide, and the draining should occur very close to the joint of the hand, if no more blood can come out, immerse the hand again in warm water and let the blood flow into it until you have enough; but if this is during winter, do not re-immerse the hand in warm water as we use more warm water during summer than winter; and draining from this vein is safer than any other veins for there are neither arteries nor nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The bleeding of the right arm's veins is beneficial for all liver diseases and here is how it works: stretch out the hand, immerse it in hot water until the vein becomes swollen if visible; and if the vein lies across [the hand], and you cut through it entirely, nothing bad will happen. Do not go too deep because the nerves are just beneath the flesh and then return the hand to hot water if the blood has congealed in the wound and cannot exit.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	Once you have extracted as much blood as is necessary, apply oil and lint to the vein in order to seal it; do this for every wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The bleeding of the left arm's veins is beneficial for all spleen diseases; do this in the same way as I told you to do on the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The bleeding of the saphenous vein is valuable for all diseases below the body, such as illnesses of the uterus, retention of urine, kidney disease, and similar ailments of the thighs and legs.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its bleeding is that the patient should submerge their foot in hot water, rub over the vein until it ruptures, and bind above the ankle joint; this vein is at the ankle, and extends upwards along the leg to the kidney; bleed either the wider part of the kidney or at the ankle, whichever is easier.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you bleed it over the leg, be careful of the nerves that are underneath, and bleed it transversely like when cutting; let the flame be small.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot escape, return the foot to the water and allow the vein to be thoroughly emptied.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the vein is not successfully opened on the first attempt, try again a little higher, for the skin there is salty; do not doubt it is nerve as we have said, and proceed likewise with the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The skin of the sciatic vein is at the back of the ankle, and its evacuation serves to relieve hip pain when caused by hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	The nature of its evacuation is such that the patient should enter the bath and tightly squeeze above the ankle for four turns, as otherwise it will not open the vein; if it opens then thoroughly evacuate all blood possible by drawing across the vein, it may be necessary to cut into it since the skin is salty there, and this vein has a tendency to clot in many men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you cannot find it, then treat the line that appears on the back of the foot, towards the little toe, and be careful of the nerves; make sure the blood flows out as much as possible, then untie the ligature, place cotton on top, and hold it firm; now it is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	Cupping incisions.
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping devices are made of horn, or brass, or glass; cupping is performed in two ways: either by drawing out blood, or without drawing blood.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this bloodless cupping is done in two ways: either by applying full heat or without heat; the method which draws out blood through incisions is performed on fourteen parts of the body, namely one is at the top of the head; another is on the neck; and two are on each side of the neck; a cup is placed below the chin; and cups are placed on both shoulders; and cups go over the loins; and cups are applied to both arms; and cups are used on both legs; and cups cover both ankles; and this type of cupping draws out only small amounts of blood from tiny veins in the flesh, unlike venesection; there should be no weakening of the patient as happens with venesection; neither full heat nor without heat methods should be administered to any sickness that results from excess or fullness, until the entire body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if it is necessary due to illness or for acclimatization, we administer cupping every hour at the beginning of the month, or towards the end, and during each season; as there are some who experience a heavy head when in need of cupping; while others suffer from fullness, redness on their face, neck and head, darkening around the eyes; there are those who find blood droplets in their mouth, with swollen tongues and coughing up blood; and still others who have dreams, seeing through the night blood, wounds, death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we observe these signs, especially during the middle of the month, we instruct them to cup themselves after three hours in the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The bleeding of the nose helps with headaches... that affect the eyes, and should not be done after evacuating all over the body; this cupping is in place of bleeding from the head, and it is not suitable for those of a cold complexion or who have catarrh, as it does them great harm; therefore it must also not be used by the elderly or those with cold diseases on their heads.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who heal often become forgetful, so it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower due to the fear of forgetting.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The cupping in the neck is instead of bleeding the head and the temple, and for that reason it helps with narrowing of the chest, splitting of the lung channel, coughs, and fullness; it should be applied gently because if it holds too tightly, it causes forgetfulness or stomach and heart problems.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	Cupping at the two collarbones is beneficial for headaches, eye inflammation, migraines, suffocation, and tooth root pain, and it takes the place of bleeding from the temple; you must tell the healer to press their hand when applying it, so as not to rupture an artery or cause excessive blood flow.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The swellings beneath the chin are caused by mouth ailments, and gum infections, and similar conditions that occur in the mouth; they take place between the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The swellings of the shoulders are attributed to ailments caused by heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The swellings of the armpits are akin to those in three veins of the arm, as they draw blood from these large vessels; and instruct the healer not to wound them too deeply, for there is bare flesh below, covering nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The swelling that is above the buttocks relates to haemorrhoids in the anus, and ailments below, it should be large, made of bronze, requiring a good suction; perhaps if it was thin, it would break; and this causes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The cupping glasses on the legs are clearly beneficial, as they draw blood from the entire body, and they help with long-standing pains in the kidneys, uterus, bladder, and remedy flatulence; they should be placed at two sophens (the hollows behind each knee), and both ankles, yet after long use they weaken the body and cause swooning in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the cupping glass is to first place it on an empty stomach, and suck gently at first, then press firmly, moving evenly, and do not cease until you see the area reddened and swollen, with the appearance of blood redness; then let go, replace the cups, and be mindful of the constitution of the body, for some have tough skin, others delicate: one must strike only once, making broad wounds, but rather shallow; suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, you must strike twice: the first time to thin out the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very dense, you must strike a third time; and when we wish to draw out the thick and thin blood, we only need to strike once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we wish to draw out a lot of blood, we strike often; and if the blood is dense, you strike perfectly, and the result is that the heart is pierced suddenly, and it is necessary for him who has thick skin and hard, and those with narrow pores, to anoint the cupping glass rims with an aperitif and dissolutive oil: if in summer, violet oil, almond oil, or gourd seed oil; and if in winter, cress oil, lily, chamomile, or other similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of amaranth, or balsam-oil, or aniseed oil, and similar oils.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the patient has tender flesh and wide pores, no oil should be applied; instead, it must be washed after the fomentation with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry juice, or pumpkin water, or china root water, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And for those with much moisture, it rises easily with myrtle water, or sumac water, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And for those with large excesses, it is raised with old wine, or juice of figs, or a decoction of aniseed or chamomile, or others like these; and one should not be bled by cupping either before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath for one or two hours; and they must not sleep after the fomentation, rather they should sit upright when being cupped and after having been cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And watch out if the person who is healing is choleric, and if their blood is too sharp and inflamed; they must take cold things, such as pomegranates, endives, and lettuce in moderation, and similar items; and eat little pork, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And for those with a cold complexion, they should take honey syrup and moderately fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and eat little pork, few small birds, and pigeons; and on the day they undergo cupping, they must drink more than eat; and sometimes it is necessary to give some men treacle or nutmeg before or after cupping, in order to strengthen the principal limbs; and although the blood may be thin, those who are hot should not drink these things.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The cups that are applied without causing injury are those placed on the liver, and on the spleen, podagra, and on the abdomen, hip, kidneys, and groin, because these members cannot bear any wounding over their ulcers; nor is it done for anything other than to draw blood from limb to limb as we do when placing them on the breasts in order to heal a newborn child; to remove the viscosity that exists within the member, just as we place cups on the abdomen and hip to reduce swelling of these members; and to relieve pain where there are calculi or stones, perhaps by extracting the calculus through its attractive virtue or moving the stone from its position; and thus it acts when applied to the liver and spleen in cases of retained flatus, and such cups are administered empty for only sucking; and sometimes they are administered along with fire, and other times filled with warm water, as in diseases of pleurisy, and in such a way that one fills the cup with warm water alone or with water into which appropriate herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the cupping glass administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it has a width of two fingers and a depth of half a palm, and on its side, near the middle, there is a small hole just big enough to insert a needle, and it should be made of copper, soft in front so as not to hurt the patient when applied to the body; and at its center, there should be an iron or metal rod for placing a burning candle, and they come in different sizes: large and small according to the ailments and ages of those who use them; because cupping glasses for children are different from those used on the elderly, and those for thin people differ from those for obese.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	One should thus place this cupping glass on the body in the following manner: take a wax candle or a piece of linen and put it into the cupping glass through the iron rod that is inside it, so that the flame is at its base, away from the patient's skin; then place the cupping glass on the affected part of the body, ensuring your two fingers cover the hole we mentioned earlier, allowing you to control the vapor as needed and remove the cupping glass when necessary; take the linen and repeat this process often if required.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the cupping treatment administered for pleurisy, which is always acute, there is no tube or aperture, and it is only applied when full of water, being placed directly on the limb; its form is as follows:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Suction cups are only applied to those parts of the body where cupping is not possible due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; also to those which lack skin cover, like toes or fingers, and others resembling these; note that when using them you should select suction cups that contain clear, sweet water without impurities - take a set of them and immerse in fresh water overnight so they become accustomed to it and have no internal contents; then bleed the area with a lancet or cupping vessel, rub the member until red and place the suction cups on top; once these are full and fall off, apply a cup at that location if one can be placed there - this treatment is very beneficial afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, lift the wound slightly, then with water, very well, and then press it; if the wound bleeds too much after pressing, dampen a linen cloth with cold water, and apply it until the bleeding stops; and if the blood multiplies, put crushed vitriol or gallstones on it, and similar things, until it is staunched; you can place half of peeled beans on the wound, leaving them there until they adhere to the wound, this will stanch it now; and if more is needed, take other compresses.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	If the compresses are unwilling to be taken [applied], rub the wound with fresh blood, or insert a needle into it until blood flows out, then put them on; as soon as they sense the blood, they will adhere; and when you see that they fall off, sprinkle some powder of aloes and broken silk, or ashes, now they shall hold.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that the foolish surgeon who neglects this chapter will never turn to any of the ancient books or read their letters; and for this reason, knowledge is lost in our land, for I have never found a single good one among them; nor do I know anything except through the science of those ancient books which I studied so much that I could draw on it, as well as my own experience and practice throughout my life. And I have described to you in this chapter what is contained within it, having abridged it at the end, clearly demonstrating the forms of instruments involved, just as I did in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is necessary then that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the words and chapters where the sage puts his understanding, and remains true to reality, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	When fracture or dislocation or twisting or rupture occurs to someone, you must hasten to bleed the patient on both sides, if nothing hinders you, such as bodily weakness, infants, or old age; or if the weather is not very hot, nor too cold; and avoid eating cold things, that is, cold baths, goat's milk curds, and cheese, and do not drink wine, eat no fatty meats, and do not eat too much meat which fills the veins with blood, until you fear a hot abscess, or the spreading of matter to the limb; then the patient may return to their first normal diet they used to have.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, one should nourish the patient with meats that produce thick nourishment and viscosity, such as wheat boiled in water, rice, testicles, feet, calf stomachs, eggs, fresh fish, red wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	Because with too much nourishment, the bones grow quickly and the fracture is more likely to occur again.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the broken bones of the elderly and decrepit cannot heal or fuse well according to their natural process due to the dryness of their limbs; nor can those who are too young, like small children, whose bones are still soft. But they must be treated: place on the broken bone a thick splint which binds and joins the limb together, as firmly as it was before; do not at all hinder its work, and for this reason one must nourish them with thick meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that dislocations are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the skull is different from that of the arm, or the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways fractures can occur.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	As there is fracture that goes into splinters, and another in sharpening, like the cutting edge of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is fracture with an open wound, or fracture with just a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And for each type of fracture there is its own method and proper instrument for restoration, according to how the bone remembers its place; and the broken bone is known by the distortion of shape, clearly seen from the outside, and it sounds hollow when pressed with the hand; and where there is no distortion nor sound under touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is likely no fracture; but there may be a twist, or a crack, or a small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You must not move it with your hand, but apply the medicines that follow here, then hold it firmly and carefully.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Know that when the bone is broken and the two parts are separated, you must now bring them together evenly, unless a hot abscess appears there; and if a hot abscess does appear, leave it for one day until the abscess subsides; then set it equal to the others as best as you can gently and carefully, and know that its restoration will be easier than that of those with pieces; then hold it, as is necessary afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone with pieces broken, you extend it into two parts, whether hand or foot, or with your own hand if a small limb is involved, or with two tendons, or one tendon and your hand; set the limb according to its natural shape so that when the broken parts of the limb are separated, bring all appendages back to their places as best you can, taking care not to cause injury or pain to the patient through your work; and adjust the two heads of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And one feels it with their hands if it seems to them that it is not well: so they raise it beautifully and do not hold it too tightly or press as some do who cause through their work a hot abscess and contracture in the limb, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is in place, one must chastise the patient well so that they do not move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, turning or any other way; and be sure that the limb is secure enough for them to feel no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when one feels no pain, it is not in place, and so must be put in such a position that they feel no pain; take care to ensure it is properly straightened, lest it become crooked once restored; and the qualities of the broken limb are as I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme. 
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For the small limbs, such as arms and fingers and similar: one must wrap with soft and fine linen cloths; and for those that are larger, like thighs and legs: one must use a wide and firm bandage, because wide bands embrace the entire large limb, and constrict it equally from all sides, so there is no burden; then bind light dressings around, three or four turns according to the size of the limb, and tighten your hand slightly on the bandage, then go above the fracture and tighten less, so that the fracture can move away a little; and ease off the bandage bit by bit, until you reach a large portion of healthy tissue, then take another bandage and wrap it around again over the fractured area; then go back to the part below the fracture, and bind moderately, neither too tight nor too loose, as we have said above in the first binding; then place between the bindings some linen or cloth dressings so that they are all even, then tie everything with a bandage on top, and finally put your well-made splints on, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, apply a soothing poultice for abscesses that reduces inflammation and leave it in place for several days; then extract the splinters with your fingers, and make them from half of a flat cane cut thinly, or from wood used to make shingles, or from palm fronds, and shape them like this:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	but the splint that is applied to the broken bone must be slightly larger and wider than the others; it should also be as long as necessary for the size of the limb, small or large; then tighten around the splints just like you did with the first binding, then tie an appropriate thread above them, similar to the first binding over the fracture; make the upper part narrower here and there; and ensure that the threads are medium in thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft flax; because if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the work of fools who use twisted linen cords for their bindings, it is a great error, for the binding cannot be even if it is too fine, and one must not leave less than a finger's width between each splint.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the head of the shoulder after its restriction in their arm, place beneath it pads made of linen or woolen cloth so that they do not wound themselves.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by a fracture, and the heart is broken, I will speak of its cure afterward.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not necessary to reset all dislocated limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limb is large, it should not be reset with splints before five or seven days have passed, or more depending on your assessment of the abscess that may occur; and here you will find the ancient method of plasters to restore broken bones, dislocations, and torsions: take some flour from the mill's walls, mix it well with an abundance of eggs, and apply this mixture, neither too runny nor too thick, making sure to use it, for this is the common way of plastering broken limbs in various situations, especially for women and small children as it is neither overly hot nor cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Autre maniere d'emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d'uef; se li complexion de l'ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Autre maniere d'emplaustre que vaut a torsion: take mugwort and viscum, each X З; myrrh and aloe, each VIIII З; acacia VI З; Armenian bole X З, grind well, mix with water or egg white, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take new wool, boil it in ash and oil, then place it on the joint or displaced bone, to ease pain caused by friction of bones, abrasion of bone surfaces, and fractures.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not restore the joint or bone to its place, but are good for cooling hot abscesses and properly easing the pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another plaster to reset broken bones: take dry fig leaves and earth-apple leaves, grind together, then make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another type of poultice for bone fracture repair and to reduce swelling caused by abscesses.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of marshmallow, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, wheat flour, each in equal parts; grind and mix with wine, if the limb is warm then use moist coriander water or plain water to mix it instead, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another poultice method stronger than the first when an abscess has formed in limb repair.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take marshmallow root, flax seed, pomegranate, honeysuckle, elecampane, violet flowers, and chamomile, of each one part; grind and mix with salted water or fresh water, or wine according to the warmth and comfort of the limb.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras says in his book that one should not put anything on the broken limb to restore it other than a mixture of wax and oil, nothing else, and he says that it must be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And Galen suggests that one should apply dry things slightly warm to the broken limb in order to heal it, such as myrrh, aloe, incense and similar items, as we have mentioned before.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another type of poultice that is beneficial for injuries and pain: take mugwort, shaved human hair, or bird feathers, along with viscum album (mistletoe), and salt in equal proportions; grind them together to make a poultice and bind it on the affected area.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then you can untie it a little while later and check whether the patient feels any pain or if the bone has moved out of place; do not remove the poultice by force unless they feel pain, itching, burning sensation, or swelling. If this happens, hurry up and remove the binding, along with the poultice now; take some light fabric and a marine sponge moistened in water and dip it into cold water, then cool down the affected area until the itching stops and the pain is soothed; afterwards leave the limb at rest for an hour, then apply dry wool soaked either in plain water or rose oil and bind it gently overnight to ensure no signs of inflammation remain. Then you can resume gentle binding with a bit of poultice but do not tie too tightly as before until the wound has healed completely.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess has softened and turned red, causing pain and swelling which have all been removed, and you need an ointment and bandage, restart it as equally as before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	If there is no improvement in the limb as we have described, do not remove the bandage until after three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, depending on what you see, until the fracture heals and the tissue comes closer together; then restrain it more than before, and thicken its flesh, as I said earlier. If you notice that the wound is drying out more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot reach there anymore. Therefore, warm it with tepid water each time you remove the bandage, every three days, and loosen the binding a little; through this treatment, nourishment reaches the limb again, and corrects what ignorant physicians do by restoring the limb crookedly: this is harmful, and so are fearful practices, and I see no other way than to leave it alone and treat it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of the various types of fractures
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many types of fractures with various forms, and the causes are distinct; for there are fractures caused by sword impacts, where the blade removes all bone down to the bone marrow as a hatchet or log does, thus this type is called "hatchet fracture".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword strikes over the bone without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound from these two types of fractures can be large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded impact, or splitting, like from a stone or spearhead, or falling on stones, or similar.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating fracture that reaches the membrane beneath the bone, or it is on top of the bone, and this wound can be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound that pierces the bone as finely as a hair, and the crack is small, and thus this fracture is called "capillary"; and if the wound is caused by striking a stone, or by falling, or by similar accidents, and it drives a piece of bone inward, and the skin is raised like the way blacksmiths do when they hammer on cauldrons; then the stone goes inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	It happens more often to those who have moist bones in the head, such as children; and it occurs with all these types of fractures where small fragments are detached like stars; I will speak of them in their proper place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of fractures through their displacement, and examination by touch, and through the corrupted flesh on top of them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of the hair is understood by this: when you uncover the bone and rub it, the black fracture opens up.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In treating the fracture, take care of the patient's accidents and symptoms, and if you see no ill accident such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, dizziness, fainting, feverishness, eyes turning pale and reddening, and other similar things in various conditions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see no dreadful accident and expect recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wound comes to you first, during winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day so that you can treat it.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest the tissue beneath the bone become corrupted and the accidents we have mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the bone fracture reaches the membrane covering the brain, you must open the affected area like this: take the wounded person's head and uncover all the bone in every way possible; expose the injury as gently as possible. If there is any bleeding when uncovering the bone or a hot abscess occurs, treat it accordingly. Ensure that the place of injury is filled with wet rags soaked in rose oil; let the wound rest until the hot abscess has cooled down and you are certain no more blood will be lost. Then begin to remove around the bone using one of two methods: the first method entails making a narrow incision at the front, and this is its form...
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then he makes another incision larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	The second method is that you have several different incisions, some narrow and others wide, all are pointed, and made of hard iron; operate lightly so as not to injure the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	If the bone is tough and hard, you must drill around it rather than making incisions with trepans that do not fully penetrate the skull bone, and there should be a margin or ring above the point so as to prevent it from passing beyond the bone; you will need several of these such that each corresponds to the type of bone, so that you have trepans for all parts of the skull; and this is how the three types of trepan are formed:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities to perforate around the broken bone are that you place the trephine on the bone, and turn it with your hands until you know the bone is perforated; then move the trephine elsewhere a little afterwards, and thus do so all around, then cut with the incisor knives the space of the bone that is between the holes, and do this as finely as you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you extract the bone by hand or with any instrument such as tongs, pincers; be careful not to touch the brain or the membrane.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have perforated and extracted the bone, it is necessary that you clean off any remaining fragments with another instrument similar to an incisor knife, but it must be more robust and finer than the other; if there remains anything of small bones or scales, remove them lightly with one of the instruments; then treat the wound with tenting and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of work is as Galen says, which is safer; and he praised it greatly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	You must first uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture is visible, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place underneath the head of this lenticular chisel, which has such a form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side only, as the cutting edge has two sides, so that the sharp edges face towards the bone; then strike gently with a small mallet above it, so that you lightly tap the bone all around, and be very careful of the membrane which is underneath; if it sticks to the bone, remove it slightly, for it can be removed safely without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate to the marrow, and the bone is only cut above, with small pieces remaining, you must smooth this roughness, and remove the splinters with a fine rasp, of which you should have various sizes, to accommodate each place appropriately, according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Use large rasps first, then finer ones, and do not cease until it is smooth.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	For each of the other small cutters and fine fractures, you must adapt the treatment according to its position; this is something not easily explained by those who have studied this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the ulcer is exposed, take a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another cloth, doubled over twice or thrice, moisten it in wine and rose oil, and put it on top of the first cloth; do this gently so as not to aggravate the ulcer, then bind it with another light bandage, not too tight but just enough to hold the wound closed; leave it like this for a day or two until the hot abscess is eased, then undo the bandage, and apply soothing medicines such as lily roots, wheat flour, incense powder, and similar things; make a powder of these, put it on the wound, and then apply non-biting medicines; ensure that the wound remains clean, do not leave any ointment or let pus form, for when pus forms over the brain's membrane, it corrupts and can cause great harm to the patient; when biting substances are applied to ulcers, they will fester on top.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take heed therefore, if any mishap occurs to the patient, as we have said, it is undoubtedly doubtful without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if redness does not arise due to the medicine that has been applied, which may have such an effect, you must take some honey and three parts of rose oil, mix it with a cloth, and place it on the wound; then treat it like any other treatment until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes both parts of the upper arm are broken or just one, for there are two bones; and the lower one is cartilaginous, it does not break but only dislocates or twists, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, you must insert your little finger into the cavity of the arm, and place the broken part inside equal to your index finger, and push from outside until the arm returns to its natural shape; do this gently, and be careful not to cause pain to the patient through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the fracture is in the part above the nose, and the bones cannot be brought back to their place, you must set it equal with the head of a nail slightly thicker.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the fracture is in two places, do it again similarly, and hasten to restore the first one on the same day if you can; if not, after seven or ten days, when the hot abscess has cooled down, cover the head of the nose with fine linen bandages if the fracture is in a prominent part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Where you apply other bandages in another place if there is a fracture there; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the pores of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some restorers say that one should wet the bandages with butter, and change them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It seems not good to me, but they should be moistened with a mixture of egg white and flour powder; then leave it until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	Sometimes goose feathers are inserted instead of tents, and if you have soft cloth, wrap it around, and hold the broken bone in place, and let the patient blow through it; do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses form at the nose while you are working on it, apply some softened wax or cotton moistened with rose oil, or put a bit of quicklime there.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses do not form there, apply a plaster from the outside made of bran flour and incense powder mixed with egg white, then put some light lint on top, and do not bind the nose; and if the nose bone is broken into small pieces, extract them with suitable instruments for this purpose, then sew up the wound and treat it with appropriate healing substances like plasters and ointments; and if there are no internal wounds in the nose, treat it with tents and insert some splints of lead until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	For the fracture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is fractured below, and there is no external wound, and the break is only outside, not broken into two, nor bent inward, it can be identified gently.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the break is on the right side, you should insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; and if the break is on the left jaw, insert your right index finger, then gently push the fracture inward, adjust it with the other hand from outside, and align it.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jaw fracture is divided into two, you must administer an extension of both parts until it is aligned.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement or breaking of the teeth, bind them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk, then place broken wax on the crushed jawbone, and cover it with two pieces of cloth; put over this a thick board well made, or a piece of leather equal in size, long and wide according to the jawbone, and tie it as firmly as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, eating only light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the shape changes, untie it on the third day, and then reset what has changed; apply an ointment made of mill powder with egg white or sisam flour after removing the wax; cover this with a light woolen cloth, and if the plaster hardens and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until they are healed; many times healing occurs in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if a warm abscess appears, apply what we have mentioned many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, remove no part of the bone; do so gently with suitable instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with a flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and no more remain, cleanse the wound if it is wide; apply appropriate dressings to generate flesh until it heals.
de la forcele	Of strength.
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The collarbone breaks several times in front, towards the shoulder, and this fracture occurs in three ways: either it is broken and torn into two parts with pieces, being the easiest to restore; or there is a fracture along with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	Et the work is such when there is a fracture without wounds that you have two assistants so that one holds down the limb that suffers the impact and the other stretches out their neck towards the affected part then hold the fracture evenly between your two hands, thus ensuring its alignment to restore it to its proper shape with no misalignment or deviation.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place under the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or woolen fabric and make it thick according to your needs; stretch out the limb with force, then grab the sphere in your hand so that you can properly align the fracture.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull out the head of the broken limb from without because it has gone in perfectly, then have the patient lie prone on their back and place a medium-sized pillow under his shoulder; have your assistants push down on the shoulder until the bone of the fractured area is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then address the fracture with your hands, and if you find it shattered, you must split upwards; and draw out the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot be joined by any means, cut it with one of the knives you have; but place this instrument underneath to protect the soft tissue:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and it resembles a spoon, and is not sharp-edged, and be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the strength of the job; and have two ends, as you see, one broad, and the other narrow, just like the shape of the wound that you made when you drew out the bones; and when you are certain about a hot abscess, cauterize the wound, and if the opening is small or you suspect a hot abscess, pack the wound with swabs and lint according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if a hot abscess appears, dampen a cloth with rose oil, egg white, and wine, then apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	Fixation of the bone when it is injured but not fractured requires applying to the bone an ointment made from mill dust and egg white, placing light dressings on top, and using a wooden stick as a splint if necessary; then take a very wide bandage one palm in width, place double cloth on the dressings and ointment, take a thin rod three fingers wide and long, wrapping it with the bandage so that its end hangs down; put the rod over the fracture and wrap the bandage around the neck, under the healthy armpit, and then under the injured one; pull from each side until you see the splint is in place above the broken bone, check daily and retighten if necessary; have the patient lie on their back with a small pillow under the armpit to elevate the shoulder; this helps heal the fracture by aligning the shoulder; bind the arm to the neck tightly for twenty days without untying unless there is an emergency, then reapply the ointment if needed and keep it tight until healed; healing takes at most twenty-eight days but can be less in some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	For a broken shoulder.
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Before the shoulder breaks or leaves its place, whether in the middle or at an angle, and not be put back into position with force; align it according to the shape of the fracture, and reset it following its natural form as best you can; then apply some mill powder mixed with abundant egg on top, light compresses, and a double piece of cloth; place over this a wide and fine linen bandage somewhat wider than the shoulder, and if there are gaps under the bandage in any area of the shoulder, fill these with thin linen strips so that the bandage lies evenly; then firmly secure it all around with a large bandage, ensuring the bandage does not move from its place, and check the binding each day; every time it loosens, retighten it, and ensure the bandage is even if it has slipped out of position, and have the patient lie on their side; and the shoulder will be reset in 20 or 25 days. And when this number is complete, then remove the binding, and take care as the bones do not settle lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a part of the bone juts forward and punctures beneath the heart, do so above it, remove it, and follow what we have said for treating abscess-causing fractures.
de la brisure dou pis	Of the fracture of the spine
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The spine is sometimes broken in two, but this happens rarely; it often fractures at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it slants downwards and the patient feels great pain, lacks movement, and coughs; they may also vomit blood, and the broken ends of bone are clearly seen through the skin, which is easily felt.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	The treatment is as follows: let the patient lie frequently on their back and place a cushion between their shoulders, then press the shoulders together and bring your two hands to join the ribs at either side; carefully adjust in all ways so that the bone assumes its proper shape; next apply plasters and swabs soaked in fine salt or other light substance, wrap these in cloth, and bind them firmly to the broken bone so it cannot move; tie a bandage around the patient's back and tighten it adequately, undoing it from time to time as needed for care of any corrosion, itching, pain, or abscess that may occur at the site, or if they need to be released due to discomfort; reapply plaster and tighten until healing is complete.
de la brisure des costes	Of rib fractures.
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that rib fractures occur only in the back and at the head of the ribs, and they bend only because they are fragile; one feels it well during examination with two fingers.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is that you set the fracture evenly, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply a plaster cast, and secure it with a splint if needed.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	If the rib fracture is displaced inwardly, the patient feels severe pain and stabbing sensations, similar to pleurisy, as the bone punctures the membrane; they also experience shortness of breath, constant coughing, and profuse bloody vomiting, which requires immediate attention and has claimed many lives in the past.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And so there are some who say one must administer meats that swell the belly to push the rupture outwards.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not cause this [condition], if hot abscesses have not come there already.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have appeared, treat them with cauterization.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some of you say to put cups on the spot to extract strongly, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the cup might draw superfluities [excess fluids] back to the site due to its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some of you say to cover the spot with wet wool in hot oil, and put tent-like wrappings between the ribs to make even the tension around [the wound], then treat it with treatment for pleurisy, meat broth, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear due to the bone piercing the flesh, and there is doubt in their condition, then it is necessary to make an incision above the broken rib, and one must place an instrument beneath it to protect the soft tissue; and then one should cut into the bone, extract it gently, and afterwards suture the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with medicated plasters until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess arises, place wet linen cloths soaked in rose oil on the affected area, and apply it to the wound; treat the surrounding skin as necessary for the abscess, and keep it constantly moist with oil on the side where it is located until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	From the broken neck.
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes there is a fracture of the bones in the neck, and it often happens that they bend; this also occurs in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will recover or not, take note: if their hands become soft, swollen, and numb, unable to move or extend, and when you prick them with a needle, they feel no pain.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is deadly in many cases, but if they can change position and feel well when pressed or pricked, know that the bone joint is saved, and the patient may be cured with proper treatment.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will recover or not, take note: if their feet become soft, and there are signs like those in the hands, and on the back, there is windiness and involuntary excretion; and when turned onto their stomach, there should also be involuntary excretion.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is reminded of it on his back and he wants to mount [a horse], he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that they are mortal; do not labor in vain for their treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if these accidents do not befall him, then the matter is less serious.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	The cure is such that you must warm it if there is hot abscess, apply oil of roses or oil of yolk of egg until it cools down; then put on a binding plaster which comforts and dries [the wound], bind it with a bandage, instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, till he be healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone gets separated, it is necessary to cut above the heart and remove the bone, then bring together both lips of the wound, if large, with a suture; treat it with ointments that promote flesh growth until it be healed; and if the bone head is broken, which is called "bone's head", you put your thumb from your left hand under it and push it up to make it even with the other side, then apply plaster and splint over it, if needed; bind it tight, and if there are separated pieces of bone sticking out, remove them, treat the wound until healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the broken hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Before the hip bone is broken, and if it is, there will be little reduction at the head; it breaks lengthwise, and declines inwards, and the patient experiences pain in that area, along with throbbing, and swelling of what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is such that you extend your hand above it, so that you are over the break; and know where exactly the break is and its shape; and if the break is only at the head, make sure this break is even, so that it retains natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is along its length, or it declines inwards, make the patient lie on their stomach so that you can see to restore this break.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it equal, place on the plaster, then put a stick of wood or heartwood above it, and compress the fracture so that it does not move; and secure the position beneath the armpit until the ligaments are aligned.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if a hot abscess forms there, do not touch it until the hot abscess has calmed down, and place on it what we have said before; then return to the restoration process, and secure it as necessary, unless some bad incident occurs; this is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The adjutoires is that which lies between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it must be restored in one of two ways: the first is to take a wooden splint of appropriate thickness, shaped thus:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And bind the two ends of the splint to the two joints, then lift them up and place the patient on a seat; next, cast their broken arm onto the wooden splint so that it rests at elbow height, and have ready an arched piece of wood beneath which you will pass something heavy or another person who can help stretch out the break; finally, the healers should grasp the fracture equally in both hands and attempt to set it back into place.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	The second method involves hoisting the patient onto their back and tying their hand to their neck; next command two assistants such that one holds what is above the fracture in both hands while the other supports below at every joint, stretching each part as far as they are able.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more powerful, then restrain the ligament below the fracture, and above the fracture, and stretch each of the ministers to their respective parts.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is close to the head of the shoulder, you must place one ligament in the middle below the joint, and the other towards the edge, beneath the fracture; likewise, if the fracture is on the side near the edge, it is necessary to place the ligaments lightly, without strain, so that the fracture remains level with the joint and the edge; then align the break as required, and restrain it, provided no abscesses arise.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if abscesses do arise, do not restrain it for seven days, and apply moist wool with rose oil until the abscess is soothed; then restrain it, and the method of restraint is to place a poultice on the fracture, then position the arm in the splint, and put your hand over the shoulder or chest; add the cloth, and tighten over the splint and the arm, such that the arm remains at an angle, if nothing hinders this, or if the bone has not shifted.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone will move, use splints, and place a wider and stronger splint over the fracture, allowing two inches of space between each splint; let each splint be three inches larger on either side to pass through the break; then strain onto the splints as I said at the beginning of this chapter about fractures, more strongly but less distant.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the placement of splints and constriction as we mentioned when restoring a broken limb, and doubt about the hot abscess, leave it bound until the seventh day, as we said; then look every three days at the binding, so that itching or swelling doesn't develop there nor prevent circulation to the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If addressed as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if none of these accidents occur, do not release him from his bonds until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back with their hands on their stomach; place beneath them a cushion filled evenly with wool for their shoulder; observe every hour during the day or night to ensure that the broken limb does not move nor its ligaments soften; if they heal by the virtue of medicine, feed him the diet we previously mentioned, in such a way that his food is at first very soft; and when he begins to recover, let it become coarse.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	It is customary that the shoulder and leg must be healed within forty days; then they should be released from their bonds, bathed and administered medicinal ointments to correct any misalignment of joints.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the dislocation is severe and difficult to move, it may take one day or two months to relieve it.
de la brisure du bras	Of arm fracture:
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the 'fosci' (or forearm bones), one of which is small and attaches to the wrist, while the other is larger and located below the little finger; sometimes only the large bone breaks or just the smaller one, but occasionally both do.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the smaller forearm bone is fractured, healing is relatively straightforward; when it's the larger one, recovery tends to be harder and takes longer than if both bones were broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is only the small bone that is broken, one should extend it gently and set it evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bone that is broken, one should pull on it more firmly and stretch it; hold the end of the limb with one hand higher than the others, and keep the small fingers lower than the other fingers; have the patient cross their arms over themselves, and place a pillow in front of them at a height where they feel no strain. Then let two ministers support the injured person's arm from below near the wrist or elbow, and another minister support it from above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	Then place the mirror in front of them evenly so they see their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the bone is broken into pieces, place each one back in its place and grasp the heart of any piece that cannot be restored to its original position; then cut it away as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the broken bone there is also a wound, as I have spoken of it in the singular chapter, then take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the restoration process hot abscesses appear, take some cerote made of rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft; bind this cloth over it gently until the hot abscess is calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	Then remove the cerote and apply an ointment made of mill powder with plenty of egg, then place the splints, ensuring that the splint over the broken bone is closest and somewhat wider than the others; know that there must be six splints on each arm in different arrangements depending on which bones are broken or not: whether one or two. Bind it tighter near the fracture than elsewhere and always more loosely as you move away from it, as I said at the beginning of this chapter. The cloths over the break should be soft and moist, never hard nor rough; and the thread used to bind them must not be too thick nor too thin, as we have mentioned.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	Reward the limb and ligament after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident befalls the limb, such as itching which occurs in limbs, you must wash the limb with warm water until the itching is soothed; and leave the limb not too tight at rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then restart the tightening process, and if the ligament is softened and the bones are separated or similar, address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you observe that nourishment cannot reach the limb due to its tightness, it is necessary that you soften it a little, and leave it thus for a few days until circulation flows again; then tighten it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said come to pass for the patient, do not release them until 20 days have passed.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	If all around is quiet, then bind their hands to their neck, and keep their necks even, avoiding any movement or turning, and let them sleep on their back; know that this fracture will be healed in 30 days or 35, perhaps even in 20 days depending on the composition of ingredients and the patient's constitution.
de la brisure de la main	On the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and at the knuckles there are few fractures, but rather it is more often a dislocation.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is fractured or dislocated, it is necessary that the patient sits cross-legged, and sits upright in front of them evenly; then place their hand on a flat surface, and the minister extends the broken bones, setting them level with one another until they are properly aligned; apply a plaster cast and bandages, unless an abscess arises, then put a splint according to the location; it should be wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is around the front of the shinbone, make a circle of cloth, and instruct the patient to bind it tightly to their broken shin; then take a long strip of cloth, and let the heart-shaped pad be as large as the palm of your hand, and bind it securely, as required.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is on the outside, you must put a pad above and another below the broken bone, so that the hand is open and straight; then bind it all around the hand, and secure the binding between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture comes to any of our fingers, be it the thumb, then set it evenly as required; and bind it with the hand, and see to put a small straight pad to raise the fracture, so that it does not move; and if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the index or one of the others, then set them evenly, and bind it with the healthy finger next to it; or you may bind them all together, holding them in an "I" shape, which works better, or you can put a pad on top, like for the thumb; and take care in the restoration and arrangement regarding hot abscesses, and assist those who come, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The thigh bone is often broken, and it can be clearly seen when the leg turns forward or backward; the restoration involves binding one ligament above and another below the fracture.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on their face, then each assistant stretches out their binding to an equal part; this is when the fracture is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	If the fracture is close to the root of the thigh bone, one binding should be towards the armpit, and the other bindings below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	Also, if the fracture is near the knee, then the bindings should be alongside the knee, and the stretching should be downwards; next, the assistants place the bone in its natural position with both hands, ensuring it aligns correctly, before applying a plaster cast and securing it, unless an abscess occurs.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down before returning to your work and treatment; the dressing is done in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You must wrap the fracture with I thick bandage doubled to II or III layers, leaving the excess, then turn the leg so that the heel comes up to the groin, and thread I long wire between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and bring the end of the wire above; then wrap the bandage around the leg and thigh, and place splints over the fracture, placing a splint over the bone of the leg; then fill the void between the leg and thigh with soft cloths to even out the pressure, then start tying firmly III or IV turns over the fracture; as you go up from the fracture, lessen the tightness; then take hold of I end of the wire you threaded between the leg and thigh, and tie it to III splints above, then return to below at the other end of the wire, until you reach beside the foot; tighten so that it cannot move from its place, then leave it like this, ensuring no abscess, swelling or other complication develops.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, then dislocate it and address what comes next, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that grip, it must be removed, if possible; and if one cannot, then the place must be split open, and force it out; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way that one sets it with pins, as in the shoulder and arm; however, when restoring it in this manner, the patient does not suffer discomfort.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in twenty days, or perhaps a little less or more, depending on the diversity of constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	From the groove of the knee.
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the knee alley there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is but a crack or hole, and this happens with any wound, both wounded and unwounded, and one feels good about it.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	The restoration is such that one sets the equal of what is round to its two sides so they are assembled as close as possible; then apply the plaster, and insert a round peg if needed, and tighten it accordingly, then observe all the arrangements we have mentioned for other breaks, like hot abscesses and similar ones; assign each accident what suits it until healing.
de la brisure de la jambe	On the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; 
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bone is broken, return to the previous step.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is clearly visible; return underneath.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore, provide an extension and make it equal, binding the splints evenly; however, if the fracture is severe and there are multiple fragments, let the extension be lesser and more gentle; adjust according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your task, take two strips of wood, padded on the inside, that wrap around the leg from one side to the other, extending from just above the knee down; then wrap two bandages around it in two layers, binding them in the middle as well, so that the leg cannot bend right or left. This is good, and some use a splint of wood along the length of the leg to prevent movement, properly applied at the fracture site or where there is an open wound; move the leg each day to check for abscesses or other complications, treating it until it heals.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of broken bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but in the bones of the foot, there can be breaks and bruises, and sometimes only a sprain in various conditions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a break in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, place the patient's foot on the ground as if they were about to walk, then put your foot on theirs, where the bones are raised, press them until they return to their places; then apply a plaster cast and bandage it, place a small tablet with two fingers' worth of [substance] underneath the belly of the foot, secure it to the foot appropriately, wrap it with cloth and other necessary materials.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, untie the binding, for you will find the bones equalized, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	If there are any of the toes broken, restore them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place in the broken toe a peg according to its length, and let it be slightly wider, then put beneath the foot that board I mentioned, and strain it appropriately; if there are two or three, or more, broken, then place on each toe a peg according to its measure, wrapped in a linen cloth, and secure the board beneath the foot; and let it extend over the head of the board from outside the stomach of the foot so that it holds it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things I have said regarding other fractures, just as we have mentioned; and help each accident as it is required.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Of the fracture of the wrist bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Make the woman sit with her legs wide apart, then bend her towards the back part and have someone hold her from behind; then fill the vaginal opening of the patient's nature with cotton wadding until it is full; get some pebbles and put them inside too so they are surrounded by the cotton; stand up the woman carefully lifting her slightly upwards several times to shake down the stones, and when the cotton comes out at the entrance of the vagina you will see that the bones have come together again with the help of the stones; then when she wishes to urinate take away the cotton wadding until after she has passed water it is replaced. Do this for seven days or thereabouts: the fracture should be healed, and if you wish to hasten recovery get a sheep's bladder tie one end of a cane to its opening, fill the whole thing with air by blowing through the other end, then insert the inflated bladder in the woman's vagina; blow hard into the cane so that the bladder becomes thoroughly distended inside her: the vaginal walls will thus be brought together again and the fracture healed. Then pack some cotton wadding round it for a few days until the parts are healed
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the wrist of a man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said for the hip bone; and these breaks are not hidden from one who applies study and practice to them, and reads my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break indicates in many ways the correct path to restoration: understand this, then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's windpipe and insert it inside the penis; then wrap it with cloth around, and leave it for three days there, and it will swiftly heal.
de brisure avec plaie	Of breaks that have wounds.
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a break with wounds, especially if it's large like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, to be healed swiftly, as the healings we have discussed attest to.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, apply vitriol to staunch it, if you have nothing else, then begin again to restore the fracture that same hour or day, unless a hot abscess comes about.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	If a hot abscess does occur, leave the restoration for nine days until the abscess is alleviated, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, as you would bring about an ill outcome.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible on an uncovered heart, you must set it gently with your hands in slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	If the extension does not align with your hands, reset it with this iron instrument which is seven or eight fingers long and its width depends on the size of the wound; and for this, three or four are needed depending on what is necessary in each bone-setting cure; and let it be round and a little thick so that it does not bend under compression on the limb being treated, and sharpened at the end, and thickened toward the middle thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palanching," for this reason the bent head must be placed on top of the protruding bone, and push once until it returns to its place, and ensure they are aligned with each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot grasp the bone properly, then you must cut away the head of the bone until the instrument has a firm grip.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then cut it away with an appropriate instrument, whether chisel or knife, to your ability; remove what remains in the bone of roughness and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not yet in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	Si ensure it is in its place, then moisten a cloth with black styptic wine, and properly so if it is in the east; and do not put on the wound any ointment or other oily substance, for it would cause rot and corruption; then apply stars once you have restored the bone, leaving the wound uncovered, and cut away all covering around according to the size of the wound, taking great care that the wound is not constrained by the fracture; this mistake has often been made by foolish surgeons, causing harm or death in some cases; and ensure that the bindings are looser than for other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is severe or large, and you fear a bad outcome as mentioned earlier, and find pain in that spot, then do not apply stars but instead wrap it tightly with hard cloths and tie them securely.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see swelling after one or two days at the wound, remove what you have placed on it entirely, and apply healing ointment such as Tetraconion and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	You must loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at night, until it is fused and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And ensure that the limb is bandaged in such a way that the swelling runs down slightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if after many days it still does not heal but swells again, know that there are small bone fragments present, which is why you must probe the wound with a needle, and remove all these dislocated pieces causing pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula forms there, or any other kind of corruption occurs, then you must treat it according to what he says in his chapter previously mentioned.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and protruding from the limb, like the thighbone or shoulder blade, and other similar large bones, do not extract it, for many times this leads to death, but leave it until it rots; perhaps it will fall out by itself after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, simply leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	wounds that arise over the suture
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often see patients after the healing of a break, especially when it is near a joint, and it's an ugly sight to see the figure of the limb; perhaps they can no longer perform their natural functions with that limb.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take heed therefore if the wound is fresh: administer styptic medicines such as aloe, incense, myrrh, gum Arabic, galbanum and other similar remedies; mix one or all of these with a styptic wine or egg white or milk of almonds; wrap it in lint on a compress, hold tight without loosening for some days then replace the dressing again until nodation is gone; or lay on a well-made piece of lead because its property is to reduce swellings from limbs and if the nodation has already hardened like stone you will have to chisel off the superfluous matter or use a rasp until it is removed, and cure it so that it heals.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	From the member which is weak after recovery.
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is healed, and the limb remains weak and feeble, it occurs due to many causes: one of which is being bound too tightly, and not bound as it should have been; or having too many bindings, preventing nourishment from reaching the member; or excessive bleeding; or large movements, not at the right time; or a lack of blood in the body, thus making it weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and soften the body so that blood multiplies within it; administer baths, and give joy and leisure; then apply ointment to the limb, so that the ointment draws in great nourishment, and often moisten with warm water until nourishment reaches the member; and return to its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	Of a twisted limb after injury
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration and the broken bone is still visible, and the shape of the limb is unattractive, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function: do not believe those foolish people who say that you should break the limb again from scratch; many such things have happened in our land, and these procedures are blamed for causing great harm and even death. However, if the knots and bruises are fresh, they should be soaked with hot water or cooked softening herbs, like leaves of mallow, roots, marshmallow root, and similar things; apply a softening plaster, like well-made diaquartz, mix the mucilage of mallow with goose fat or sesame oil and make an ointment from it; alternatively you can take fatty figs, crush them with colon fiber, and any other medicines that ease inflammation.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the nodule is removed by continually and extensively rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And provide gentle movement to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the curvature is severe and hardened like stone, and it must be removed with an iron tool, then one must cut down to the bone using a delicate knife; and insert a suture and focus on the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs in someone, one must promptly reset it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the joint swells, and by chance it may be replaced with pain; therefore, it must not be moved when swollen: many times this brings on spasms and other pains; nevertheless, when this occurs, make the patient bleed, then leave them alone until the abscess is healed; then bathe the limb in warm water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each member as it comes back into place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from head to toe.
des mandibules	of jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes jaws become dislocated on both sides, and there are two types of dislocation: either they are slightly out of place and softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging downwards, with saliva running from the mouth which cannot be contained, nor can they close their mouths, and their speech is slurred.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When a dislocation is minor, it can often return through various adjustments.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete and fully displaced, you must reposition it swiftly without delay; in such a manner that your assistant holds the patient's head, and pushes one of their hands' fingers into the root of the dislocation within the mouth, if the dislocation involves two parts; the other hand's fingers should be outside to provide balance; instruct the patient to relax their jaws, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	The practitioner then places it evenly until it returns to its proper place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if repositioning is difficult, especially when both mandibles are involved together, warm them with hot water and oil until they can be gently eased back into place; do not delay the process of returning them as we have instructed.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's wound is closed without softening it, apply moistened dressings soaked in a mixture of rose oil and wax; then lightly bind it with soft bandages. Let the patient sleep on their back, with two pillows under their shoulders to prevent any movement to the right or left, and let them avoid straining during chewing; but feed him light food until his pain is relieved and his jaws are healed. Then allow him to eat what he wants lightly, and do not exert himself in opening his mouth for eating or drinking until his jaw is well-healed and strengthened.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be reset to their original position within an hour and do not return to their proper place, fever and constant pain will result; possibly leading to diarrhea, or perhaps vomiting clear bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, know that it is destruction; and often does the person die whom it befalls, within nine days.
de la forcelle	From the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The fork cannot be dislocated from the inside of its shaft or below, and is sometimes dislocated outwards, which one can easily tell.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is such that the patient often lies on their back and extends their arms; then you press the place firmly with your palm, and it will return; then apply a plaster and bandage, holding it tight; and the shoulder which faces away from the blade cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it does dislocate at some point, reset it to its place as we have said; then apply the plaster and bandage, binding it tight, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed; likewise is the head of the shoulder restored when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	You know that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: first, it dislocates at the joint below; secondly, at the part of the chest; and occasionally, it dislocates above, which happens rarely; it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor inside due to nerves; and many times it dislocates below towards the joint, especially in those with little flesh, as it easily jumps out for them; for those with enough flesh, it jumps out with difficulty, and returns with difficulty.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And occasionally happens to some men a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	You must therefore test it until you are certain; then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	It is recognized as dislocation when it points towards the armpit, and there is a difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one; you will find an obvious distinction between them; and at the head of the shoulder, a pit, under the armpit against which lies the head of the shoulder, like an egg; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move in any way; similarly if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you can clearly feel it on touch; this type of dislocation is easy to reset when it is new or affecting a child.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	The method is as follows: have the assistant lift the patient's hand upwards, then place your palms underneath the armpit, and raise the joint forcefully to its position above; let the assistants lift and stretch out the hand upwards before placing it below; this will cause a stir.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said with manual traction on the same day, then the patient must be bathed in warm water; and administer a gentle softening and soothing remedy, such as a decoction of altee, fenugreek, and mellilote in water, and let him drink this; then remind the patient to lie on his back, and place beneath him an even woolen cushion, neither too soft nor too hard; then have the assistant place their heel on the cushion, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, pulling the patient's hand; while another assistant holds the head of the patient so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder returns at once, and if you wish to reset it in this way: ensure there is a taller man present than the patient; have him stand upright by the side, pushing the patient's shoulder under the cushion from below, lifting the cushion upwards so that the patient hangs in mid-air; while another assistant pulls the patient's hand downwards towards their belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, weigh them down with something heavy, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	We also reset it in another way: take a long pole and plant it in the ground so that the shoulder is as high as the pistol, neither too thick nor too thin; then place it underneath the patient, but have soft coverings on top of him, and let the patient's arm rest along the length of the log; then stretch his hand downward on the other side quite strongly, and the joint will come back into its place quickly; if it does not wish to return with all these things we have said, do this cure: take a pole two arms long and four fingers wide, which has a rounded top so you can perfectly insert it underneath the shoulder bone, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lay upon the head of the sick person a soft cloth so that the wood does not hurt them, then place the patient under the bench; and extend their arm along the long side of the wooden block, and tie the shoulder to the block, and the arm to the head with the hand, then put the arm on the edge of a wide stool, and let the hands hang down, and leave the body hanging on the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, however it may be, you must put under the bench an equal woolen pad, then apply a plaster prepared with flour powder, incense and egg white, over the entire shoulder and around it; then strap it underneath the bench appropriately, and turn the bandage back onto the plaster, embrace the hand to their neck, and let the hands stay thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And one should eat little, so that the limb is strengthened, for it will heal quicker; then increase eating after five or seven days, and move it; if it is firm and not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is forced out of place due to moisture that has entered it or for another reason, then you must apply cauterization to three openings, as mentioned before in the chapter on cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this and it dislocates again after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and they cannot lift their arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is either cut, stretched or weakened; and know that the joint will never be properly set in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that affects the hip and breasts from behind is caused by a push or pull of hands and is treated elsewhere; treat it until it heals.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing process, the limb develops cracks and moves slowly, the patient should bathe frequently until these cracks are alleviated and return to their original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of shoulder dislocation:
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the shoulder joint can be dislocated partially and returns partially; if it is completely dislocated, especially in front and back, and the dislocation is not corrected because it is visible and felt well; it dislocates according to each person's build.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick man's wound with the healthy one, you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is dislocated, and he cannot bend his arm or reach his shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must reset it before any abscesses form, because if an abscess forms, it will be difficult to reset; and perhaps it cannot be fully reset, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, causes greater pain, and in some cases, leads to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	The restoration process is as follows: when it can be reset, extend their arm with both your hands; have their arms spread out, and place your hands around the affected area from above and below, pushing the joint back into its socket or towards the root of the palm until it returns to its original position.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it occurs when one doubles over their hand to their hand, and it strains the root of the palm where it is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	If it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; those who assist should stretch the arm and bend it with two hands so that there is no movement during the extension; then turn the arm from side to side, having wrapped a long and wide double cloth around it beforehand; when you have aligned the joint with their hand, anoint it with oil to soften the joint, then manipulate the joint firmly until it returns; once it is in place, apply dry plaster with egg white on top, straining it tightly, and fasten the arm to the patient's neck for a few days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in place, untie the bandage and leave it; but if you see that the joint does not hold well, redo the poultice and the bandage, and leave it like this for a few days until it is securely set; then untie it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels tenderness after the joint is reset, and it changes, bathe him and gently rub the area until it becomes soothing; or apply a layer of fatty sheep's wool to the joint, then leave it for one day and night, then remove it, and place him in a bath; once he sweats, gently massage his joints, then reapply the wool, and put him back into the bath; do this twice or three times until it is healed. If you can see any white fatty tissue, apply warm beef tallow with butter to the strain above it will return to its normal position
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The wrist is dislocated and its return is light, more so than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be reset immediately when dislocated, unless the place is swollen or an abscess forms there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the method of resetting is that you place the affected hand on a table, and have the assistants stretch out the hand, and adjust it so that they put their palm over the apparent joint, and push until it returns. However, one must ensure it is properly aligned; therefore, have the patient place the back of their hand on a table for extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, have the patient place the back of their hand on the table and let the assistants put their hand over the apparent joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that is good; if not, apply a strain of emollient plasters to soothe hot abscesses, and leave them be without reapplication.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you are unable to put it back in place after some days, the joint remains deformed; this causes no harm to the patient as long as the hand is relaxed, and unable to grasp anything at all: then know that the nerves or arteries have been cut, so there is nothing else to be tightened except by cauterization near the site, perhaps even nothing else will help.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, apply the plaster we mentioned earlier, then strain it and leave for five days, then release the strain and leave as is.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if they cannot move it properly, and there is any tear or injury, then apply a compress of warm water, and rub until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	On the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on each side, sometimes at the back of the palm or on the palm itself; then stretch the finger, and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns to its place, then hold the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is disjoined; leave it for two days, and then put it even that day; at night bind it as we have said, and in the morning unbind it, and make it move, and re-bind it at night; do this frequently until it becomes straight again, and do likewise if it is dislocated on the palm of the hand, doing what you did before until it is healed; and do the same when it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Of dislocation of the spine from the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine from the back or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no cure, as death quickly takes the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the patient involuntarily releases urine, cannot control it, and often has weakness in certain limbs, such as both thighs or both arms or one. And sometimes the spine twists into four parts; this twisting towards the back is called "gilbositez": the cure for this is to reverse it if it came about in childhood: there is no cure nor healing from this condition.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes about due to falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of cure were longwinded, and not very beneficial; but I have made them shorter according to my understanding, and have fashioned instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the hunchback condition affecting the lower back, no one is aware of it beforehand; and likewise for those directly affected on both sides, you cannot treat with force unless it comes to the back, as I have said; so that the patient should be stretched out face down onto an even surface without bruising themselves, then fix a poker into the ground at the head firmly and another between the feet, bind a rope over the hips of the patient, and another around the waist, knees, and ankles; two assistants should hold these ropes, one by the head, and the other by the feet, in line with each of the pokers; and let them be well secured, as we have said for the pokers, and let the healer place their palms on the spine firmly until it regains its shape.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return to its place with this treatment, take a board of three arm lengths long, and fix it under the wall, and let the patient be on their side, then push the head of the board underneath the wall, next place the middle of the board onto the spine; have the physicians put their feet on the other end of the board, and press hard until it returns to its place; if you wish, do it with the turner's tool that turns by hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	Insert two posts at the patient's head, one arm length apart, and place two more towards their feet with the same distance between them; leave a palm-length space in between each post from top to bottom; make a hole in each post for the turner's tool to fit through, and ensure the posts are firmly embedded into the ground so they do not move; between each pair of these posts, insert another single turning post, upon which the ropes will be wound; this turning post should have two small posts attached that are one palm-length long in order to wind the turner's tool around them; then tie one rope from the turning post by the patient's head and attach it at the other end to the second turning post near their feet, while another rope is tied on the opposite side of each respective turning post so they meet in the middle; have each minister rotate his own turner as far as the rope will allow them to and the master should adjust the spine accordingly as we mentioned before.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	When it is equal, apply a drying poultice with plenty of egg, then the pads, and an iron rod three palms long to clean the place of curvature and the part of the spine which is healthy, then tie it up as we said above, and let the patient feed on subtle nourishment until he is healed; and if anything happens at the end of healing, one must administer softening and soothing medicines with a handle that I mentioned before, and sometimes a piece of lead is administered or something similar appears behind the vertebra in the back, and they think it is dislocation but this comes from an emergence of bone so there should be no presumption: perhaps it will bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Hip Dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the recognition of its dislocation is as follows: when you join the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the diseased knee appears more prominent than the healthy one; the patient cannot bend their knee fully to the ground; and there is an inflamed hot abscess nearby, due to which the head of the thighbone has come loose.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes naturally is as follows: these accidents are contrary to those mentioned before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of him to whom it happens in advance is as follows: he stretches his leg well according to its length; however, he cannot bend his knee without pain and if one makes him walk, he cannot go forward but only backward, retains his urine, swells up with anger, and when he defecates, he sits on his heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of one who has dislocated behind them are such that they cannot straighten their knee or bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, with a softened groin, and the head of the femur is in place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	We treat this type of dislocation by resetting it if the dislocation is old and has remained in its displaced position, following its natural shape, with no treatment needed; there should be no presumption on our part.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for the one with a fresh dislocation, which can be of four types, hasten to reposition the joint, stretching it both inside and outside, and moving it right and left; perhaps it will return, and no other treatment is necessary.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, you must prepare a strong assistant, and they should firmly hold the leg with two hands, or use a strap tied above the knee; another assistant places their hand under his armpits, then tightly binds his thigh with a rope; another holds the head of the rope; all extend upwards and downwards at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground together, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common for four similar cases, and if the dislocation has been corrected, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, you must treat it in the same way when dislocations are inward, you should lay the patient on their healthy side, then place the strap at the root of the thigh and below the hip joint, then extend the strap upwards towards the hip joint and inguinal ligament; another assistant takes his arms and embraces the thick part of the affected thigh, stretching it outwards strongly: this will return it to its place now; and this type of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot secure it in this manner as we have said, then you must bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft bandage above the heels and around the knees; let the diseased leg be extended twice as much as the other one; then suspend him from the head of a pole so that he is hanging about two arms' length above the ground. Then instruct your assistant to embrace the head of the thigh, while another attendant hangs with the patient and firmly embraces his thigh because now the joint returns hurriedly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is on the outside, let the patient lie as we have said before in the case of one with curvature (gilbositeit), bind the bandage tightly around the diseased leg and also above the feet; then place two rods, one at the head and another at the feet, then insert a rod between the thighs of the patient into the gap; have moistened cloths planted all around so that it does not hurt the patient, then stretch each minister towards him, and let the surgeon put his hand in an equal position to the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place it on a flat surface, i.e., a table, and press it as we have described for the treatment of clubfoot, and lay the patient on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And for anterior dislocations, you must extend the affected leg gently according to what I've said earlier; place your weight on top of their injured limb and press with the other hand, extending it downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	If the dislocation is posterior, you must not extend or lift the affected limb off the ground; instead, it should be positioned as if the hip was dislocated backwards, similar to what we've discussed about positioning for double-hip dislocations; they should be on their face with an extended strap as described earlier, and you should press against the joint on a table. It is ready when the patient can extend both legs evenly, at which point you align the thighs and apply the plaster cast along with tight bandages to prevent movement in the hip, resting for 3-4 days before unbinding them and applying more plaster; if they remain even, then rebinding as described earlier for another three days is sufficient. After this period, undo the bindings and allow gentle movement until their limbs regain strength.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knees are dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward and outward, and backward; it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the sign of this is that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the thigh, and if it does not reach the thigh, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration for all these cases is that you make the patient sit upright, and stretch out their leg if they can, and place your back on their face, and put their foot on your feet; then take their knee in your palms, and push between your two hands, then bend the two sides of the knee sharply; and other assistants should stretch their foot until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it lightly touches their leg to their thigh; and apply a plaster cast, and make the leg touch the thigh, and bind them together firmly for three or four days, then release it; and do not let the patient walk, until the limb has regained strength.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not broken, apply strong traction as we have mentioned in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	Of the dislocation of the heel,
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes bruised, and sometimes completely dislocated, both internally and externally.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the sign of this is that the ankle is swollen and more prominent where it is dislocated; the reduction should be gentle, and one must gently extend it with their hands when only bruised.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated, you should make the patient sit upright and have one minister hold them except for their leg above the ankle; then pull the foot towards yourself with your right hand and then twice with your left hand, then extend upwards and firmly push the foot upwards; do this twice as we have said, pushing and pulling on the foot; if it returns, that is good; but if not, repeat the process because it will return; and if it cannot be returned in this way, then make the patient lie down on their back on the ground, and firmly stick one pole into the earth between their thighs, tying cloth around it so as to avoid hurting the patient; then have one minister hold the thigh while another extends the foot with their hands or a rope tied above the ankle; then extend equally with both ministers, and let the pole be close by between the patient's thighs in order to brace the patient when extending; then place the doctors equally on either side of the dislocation with their hands, and have one other minister hold the healthy leg underneath, and the dislocation will quickly return.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is at the point, place the plaster and swabs on top, apply force, and bind the foot to the leg, securing the nerves above the ankle from behind, ensuring the bindings are not too tight; leave it for two or three days, if the binding loosens, tighten it again; then release the bindings on the third or fourth day, forbidding the patient from walking for four days; if they walk before this period ends, it is not safe as there is a risk of further dislocation.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If pus forms in the abscess, you must soothe it as we have said elsewhere until it is healed.
des dois	twice
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the shoulder is dislocated, it should be gently stretched without strain, which is a simple matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any nut of your back from your foot, you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a straight table, and place your foot on what appears to be these joints, then press hard with your foot until it returns; when it is equalized, and nothing seems wrong, put under the sole of the foot a two-legged table, then strain it strongly, and leave it three days, then release it; and let him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	For wounds and dislocations together, you must first prepare the cautery of fire and use coals or stones to burn them red-hot; then take wax, pitch, rosin, fat, and oil, mixing all five substances. Take two small pieces of cloth, rub them with hog lard, spread the mixture on one side, and place it where you see that there is a dislocation. Let him rest for some time until the swelling goes down; then take some fine linen, soak it in water, and bind around his limb from the head to the foot of the member. Leave it bound tightly and let him sit still like this until the wound heals completely, or nearly so, if necessary.
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation and one wants to restore it, often the patient dies: so do not be presumptuous in treatment if you are not wise in this art or experienced, nor tardy, nor uncompassionate; first use cooling remedies for the abscess, leaving the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of health; but when you have seen a chance at recovery, move the limb back into place now before any hot abscesses appear and develop it; and once the limb is back where it should be then give him warm soothing things to treat the swelling of his wounds and cure the wound with drying ointments. If there are broken bits of bone left in the joint that dislocation has knocked apart, remove them and do as we have said for simple diseases. Be mindful always of fear, which I have mentioned; because it is important how you proceed according to your creator's design, preserving both your soul and body.
Amen	Amen
