O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	 "Dear friends, having completed this book which is the foundation of medicine and surgery, I have come to its conclusion after discussing it in detail with my explanations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	 "And I realized that the best way to complete this book is by introducing 'surgery,' which comes from the same Latin root as my previous explanation.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	 "And because of that, the art of surgery is particularly important in our region and has been highly valued over time due to its importance for science and progress.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	 "And from that comes the realization of error and the fear, which leads people to close off their thoughts and align themselves with the science.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	 I believe you meant "I seem to recall that this medical treatise follows a format of exposition, explanation and abbreviation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	 And will include examples of the various procedures involved in this field with a description and preparations for each one, as required by the medical treatise's format.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	 And because of what we have experienced no great doctors of hands are found in our time
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	 And he who undertakes the science of anatomy should know how to distinguish between different parts and joints and separations thereof, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and brain cells, as well as their number and manner of motion and rest; so that they can be distinguished from one another.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	 And because of this, we must ensure that Ypocrates is not only with water but also with oil and vinegar.
et meismement en l’art de main.	 Furthermore in the art of healing.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	 In the introduction to this book we say that nothing is written unless it's necessary and if there are any mistakes or errors in what has been said.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	 And that I have seen many people who become involved with this field and then abandon it, either from lack of knowledge or fear of the unknown experimentation required to learn more about it.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	 "If a man penetrates the anus with his penis or from anal intercourse, he will pierce through to the artery.
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	 "As for women who choke on death between their hands,
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	 "And there is another matter where you treat an abscess of the eye and it is large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	 "If he takes a part from his bladder with him, then three times he dies.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	 "And I have mentioned above the treatment of it; and mention its position in relation to other wounds, and how large it was.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	 "And there is another matter where you treat the foot fracture and with a breezeur or wound;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	 "And the matter of ignorance holds the fracture steady against the wound and does not let go to the end.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	 "They command that he do not remove it until his own will allows him to do so;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	 "And they await until the leg is all healed and the pain is gone, and then come for death.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	 I am coming to take him away, quickly.
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	 When dislocated, it was quiet and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	 But every vein corrupted or member could not be healed;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	 And as long as the corruption was in a member, it would continue to spread through all members.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	 And then there's another remedy which would burn away the abscess and inflamed with the heat of its own nature.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	 However, when it is pure melancholic humor (a type of toxic humors), only touching with iron can restore what has been corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	 In order for you to understand that the fire cautery is divided into two parts
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	 And it was necessary to know which part of them had more severe conditions.
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	 I will show you in this book where there is doubt and fear.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	 It was necessary to hold the eye steady so that it could not talk badly about us.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	 If you take your arms in custody and tie them gently but firmly, and use the best way that by God's grace you come to healing and may live.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	 Let the blisters of concern heal.
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 Let your doubts and fears be at an end; if so you may come to the other world with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	 He has lost his mind
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 Do not take ill treatment of any disease; for this will be no good
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 I have completed the third chapter of this treatise.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	 The first chapters deal with fire cauteries and the remedies against them. And in these chapters are found remedies for other sores.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	 In all these chapters are found remedies for burns and wounds, and everything else that is necessary in their use.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	 The second chapters deal with cutting off, piercing, and the treatment of wounds, and extractions from arrows, and similar things;
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	 And in these chapters are found remedies for treating sores, and extractions of stones, and similar things.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	 The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and sprains, and similar things.
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	 And order the limbs to be straight, and arrange the body's parts.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	 And so that we remember of old, it is important to assess the quality and quantity of all healing treatments.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	 I say that the quality of the help, and also its abundance, is longer words and more subtle knowledge, and it responds to inquiries.
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	 And when they speak further on the subject, and agree with each other's ideas.
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	 I am bored by their talk for too long.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	 I say that the fire cure should be used universally on whatever matter there is; as it does apply to all things:.
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	 It is about knowing how to use heat for treatment, and dryness for treatment.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	 In using both hot and dry dressings together they found none of them helped much, and they said the fire cure is a great aid:.
et li autre dirent le contraire:	 and they said otherwise:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	 That cautery is not worth doing if it comes from fire or heat.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	 Because when the body is hot and you must treat a hot disease with heat, not with cold water.
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	 And that which promotes the opposite of cautery does great good to a warm, dry illness coming from inside the body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	 When you bring the fire to one's skin and moisture in contact with it, the fire becomes extinguished.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	 I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	 But I have never found any evidence to support my experiments.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	 And any way you can use to treat the patient if it has been proven effective by experience and with good intentions for the art of cautery, knowledge of the different types of skin, the disposition and cause of diseases, and the remedies and causes of those wounds.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	 With other diseases we have no fear but for cold and wet illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	 And they had been arranged and aligned with the fire treatment.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	 And note that if the fire cure is used in secret treatments, it will be more effective than using it with medications.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	 Its effects are simple and only occur on the member that is being burned, and do not affect any other part of the body.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	 The fiery medicines come from different parts of the body to heal the member of pain or disease.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	 And by chance occurs a dislocation
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 The joints because of their height and the goodness of their substance do not like this if there is excess
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	 And that is why I was able to discover it through experimentation and the length of time and study that I put into art, and also by observing nature.
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	 and for the length of my discourse I apologize, because it displeases me to reveal what is hidden or fire, and also quality of the earth, as it brings about diseases in the body, just as the philosopher says when he demonstrates.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	 And receive in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	 And see you that they must make the cauterings
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	 I say that cautery is acceptable for all types, because those who are recommended by the cautery's aid.
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	 And furthermore it is known that cauterization should be used for necessary pains and haste, so as to not treat larger wounds on the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	 And do not think of anything, dear friend, as long as you follow what I say.
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	 because the disease that is treated with fire does not have any cure
et il le dient ensi;	 and it says to leave it alone;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	 but it is not necessary to do so if the patient does not need them and they can harm the complexion of the patient and dry out their humors that cause pain, and makes medicines for its immediate relief and for preserving its health and beauty.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	 And any disease can happen once as long as the complexion is affected by the ailment, or as long as it does not cure itself and its beauty.
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	 and these are collected by acquiring food or similar things, so if you do not administer the fire cure when there is too much fatness or moisture, as long as the fire cures does not reduce the pain, wounds, and similar things, and the pain returns no more.
mais ce avient poc.	 But that happens here
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	 And many people do not listen because the treatments are called "medicine" and they see
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	 But they do not believe that treatments are worth anything after "medicine," but their intentions are false, and they call the doctors of medicine because when we administer our methods for curing any disease, they are not worth it, from the moment we administer our cure, until it is applied
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	 "Even though it is understood that cautery is for medical purposes, many people still do not agree with the intention of those who practice it.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	 The previous one said that the cure was more effective than any other method of healing, and they did not say what qualities it possessed or its high quality substance.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	 They said that the cure was not harmful, but it is not seen as effective because I have tried and found that it is ineffective in any case.
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	 The gold cure was worth using if they said so.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	 "When you heat any metal object," it does not indicate how hot the metal is becoming and stops when cooled off.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	 if heated too much
si font au feu;	 if burned.
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	 and the fire is no longer available.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	 And because of this, we use our fire cure to treat our wounds.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	 You have ordered the execution of this chapter for such reasons that it is easier to be found by others.
dou cautere olivaire	 olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	 Olive oil cautery is used in hot and cold weather, as with the cause of a disease called 'soda', and due to many humors arising from two main causes: wetness and dryness. And it leads to various ailments like dense pain and throat pain, among others
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	 The form of the fire cautery is that the hairs are burned off by a soluble ointment applied three or four times, depending on how often it hurts and the strength of the pain.
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	 And then apply the same cure again.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	 Then place it between your hands and let them sit still.
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	 After placing the root of his palm on the base of his nose in between its two eyes
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	 And when you hold your hands steady if the fire cautery called 'olive', which is its form.
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	 And let your hand grow cold and cruel little by little.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	 After making it numb, gently release the limb you see in small pieces
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	 If you don't feel pain when applying the fire cautery as I have told you to do,
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	 After a short while, let it rest gently and make it numb, then apply the fire cautery to the affected area.
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	 Then take away the moist with towels.
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 And let it burn until it is white (i.e., roasted).
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the wound known as tetrafarmacien, as long as he remains sane
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	 And they realized that when a person applies more ointment to the wound, it becomes more inflamed.
et por ce si aide mues.	 And for this reason he moves.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	 And say that one must be so careful with the cautery that some part of the bone may be broken, and then proceed to make a small cut into it where it is broken
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	 And the second is to apply it gently as much as possible on and around the affected area, and press hard enough that you remove some of the phlegm from the bone just like women use when they put a poultice in their ear because this helps bring out the humors.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	 And for the third, apply it gently and firmly to the wound as much as possible, so that it can be applied for an extended period of time.
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	 After applying it, you should clean and bandage it properly.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	 And these two methods of cauterization seem to be the best way to do everything in all cases, except for those who have fear as an option.
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	 I think it's important to let go and let nature take its course.
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	 because the dislocated joint is already weakened by continuous natural treatments, as we experience with other joints;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	 And I shall serve you with a cure that is gentle and mild for my sake, and to which all members of the body shall be subject.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	 "The pain of the first degree.
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	 When all the symptoms of chronic pain are severe and prolonged, you should use creams and pills that contain capsaicin, which is known for its pain relief properties.
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	 And after applying the cure as mentioned above, it will be effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	 When a joint dislocation occurs due to its strong nature and is not too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	 After applying the cure as mentioned earlier, you should apply it sparingly.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	 After applying the cure to the joint at its place as mentioned earlier, you should apply it using a tool called a mallet.
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	 and then we put it in a container with ventilation.
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	 And hold tightly to your hand if you feel a jolt when it comes.
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	 The fire cautery has greater pain than any other treatment and I will speak more about that later
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	 And it is advisable to have the corners of the fire cautery be less sharp than those used for cutting into major vessels, and this is how
dou cautere dou chief	 "Fire cautery
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	 When part of the main artery becomes painful and is extended with illness, and dislocations are purged through various medications, I have already mentioned in dividing diseases, everything else does not matter.
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	 Without knowing the specific procedures of how to perform it, we must know that medical advice and treatment are crucial.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	 The medical cautery advice is that if you need a vein to be cut open and the arteries or veins near it are also to be cut, then fasten the eye so that the pain remains in place until healing occurs in such a manner that you may repair the incision without damage to the flesh.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	 And when it is reset if the tie and restraint are done well, let it rest for twelve hours.
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	 Then apply a poultice of honey and vinegar twice or three times a day, and leave the wound open for two or three days.
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	 Apply it to the chest as much as possible, until breathing stops.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 After the incision has healed completely;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	 and if you see anything of any other remedies that I have written or tried treating with the burning remedies.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 Fire cautery must follow this procedure
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 In case of fire cautery, do it like this:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	 And call 'close' for when the head is cut in such a way that it forms into a hood or has an appearance of being a hood.
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	 And place it on the sore arm and hold tight and gently pull off a little bit at a time until you feel that the wound is completely cleaned.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	 And gently tell them not to worry too much because it will subside and recover abundantly
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	 After washing with warm water and salt solution, then rub the wound three times
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then apply a moist compress, and continue to clean the wound until it is dry
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	 And cauterize this ulcer with the cautery known as "cultella," at its tip, and hold it so that you do not puncture the artery in this area.
de emigraine	 Of the injury
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	 When you have cured the ulcer as we described in earlier paragraphs and do not harm it further, then make sure to remove the cautery known as "cultella" when it is dry.
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	 And gently rub the wound with a line of half an inch twice and hold your hand once, and make sure not to touch or damage the artery and cause any harm to it.
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	 Hold your breath when you speak, and make sure your nerves do not twitch or spasm in any way, and be cautious of the artery as it is opened, or if something terrible happens.
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	 Let out a sigh/a deep breath
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	 I will tell you how to treat the artery when it is cut open, and I will show you where it is located in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 If the cautery does not help with the disease, and if it causes pain to the patient, use it in the way we have suggested, and treat the wound as long as it is still healing.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	 And if you see that the cautery I have suggested for extracting an artery is not effective or if it causes pain to the patient, use another kind of cautery with two handles.
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	 And if you wish for better relief
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	 Of the pain from the ears of frostbite
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	 When the ear experiences pain from frostbite, and it is treated with solutions and other treatments as we have mentioned in this section, the pain does not cease until the cautery that has been applied is called "ice.
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	 After puncturing both ears with the lancet, put a small amount of it into each ear and gently twist towards its root.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	 And apply this treatment to both ears
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After applying the treatment until it is cured.
de la torture de la bouche	 Of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	 Torture that must be treated with fire should never be attempted when blood moves rapidly, as we have stated in the discussion of diseases.
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	 and not to perform any cautery that comes from wet or dampness.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	 When you cure this kind of torture that comes from the ears and throat and gagging, it does not work, therefore, if necessary, cauterize one vein.
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	 One into the root of the ear and another a little further back near the temple, and one behind the lobe of each.
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	 And instruct the patient to apply the cautery to the healthy part of their body, and to do so on a spot near each ear's corner, as well as another one in between the eyebrows.
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	 And let it burn for as long as possible without causing pain or damage.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 This is the shape of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	 And it resembles a surgical incision that we have seen before, but it is slightly more subtle and should be made with the cautery being slightly larger.
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the left arm as I mentioned earlier, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	 When a stroke occurs and you treat it as we have mentioned earlier, there is no benefit, and the limbs do not recover, unless you apply four cauteries.
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	 Apply the cautery to both ears and to the big ear, as well as on a spot called "the bridge" where we mentioned earlier, and then apply one more cautery on the bottom of the stomach.
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	 And then fix as you have said before.
de litargie	 Litargy refers to a disease characterized by numbness
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	 This ailment is to be treated with large and varied pills,
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	 after treating the main abscess thoroughly, then apply a plaster to cover up its exit wound which is written or treated with plasters;
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	 And this is how to cauterize it.
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	 if you do as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	 If sane at first sight, good then;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	 and if it is not sane at first sight, burn the main abscess with a large cautery after applying one small one between two larger ones.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	 and treat it like all the others, and if you see an abscess spreading, then burn it right away;
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and when the second one is done with its wound, hold onto the third one tightly while treating as long as he/she remains sane.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	 And if you say "olive", as I have just said,
de la froidor dou chief	 from the cold of the chief
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	 It is important to ensure that the joint moves freely and as we have previously mentioned;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	 After releasing the shoulder bone, then apply the fire therapy to release the shoulder joint and its tendons behind it and in between each rib;
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	 And if you continue with more force and the muscles are more tense and the pain is worse, then apply four fire therapies between each rib.
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	 Let it continue until the shoulder blade rises further on its own, and gently hold your hand;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	 After the therapy is complete, then apply the fire therapy as mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	 eyebrow
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	 Eyelashes should not be shaved until they are completely healed, and it is advisable to first moisturize the area around them before any other treatments mentioned in this chapter as they tend to be quite sensitive after surgery.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	 And if this causes pain that cannot be endured, then let him gargle and chew meat with bones to soothe the throat.
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	 After removing the outer layer of skin, we will apply the fire cautery as previously instructed, and then apply it to the veins.
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 And the eyelids stay open and relaxed, as instructed to those who have paralysis or softening of the face, under both arms, and so apply the olive oil with a cloth following the manner I mentioned.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	 If the eyelashes are still sensitive after all treatments, then apply a gentle cure as mentioned before.
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	 When the causes of melancholia are excessive fluids or swelling and become very thick, then apply treatments that are similar to those mentioned for paralysis as they may be helpful in this case as well.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	 And because of melancholy they lose the appetite for food and drink, unless their veins are opened so that they can feel something through them
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	 After removing the outer layer of skin
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	 after applying a thin coating as smooth as possible to cover it completely so that they are well covered.
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	 And the eyelids tightly closed and well maintained in all ways.
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	 After presenting it as smooth as possible to be cleaned thoroughly with an old cloth.
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	 And the forehead should be heated gently so that they do not feel any pain when applied.
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	 After viewing the circle from above, let it cool down.
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And do this to each vein once every week with another application of heat, as long as he is healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 Or if you see that the cautery is not working any longer, perform it anyways to ensure its effectiveness.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	 This manner of cautery affects the brain greatly;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 And then applies butter and grease on the skin, in linen;
de l’awe des eulz	 "Of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	 When the eye first moves due to signs that I mentioned in the previous paragraph, and it begins to bleed profusely, causing great damage, and if you fail many times, then they die
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	 After he commands to view his forehead again, and does a second cautery on the forehead, and performs another cautery at both temples so that the eyes become fixed in one or the other direction.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	 And treat all the cauteries on veins and arteries that are close to the forehead, and apply them at one end of each temple.
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	 And be cautious with the bleeding, if you see too much blood to stop it immediately because your time is short.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	 And I will teach you how to extract arteries, and make an incision into the vein so that you can hold it steady.
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	 And no matter where they are located
dou cors des larmes	 two tears of blood
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	 When the veins' tears have become old and accustomed to being under the skin, or if you find that they are close to arteries that appear to be beneath the surface.
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	 And one sees that it is a frost-induced fluid accumulation that follows the advice given at the beginning of this chapter.
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	 I will teach you how to do the forehead, and both temples, and two ears.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	 And if there is another one nearby as well, it should be cauterized at the very base of the scalp to every small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	 two tears from the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	 When you follow the advice given in that chapter and it doesn't do any good, then add a third bleed by making incisions.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	 After removing the head, perform a fire cautery over the entire surface.
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	 Perform two cauteries referred to as "clavili" on each of the two arms close together near where they meet.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	 Make sure you do not cut into an artery during this process.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	 "The procedure called 'fire cautery':
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the paper of the oil is softened by illness and moisture, but still must be cauterized with the procedure called 'hair removal':
de coi ci est li forme:	 The procedure
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	 If you perform the two clavili cauteries in exactly the same way that the arrows are,
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 do not let go of your hand until there is no third part of paper left in exactly the same way I said before.
dou poil qui point l’oil	 with hair
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	 There is never a time when the hairs of the eyebrows are shaved off and prick at the eye, or perform the two methods for cauterization.
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	 This is knowledge from burning practices, not medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	 The fire cautery instructs the patient to let their hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	 "For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	 "When the hairs have grown and are even in thickness, then shave the patient's skin close to the hair growth.
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	 "After shaving the eyebrows a shape that is as smooth as possible or close to it with fine strokes of the blade.
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 "Then apply a powder made from soot and pitch on the forehead and eyebrows to conceal it; then cleanse the fire scar as best you can.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	 "After cauterizing the face that has been burned slowly and repeatedly over time to its extent; then ensure that all the wounds are in order.
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	 "And the signs of healthiness on the forehead are to shave the eyebrows high and pointing towards the head.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 "And after washing your hands, let them stand for three quarters of an hour.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "After the treatment is complete when it's safe to do so.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	 "And after that comes the hair and paper becomes softened until you reapply the fire on the affected area if it's your first time doing so.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	 "The hairs are burned off if the paper is light enough on its own and even; and do not prick at their roots.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	 "The burning cautery is that you instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and even, then make a strip of paper into the shape of a shield.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	 "Then take French soap and live chalk, from one corner to another. Break it well;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	 And if it does not freeze then in astonish the shape that you have made such as a crooked figure and put on paper these eyes.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	 The illness will remain only if one is overcome with it, or the disease will be in abeyance otherwise.
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	 And put on a cloth moistened with oil to prevent the fire from spreading further.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	 And the dislocated shoulder should be in its place and have two mainstays set into it for the medicine to hold on tightly so that it does not move any more after the fire has been applied, as the pain from the fire will also cause further movement of the dislocated joint like with fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	 "After doing this for a long time, you will know what I mean.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	 And when the medication has been applied and you loosen the band as well, then you see the paper lifted in a way that it was lifted by either fire restraint or cut.
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 If it is done properly
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	 If you do not, if you continue with your left or right leg movements without relief, as long as your wounds are clean and your eyes hold still.
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 As long as your arms are covered with a cloth and you continue moving them, after curing the left ear injury which is known as "dizziness" and others, as long as it remains steady.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 "It is better to apply the remedy often with great diligence, so that it does not touch any of the wounds.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	 And if the paper becomes thin after that, and the hairs prick in oil, then continue with the treatment of the left one which was moistened properly, just like you did before.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 As long as it remains steady.
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 It is the form of relief that follows medicine:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	 And there are many different ways to do it depending on your constraints.
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	 It is not necessarily the right way for that which has been taught in this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	 "The treatment of fistula by cautery.
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	 When treating a fistula as we have described in the previous paragraph and your treatments are not benefiting you, then it is advisable to apply cautery according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	 Instruct the patient to put his head on a pillow.
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	 And keep your hands steady and do not move or disturb his head.
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	 After wiping the forehead with a warm cloth, apply it to the eye in small droplets of liquid.
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	 After the fire cautery is complete:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	 and put a bandage on his head if it forms an oval shape so that he can have the cautery.
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	 If you see one part of his head is smaller than the other, and if it's like a tent:
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	 But whichever bandage you choose should be in place for your entire treatment session.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	 After the fistula is closed and treated with a poultice:
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	 then bind it firmly to prevent any leakage.
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	 After applying the cautery ointment, keep your hand on it until the numbness wears off.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	 And put the cautery on fat from the body and burn
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 At the beginning of the cautery procedure, it is well
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	 If not, if you continue to use it after one more time, then leave it off for 3 days.
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	 After applying cotton wool soaked in vinegar to the burn, apply a corrosive medication as long as it is painful, and let pass 3 days until it stops being sore.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 And then you should follow up on this by consulting your doctor.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 It is a manner of fistula cautery that none of the ancients knew.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	 If there is a fistula and you open it up.
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 After applying the burn dressing of which kind?
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	 And how much quantity of it do you use?
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	 And hold your hand or firmly grasp it so it does not move at all.
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	 And make sure to wet the arm with lukewarm water and wipe off any excess.
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	 If a fistula occurs, take care of the healthy surrounding skin.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 "And when it is cured as we have said, then everything will work out.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 "If that's not the case, if it is necessary to administer poison and bring the fistula back into the neck according to what is best for a healthy body.
des crevaices en levres	 "The veins have been cut.
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	 "Twice as many veins are cut when the hairs are long, and especially in young people.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	 "When you have cured these veins as we have said by making incisions, and it doesn't benefit them, then apply a gentle cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	 And hold tightly until it is completely healed as instructed by your doctor.
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the sore, make sure it has fully healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	 "Of the abscess of the eye.
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	 When pulling out of the root or vein, or the tooth, or any other part of the body after injury and infection occurs, it becomes a fistula.
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	 You treat them as described in our previous response, making sure to follow all instructions closely.
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	 Unless instructed otherwise by your doctor regarding the specific treatment of the fistula.
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	 After making an incision in the fistula, hold your hand steady until it stops flowing.
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And after that, when you've done what we've told you in the previous treatment, as long as he is calm;
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	 And if he calms down quickly.
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	 But if not, then you should check the shoulder and correct any misalignment that is found in his treatise.
dou movement des dens	 The limb moves out of position
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	 When joints become relaxed due to moisture and move, you treat them with medicine as necessary but do not hold the arm down on a pillow.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	 After applying the cautery that comes after, you must apply it in such a way as to place a bandage on his finger.
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	 And hold the cautery tightly while keeping your hand steady so that the heat from the burn does not spread to the fingers.
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	 After gently holding on to your arm, apply the fire cautery according to your will.
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	 After loosening his jaw muscles and applying a poultice for an hour or two
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	 In that manner you have tied the moving gums and held them in place, their mouths were stopped from producing saliva.
de la dolor des dens	 The pain of the limbs
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	 When pain comes from coldness, either it is from the cold itself or its source, and treatments by medicines are not effective; then use the fire cautery in this manner
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	 burn/fire cautery
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	 A barber's cautery is when you need to remove hair from a blade or arrow, and the end of it in a steel or iron cutting tool;
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	 After wrapping cotton around and placing it at the point of a needle, making sure that it is hot enough to cause pain until it is cooled down.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	 And as soon as its virtue begins to weaken at the base of the tooth, if you see that it is becoming dull and cotton burns, and put on iron filings until they burn out equally;
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	 The fire cautery assembly is such that if you touch it with fire or rain, and so long as the flames do not go out at the base of the bad hair,
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	 After applying the fire cautery, make sure to rinse it off after a while and hold it against your teeth and put it in your hand as long as you are using it.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 Do this carefully because the pain will be severe now or tomorrow.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	 And make sure to pull your lips back and spit out any burning material immediately after applying the fire cautery.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 This is how you use the fire cautery
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	 And do with it what you want and according to your ability.
et c’est li forme de la caine:	 This is how the cane works:
des scrophules	 scalp
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	 When the scrophules are cold and wet, they become thirsty for digestion by medicines. After applying the fire cautery to one part of them, wait until it is done and then apply the fire cautery to another part.
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	 Once you have applied the cautery to the abscess once, it will remain as long as one continues applying it.
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	 If more caustic is used in proportion to the amount of the abscess, and allows three times after that.
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	 And it should be applied as long as there is bleeding.
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the wounds and ensuring they are healed completely.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The form of the cure
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	 When moisture weakens the veins due to cold weather, and especially when this is accompanied by a pale complexion, it should be first treated with topical solutions.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 After applying the caustic to the root of the throat and making sure not to come into contact with it while swallowing, do not drink anything for at least an hour.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	 After applying the second caustic to the elbow joint on top of the arm, and if it is called "clavicle", as we have seen the form
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And treat the left as you would have done when it is right.
de la toust	 from the chest
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	 "If the disease of the arm is cold and frostbitten, do not heat it too much, as that may cause further damage. It should be treated gently.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	 "And another cure for between two moles;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	 "The treatment to be called 'clavicle' as it is in front of us.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	 "And if you see one, treat it by puncturing the treatment called 'pimple' as that is in front of us.
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 "The pimples are just like this... or here.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After curing it as described above, apply the third cautery in this manner:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	 And for those who are using it more often, please do so with caution
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	 dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	 When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture and it cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	 "Afterwards, treat the moles on his back and side;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	 "After gently rubbing what is dense in the ears with your hands.
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	 And if you hold tightly to the fire cure when it is applied, then you should ensure that the connection remains unbroken so that its effect continues.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	 And cauterize long enough to burn through any flesh beneath it and make sure the fire burns across all the cuts.
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	 And for this fire cure with the third ember, there should be six cuts total made by the cautery.
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	 The nerves are treated with the subtlety of a tent and it is the third fire that is used for this purpose.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	 And no joint is ever dislocated on this arm.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	 After applying the cure, you must place bandages over the area.
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	 After letting the patient rest and ensuring their limbs are not tense for as long as they can be comfortably relaxed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 And if there is a dislocation of the shoulder, then it may be necessary to perform cupping on both shoulders together or at different times depending on which shoulder has been dislocated.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 The alignment is maintained, and the patient's moisture is kept under control, and their limbs are well-cared for.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When the stomach has brought coolness and moisture that is excessive on his complexion, it multiplies the chattering of him, and the accustomed ways of treatment he doesn't profit from anymore, then it is necessary to put a towel or cloth over his back, stretch out his legs and his hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	 After the third fire has been used to set all the cuts and the cautery eyelid is done, there should be space between each of the two cuts so that they are not joined together when they begin to heal.
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 "Make sure to follow these instructions for performing the fire cautery. Do not let the hairs grow short or uneven.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	 "If you are going to perform a gastric cautery in this manner:
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	 "if someone has fear of the cautery procedure, perform it by puncturing and holding steady at the stomach's base for a certain amount that you have determined.
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 "Then proceed to applying all the poins as they are called.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the treatment of the preceding ailment has been completed and is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	 "For the liver, there is pain from fruit and moisture and excess volume. As long as it remains in its natural state, it will expel any surplus.
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	 "And the hair is cured as we have described in sections and it will not benefit from being shaved over its hairline.
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	 "Sign the third poin in this form and fashion, with its quantity, on the liver. Treat it for any symptoms that may arise from consuming alcohol.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	 And say between a small fire and a large one
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	 And the smaller ones on both arms should be held as firmly as possible.
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	 Only let it go gently through the hair, and hold them tightly to his feet.
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	 If not possible, if he is still conscious, extend his legs, and lightly hold his head.
et c’est li forme:	 And that's the end of it
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	 And if you are skilled in the art of cautery, you should be gentle and hold him gently as he grows smaller, so that no harm is done to his neck.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 And if he does not see well because the sores are in place and low down by sight.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	 When you prick his liver, and find out whether it is soft or leathery
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	 "If a person is burned with fire, they will feel great pain.
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 "And if it's in the water, then there is no feeling of pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	 "When this remedy wants to see the eyes closed tightly;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 "And then close one eye when the other is being pricked by a needle, and then remove the fire from over the face so that it does not burn.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	 "Burn until the hairs are burned through, and every time there is a rupture, as long as it bleeds.
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	 "After this treatment for burns, follow any other treatment until it is healed;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 "And do not recommend this treatment for anyone who has not studied extensively in the art of medicine, as these diseases have never been cured.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 Certainly.
dou cautere de pleuresin	 fire cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	 The first one said that you must perform multiple cauterizations of the roots of the physician's vein.
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	 Take one root of a vein that is long enough to cover your finger tips and make it dry, thick, and as large in circumference as you can.
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	 And wrap it in oil and apply to the fire, cauterizing between the heel and toe, and performing cautery a short while later on the part that is next to the beard;
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	 And perform cautery between the fifth and sixth fingers, pulling it back slightly.
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	 And I perform cauterization on the nipple and another on the stomach, separating two spaces, and between these two fingers there is a cautery.
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	 Do not press too hard with your hand, as it causes injury when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	 "And they said that no one should use the fire cautery at all, except for removing hair and putting it between the lips until the abscess is healed.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And if there was pain like what we experienced in the previous sentence,
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 "In this case there is fear and many die, or fistulas come that cannot be healed.
de la mice	 of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	 "When treating the disease of the mouse from what we have mentioned as cures, and it does not benefit me, unless you use three different methods to cure that which is good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	 you do three or four incisions at various places along the length of the vein, according to its shape and the size of the incision in that place.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	 don't press your hand too firmly on all of it or put pressure against your own back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	 another way to do this is by using the technique we mentioned in the previous sentence for treating dislocations of the shoulder.
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 And gently apply the treatment to the part that moves around and has a lot of hair, or if it is on your back towards the front side; and apply the treatment according to its size, length, and location, so as to be able to see the area clearly when applying the fire cautery.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	 After holding their eyelids open as long as they can stay open on the other side, and then apply the cautery, and in a short while there will be two.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 And if you see that all the hairs are burned off with the cautery to the third eyelid,
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After the treatment when there is pus discharge and it must be known to apply another treatment immediately.
de ydropisie	 dislocation
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 Fire cautery is not advisable when using sharp objects; it should be done in the manner prescribed as "asclytes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	 When you treat them as we have described in the divisions, and your treatment does not profit, then it is advisable that you perform four cauteries at once on the back, behind the stomach, behind the liver, behind the gallbladder, behind the ribs, and behind the spine, and place there the needle.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 And then apply them well near to each eye.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	 After letting the cautery burn off the long hairs, do not leave the treatment of the eyelid after the cautery.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	 And healing will take place, and they will assemble with God's aid.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	 The form of the cautery for the belly or the collarbone as we have shown before.
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	 And it should be on the back if that is where it is located when you are facing forward.
de l’enfleure des piez	 Of the arrow wounds
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	 When the veins are inflamed in that area and they are covered with jaundice, it is recommended to cauterize between the auricular and ulnar points on the back.
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 And gently hold your hand while you perform the cautery so that it can turn properly.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 Do not enter too much force, or it will cause bleeding; and if there is bleeding, then cauterize in the following way
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	 After performing both legs' cauteries at their respective points of insertion.
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	 And if you are cauterizing both sides, one on the front and one on the back of each leg.
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	 Let the cauteries grow slowly so they can heal completely.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	 After completing all other treatments as described before.
de la menoison	 dew
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	 For the belly ache comes from cold or moisture as long as the stomach and digestive powers remain active, they cannot be cured by conventional treatments.
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	 You see the stomach ache radiating and intense pain, if you apply the fire cure to the stomach as prescribed here or to the stomach itself, apply it externally.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	 And also apply an external application of the fire cure in the small intestines and around the joints.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	 If you see abundant moisture and the patient is in pain, apply the fire blister to their finger, and also to both wrists and any other part of them, as treatment will be beneficial when it has little aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	 "for curing hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	 When the hemorrhoids are present and one or more, old and large, cold and damp, they will heal if you apply fire cures as we have suggested in previous sections.
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	 Apply the fire cure to both shoulders, one after another, holding them steady and slowly in a triangle shape, then apply it to the belly.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	 And if one thinks that their stomach is cold and the meat does not cook properly, then you see swelling of the vein on the stomach, unless the vein has already been mentioned before, also with the liver, and another on the sternum altogether.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 And let the cautery be maintained for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "After curing him as much as he can bear.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	 "of the charm which is called 'The Lul'.
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	 When you catch fire, if you extinguish the cauterization that seems necessary, and then apply it all over the affected area.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	 And I let my hand grow as long as it takes to cauterize new veins that have not yet developed, until they do develop.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	 Do this once or twice more, and if there is any swelling from the heat, then cauterize as quickly as we have mentioned.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	 After treatment of the affected wounds until they are healed.
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	 And if you apply a greater fire to the cautery, it will have more effect.
de plaie mal curee	 A poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	 If the patient cannot endure the fire, we will tell you about it in their next post.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 When there is any fistula present, and pain and moisture are prevalent throughout the wound, if you perform a thorough cleaning with a subtle solution, keep in mind that you should clean as thoroughly as possible for as long as it takes to heal completely.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	 After you have applied the cautery and it seems to be working, place a finger into the fistula according to how much force is needed for insertion. Continue applying pressure on the cautery as long as the pores that are inflamed and crusted remain firm, one, two or three times depending on the amount of swelling;
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 And watch your nerves when you do this, and avoid large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	 if the fistula is in the arm and to the intestine, be careful with these procedures, do not perform them without a nurse present;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	 after curing the sore as much as it is healed and the wounds are sealed up tight until they are completely healed.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	 "And if they do not heal properly, it is as though their bones are broken.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 And if one of these we have mentioned in the above sentence should happen to you.
de la maladie des reins	 Of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	 When the pain of fruit comes and great suffering, do not let it pass without applying a cautery on both sides at once to the fruit cautery that we have mentioned before.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	 And if you do not get enough help from one cautery, there will be three in a row, and they will make even more aid.
de la vessie	 Of bladder disease
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	 When the bladder is small and fragile of fruit and moisture, if it holds urine in it, then apply cautery to the part below the bladder. Where the hairs begin to prick at their base, and one on each side, and so there are two others where they do not come off with a single blow;
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	 And if you use a fire cure on your back, do not move it.
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	 Or should the shoulder be burned in accordance with the form described?
de la marris	 Of gout
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	 When the marrow is cold and damp, it cannot conceive or bear witness to its death.
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	 If they come, if there's great pain.
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	 When it is not convenient to do the third fire cure on the face as we have described for the veins, and the second fire cure on the back.
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	 Or should you burn your shoulder?
de la hainche	 of the arm
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	 When the moist external secretions come out of the mouth and this leads to its death, it is known that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together.
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	 And if you want to burn the hair on the back of the neck in one go, as with the fire cure similar to a circle and facing towards its front at that time when it's turned, so that the back is burned inside the circle.
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	 And if there are burns of such severity that they require cauterization to the stomach
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	 If there are burns of such severity that you need to apply a third degree burn treatment on the skin, and if they require similar treatments all over.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then treat it as soon as possible.
de la dolor de la hainche	 of the arm pain
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	 When pain comes from the bite of a snake, it is cold and wet, and the wounds are treated with what we have said in the division and the treatment is not worth much, and the disease is ancient.
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	 It's advisable to purge the large lumps of fat pills or other similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	 After applying the burn treatment.
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	 And if there are two methods for treating burns, it is recommended to use
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 It's important to know how to combine strong painkillers and burn treatments.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	 The fire cautery is performed in various ways as follows.
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	 The third type of fire cautery involves the application of triangular bandages in this shape and is done deeply and extensively to cover as much area as possible. It also includes olive-leaf bandages.
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 There should be no fire cautery performed in the vicinity of the jugular vein because it may cause four injuries to occur based on this shape.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	 If you observe that a fire cautery is being performed at or near the dislocation of the shoulder,
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	 in any manner where the circles cover all parts of the arm and the shoulder blades.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 This is done in surgery when the pain persists in the arm or leg and cannot be alleviated by pressing on the shoulder or knee.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	 and if it comes to the arm and leg as well, do two more fire cauteries where they say that this pain holds them tightly, and then cut into the side four inches further towards the front of the body.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	 And if you wish to use a cupping forceps, ensure they are gentle enough.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And they should apply the cautery at points or intervals where it causes pain three times or twice as intense, known as "pains.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	 They must continue to press on.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	 And make sure when applying the cupping forceps or circular cautery that you do not cause excessive pain and restrict blood flow to arteries; and avoid causing unnecessary harm such as constriction of major vessels.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 "I have seen many who had their shoulders dislocated but suffered greatly until the arm was completely numb and they lost feeling in it.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After the belly has been opened up there will come death
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 And the pains are in two parts combined, apply fire to one and then to the other according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	 And if performing a phlebotomy cautery, you should aim to pierce through the vein as quickly and efficiently as possible using a large needle or slightly less, depending on your skill level.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	 And let them between cuts of two parts, and as neat as needles, so that it may be well done.
et c’est li forme:	 this is the form
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	 And let them be seared as much as they are rough and soft spots. Then place it onto the surface of the skin and turn towards the affected area.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	 The fire will burn once, then stop after three seconds.
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	 Then apply the plaster, and let the wound heal quickly.
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the healing process has begun until it is completely healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	 Albucasis says that we should use this method sparingly due to its severity and danger.
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	 And for all the painful burns which may occur, where it hurts very much.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	 The cautery instruments which are very hot should be used if you make cuts at the edge of the vein and either burn or cut them long and thick enough to heal within two days.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 And they are joined together in a bundle this way:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	 After placing the hook of the arrow at its base on your string, press your thumb against the hook.
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 After applying heat to both circles that are burned by the first fire for a time and allowing them to cool down, leave them exposed and let the arrows burn until they are consumed.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	 Because of this cauterization with fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	 and when the cauterization does not succeed, gently remove your hand from the instrument and lift away the arrow gently, leaving three wounds, then press the wound that is dark with soot until it stops bleeding.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	 And leave the other three wounds open;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After treatment of burns, he would be in need of care until it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	 And if the pain extends to your arm or leg, use the same remedy that you used on the other affected limb.
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 That is how I treat it, and I prescribe or advise the treatment of medicine for its remedy.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Crush all the living things equally from one to another, and throw them together into a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	 Or if there is a small opening to allow an arrow in
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	 And places the arrow in another place that it may not enter, and puts ashes and ashes on it, as long as you have no powder to spare in your hand;
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 And leaves it as long as he has burned the arrow and cut off or pulled out feathers from it, then take all the ashes and apply them to the wound with a bandage if necessary.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	 And afterwards they will be treated for burns and wounds on other parts of the body as well.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 For this treatment, instruct the patient to burn and cut open the abscess with fire, so they can see inside it; then apply a mixture of olive oil, vinegar, and charcoal, which will be burned together
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 "They tell of a treatment that cured the pain in the veins and arteries, as well as the sciatica; they say there is no other remedy for it, and if one does have it once after this treatment, he gets wet from head to foot.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	 Do this in such a way that you press gently on the affected area with a warm compress and apply butter to it, covering all the joints of the body except for those where pain exists.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 After three hours, as long as the blisters no longer feel the heat.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 And then let it enter water as long as its course is running smoothly, and the fair will enter, and the pain will be gone entirely and be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 No one should use a fire cautery after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	 Also note that if a varicose vein is cauterized without injury, it may be helpful to do so
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 This treatment should be done in the same way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take a needle and smear it with oil; place it between the thumb and forefinger on one hand and the little finger of another hand.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	 After removing charred veins and leaving them to cool off, apply fire until they are burned away, and then place the cloth over it as you wait for the fabric to dry.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	 "And keep doing it until you feel sure that he has reached the goal and the pain is gone.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 The cautery method is called "fiery cauterization".
de la dolor dou dos	 The pain doubles
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	 When pain comes to the back or from hitting it or from too much cold water, or by excessive application of cold substances; nothing of these will alleviate the pain unless there is relief through hot application.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	 After the patient has been advised to stop using pills or any other such substances that cause pain, three lines should be applied at the back of their hands where it hurts the most. If no improvement is seen after five lines are applied repeatedly and according to the expertise and quantity of pain they may suffer from;
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	 The points method, also known as "pinprick", should be performed.
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	 Apply three or four points on the injured area depending on this way
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	 The disease often comes in childhood and its signs are evident when the patient's limbs become weak or pain occurs.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	 "And you will see a difference between these two and in us the appearance of those who come with others.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	 When you see it and view it cured by the fire treatment as described above
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 If a certain part of the spine is burnt, the entire body should be treated with caution
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you see that a certain part of the spine is burned for more than two or three lines and points are present at one end of another,
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After curing it as much as you can according to what we have said, and be sure not to apply fire treatment in any place where there are nerves.
de la dolor des jointes	 Joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	 "Joint pain is often caused by moisture expanding in the joints of the arms and legs, and when it comes from ice, they call for 'podagre' properly; if there are cold causes or treatments cannot be cured, then treatment should be done through cauterization.
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	 "Does the mouth of cautery to the joint, and if so, cautery olive in this way:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if it is desired to prick at its base with a needle, you shall apply the cautery as described.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	 "And the pains grow with joints and other places, often happening, so they do cautery on each finger three or four times for each part of it, all olive cautery.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 "And if you have more control, do so, but never let your hand stay longer than it takes for the swelling to go down.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 And when the pain increases gradually on all sides, you shall apply the cautery as described in our earlier chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	 And their pains are so great when one enters into the second lines
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	 and if no more pain is felt after entering into the second line of the joint or moving its hairs.
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 and their pains come quickly or far apart when the cautery is applied to that part of the body; hold your breath tight and apply pressure on the wound as well as take medicine right away.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 "If you hit him with a strong blow and draw blood, he shall live by God's grace.
de la routure dou syfac	 "The road runs through the village.
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	 When the wounds come in angles and they multiply quickly, if you are treating them, make sure that when you cure one wound, it will not cause another to appear.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	 And if there is something in the belly that causes wounds from inside of their stomach
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	 After he lays his head between your hands, tell him to keep his eyes closed until the wounds heal completely, and you must hold tight on both sides of his head as well.
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 "Then apply the cautery as follows:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 "As long as he is bent over and breathes deeply.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	 Then release the bowels.
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	 And let his limbs remain motionless until they return to their place.
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	 And treat the patient well with cautery, and bind tightly around his wrists and ankles, and another around the buttocks where they touch the hands;
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	 Then apply the cautery around the entire arm and hand, with the right one and the left as you reach for the bone, but if there is another injury to the limb, then reapply it until healed.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	 And gently warn them not to move when doing the cautery;
que tu ne le brulasses;	 Do not burn him.
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 That he does not die from that or any other injury.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 "And if you do not come close to the fire treatment, your wounds are nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	 And it is necessary to apply the cautery gently according to their size, and for large ones as well in proportion to their size;
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 After the third burn, let the hair grow long as it may.
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	 After other burns that are healed completely and leave the patient free of pain, let them grow long as they may.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 And make sure that his nostrils are kept open so he can breathe easily if he tries to move towards a corner.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	 And after the third burn, when he wishes to stand up, they will bind his hand tightly and tie another strip over the top of it.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	 And have him rest well, work gently, take too much drink and food, and too hot air.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 When he has completed this lesson when it is completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 After curing this ailment from the surgeon's work, I will tell you.
de la routure dou ventre	 of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	 When the other wounds come and heal over time, it means they are done with one more burn according to their quantity, or else cut them off.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	 After treating as we have said
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 to burn with a third degree fire
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 Also note the first time you apply ice packs and follow it up with another one to cover all of the affected area
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 The initial treatments are less severe but more frequent
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	 Pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain occurs in any member, whether from a cut or a bruise, and the pain persists for a long time, treatment with medicine is not effective; instead it should be cauterized at the point where they say "pinch," and also apply cautery based on the length of the member and its thinness and flexibility, and the location of the torques and the pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	 If the first burn is successful, it's good.
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 If the first burn fails, perform another one immediately; since it is custom to do so until all hairs are burned off.
de meselerie	 "meliority
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 The illness comes from the decomposition of blood and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	 If you cannot perform the fire treatment, look for a disease at its beginning; if it is cured according to what we have said in division and does not move or die, then you doubt that corruption has spread throughout all the hair.
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	 I applied the treatment on the back of the neck towards the front to the end of the cheeks;
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	 and on both ears, and behind the head.
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	 "And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 The patient should be instructed to make the fire cautery on the nose according to what is in front of it.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	 And the pus from everywhere escapes.
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	 And if you are about to apply the fire cautery as we have mentioned before or chief, and then apply it in a straight line across the nose, and V across the brow of the face, and VI across the eyes on both sides, and I above the bridge of the nose, and II above the ears.
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	 And II across the cheeks, II across the tendons of the lips, and I above each hand joint and ear joint, and II over the ears.
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	 And beware of burns that may occur from touching it, so do not burn them.
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	 And once you've done a fire cure on one bone, and another on the sternum bone, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	 That is to say that as more cures are administered, the benefit becomes greater
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And it should be noted that there will be no pain when applying the cure if the patient does not feel any heat because his nerves are already burned up.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 And it is advisable to make them big and small depending on the size of the members and joints, as you can find that in various ways with needles.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After curing the head injury with flour and honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	 When a member becomes inflamed and is treated with medicine, oil, and plaster, it does not harm the body part, unless there are cuts in that member.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	 And if they go too deep into the vein's skin.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then hold the treatment as long as it is safe.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	 And once you've done fire cures to the hand and arm, and back and leg, at the end of which nerve that must be numb in the member, if it is not numb then there was a mistake made.
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 "There is no longer any movement of limbs or joints.
de albaras	 de
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	 "The disease called 'albaras' is deadly to both men and women. When a cautery is used on the skin, it must be applied only once as long as the fire continues to burn steadily.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	 "Then apply a poultice of flour and lentils mixed with rose petals and leaves of the fig tree to the anus and anal fissures as well.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And tie it together with bandages or cloth, so that nothing else touches it while it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	 The cure for chancres through fire
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When a chancre appears at the beginning, and you see it arrested with a fire that seems to circle around it, then apply heat all around the chancre
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	 "Then the surgeon will perform a cautery in the gallbladder area.
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	 "But I am doubtful and afraid that it may ulcerate or be corrupted, so I don't want to do it again.
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 "And further more right is that he be burned inwardly or externally to the fire cure as it is called 'circulation', as we have mentioned in the previous passage.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	 The arm cannot stay in place
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	 "If one has an illness called 'adubelati', which either dies or is caused by excess moisture when the hairs are worn down and it causes sores on the body as it were too much, and there is pain present.
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	 "And you will see how to cure.
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	 "Do not burn the patient with too many fire cures when pricked at their base.
aprés le laisse ensi.	 After leaving it alone.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 She will die
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 And if you observe the burning carefully when performing the cautery, then perform it in this manner:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 And hold your hand still in the midst of this ailment called "adubelati" until you have performed the cautery correctly and it seems as if the pain is gone or reduced to a minimum, at which point the course of illness should be considered finished.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After curing him when he is cured completely
li cure dou feu par fer	 "The cure for fire.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 Another way to describe this ailment is "corrosive," and it's nothing more than a wasting of the limbs because it eats away at them as if they were dry sticks.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	 "If you see this illness in a place that might suffer from too much heat, avoid applying the cure with small and large amounts as needed according to what is best for healing or prevention.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 "After the cure has been applied until all corruption is burned away and nothing remains of it, whatever was corrupted will not be healed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And leave it for three days and put on the burned areas fire cauteries with oil until all of the burns are healed, and any remaining corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After applying this treatment to the wounded limbs.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	 And if after three attempts no healthy hair appears, it is good.
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 However, if not, if the fire cure continues to be ineffective due to a weak pulse or hardened veins.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	 This remedy is never effective in place of a fire cure;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	 However, every fire cure is more helpful, and I have already given the cure for the disease through incision.
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 Take what you will from this.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	 hairs that come out
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 This happens often when the sores are pierced through with a sharp object; it is called "closed" according to our understanding, and is an extremely painful thing that causes great injury.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And the treatment for this disease is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 It's to do cauterization with fire and cautery of hot iron.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	 Fire cure is that it is harsh and painful until the hair is long enough to prevent the nail from being pulled out completely, and when it has fine margins.
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	 After holding tightly to the nail until it breaks off, then let go as quickly as possible while the edge of the nail is still sharp.
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	 And leave the third joint as long as it is being burned,
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 Then apply the salve of bitter herbs with a cloth, and leave it on all night; after which you will feel its effects as it burns through to the roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Firstly, apply ice to the affected area as soon as possible.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	 And if they are turned by the cold, and many times happen in hand and foot, it is advisable to apply a hot cautery;
et est en teil maniere:	 The other way is this one:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	 Take a piece of iron or steel, or a strip of leather, and place it on the wound and the flesh, this is to burn warts.
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	 And place the strip on so that it burns through all of the skin, then apply some hot oil and keep your hand tightly closed, press your hand as you turn to make sure the edge of the strip is at the base of the wart, allowing the heat to reach into the root.
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	 And suffer the patient some of the heat application one hour
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 After which, and it will be loosened all at its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 "Afterwards, continue caring for the affected areas as before until they have healed completely.
li cure dou trembler	 "The treatment of trembling.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	 If any trembling from cold or feverishness is present, whether it be four o'clock fever or otherwise, if appropriate you do a fire cautery between the two ears.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	 And an esophagogastric caustic.
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	 If it leaves trembling and treats the cold disease's healthiness.
des pustules puans	 pus wounds
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 No signs of large corrupted substances appear on the body and pustules wounds
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	 When it is necessary to perform a fire cautery on the head of a pimple
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 A subtle cauterization with a small flame to pierce or burn at the root of the pustule, or to a cautery on the eyelashes.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	 And never perform it at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and it will not cause damage before that, but it is able to remove excess which comes from them, and heals.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 After the evacuation of blood
quant li artere est copee	 When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	 There are often great swelling of blood vessels near the wound that comes from above or below the incision at the abscess, or in cutting into an artery, and similar things
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	 And there is often pain when pressing on it.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	 And if nothing happens when you put your finger on the vein's wound, and hold it as long as they are not pained away from each other, until there is no more movement.
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	 Then apply fire cautery for longer periods and larger areas if they turn red.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	 Then apply the fire cautery according to its severity and location on the vein or artery you hold, and hold it until they stop moving.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	 "And if this happens when you apply the poultice to a vein and it stops burning, quickly apply another cautery that is on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	 "Do not stop doing this one after another until it is fixed.
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	 "Make sure you don't harm the nerve that has been damaged and prevent any other injury to the area affected by this.
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	 "And it is important to ensure that when you cut an artery, even if the patient bleeds heavily and cannot be stopped right away because of its size, then we will do one of these methods only.
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	 "Or by cautery (burning the area to stop bleeding), or by extraction if it is not treatable with other methods, or by tying off the artery and applying pressure on what needs to be stopped.
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	 "And always ensure safety in all cases.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	 "Whoever will endeavor to burn or destroy anything that may harm the patient's health, or other such things, shall not profit from it.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	 "And if there is no immediate medical solution available and the patient needs to put his finger on the vein as we have said, then hold it steady until it has been bandaged properly.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	 And it shall not move unless it is kept warm to such an extent that it does not freeze and become stiffened.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	 After the application of heat, give the patient something to soothe their burns and wounds.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	 This concludes the second book of treatments
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	 We have stated in the first chapter that any illness for which there is a need for heat therapy or strong medicines should be treated with cautery.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	 And in this chapter I will describe the various types of cautery and how to perform them in order to make it easier for you who are inexperienced, so that what we say here can be understood better.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	 And so you should know that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in any other cautery, and for this reason it is necessary to use greater forceps
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	 For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	 "There is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 I assure you that no folly is practiced.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 The manner in which people come to cure themselves.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	 "They would suffer greatly from their disease if they didn't die soon due to its severity and the great pain it caused.
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 And that is why one should have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	 "And as for those who had lost their senses," he said
«atendez, je sui garis»;	 "Listen, I am wise.
et li maladie est despitouse.	 And the disease is cruel.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	 "However, it is best to consent with those who come in this way, but put more strength into your defense than into your offense, and do not fall too quickly without knowing the cause.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	 "And use prediction and guidance in the treatment of your wounds to ensure that health is restored;
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 "This will help you achieve honor, glory, and memory for life.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	 "Dear son, our dear Savior is giving you good understanding and grace; and he will inspire in your heart the holy spirit from his hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	 "I have ordered this chapter by doctors in such a way that it is before those who are doctors of cautery; I have devised for you the chief which may come to pain, because you will find more easily what you may treat.
dou chief plein d’aigue	 And there we have the first sentence to translate.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	 This disease often comes from very young children when their illness is too severe.
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	 It cannot be cured because the reason for its occurrence was not found.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	 And I have never seen this disease in anyone except children and those who died from it.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	 Because of that, I think it's best to avoid the chapter altogether.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	 And I saw a child whose dislocation was very severe and their shoulder became crooked so much that they could not hold up their head.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	 I thought it was because of too much moisture that they died, and the moisture was so severe between the arm and the bone.
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	 And dislocations are often caused by too much moisture between the arm and the bone, with pinched nerves that make it hard to move their shoulder.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	 And so long as the moisture continues
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	 For example
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	 If the pain is greater, and if the patient's eyes are bigger, then make these incisions in a cross shape.
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	 And if the moisture is excessive and you see cracks in the joint at the base of each limb, and it suddenly starts to move when you press down with your hand on its end.
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	 If you want to calm the swelling around the third finger this way.
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 After the incision is complete
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	 After binding up the wounds and applying oil and ointment, leave them for five days.
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 Then apply compresses and heat to treat the wound; leave it bound up tightly, and keep the affected area dry until the member is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	 Another incision method involves making a large opening in the abscess and assembling all its contents together;
car aucune fois est elle devant;	 "No joint moves out of its place once.
aucune fois derrier;	 "No joint moves out of its place after this.
aucune fois en destre;	 "Not in the right direction.
et aucune fois en senestre.	 "Nor in the left direction.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	 "When opening a vein and applying tourniquets to control bleeding from wounds or arrow injuries, do what feels right based on your medical training.
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	 "And watch for any signs of arterial damage.
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	 "If the patient is bleeding too heavily from wounds or blood loss, do not hesitate to evacuate and treat for shock and fluid replacement.
de reume	 "For a new beginning
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	 "If there is no illness called 'cataract' in the eyes or elsewhere on the body, and it is not contagious, treatment with cautery does not help; unless it causes internal bleeding from a cut artery.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	 "It's important that you check the pulse at regular intervals, as the patient's condition may deteriorate rapidly.
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	 "After securing a tourniquet on both arms tightly if the arteries are bleeding, apply pressure to the wound with gauze or cloth.
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	 "Then check for a pulse on both sides of the neck and press them down gently to ensure they are secure.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 After cleansing the skin, apply one or two small bandages soaked in a weak salt solution to both sides of the wound as much as it reaches the bone and wherever else
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	 "And if you see a small crack on an artery or vein, do not attempt to repair it as you would otherwise.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	 And when the wound is closed, if they continue to bleed continuously
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	 And hold the artery steady when you measure its length in centimeters and apply pressure to it.
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	 And put in place a sixth bandage if necessary, and depending on how much the patient is suffering from it, and filling of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	 Then examine the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 If the abscess remains stuck in place or if the patient loses consciousness during treatment, hold the wound and bandage it tightly, and perform a stitching procedure until the bleeding stops.
de emigrainne	 To emigrate
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	 When emigrating occurs and is accompanied by dryness of the eyes and nose, due to moisture in the air, and the skin becomes inflamed and similar things; it should be treated with remedies for burns and all that doesn't help, if arteries are burned or cauterized as we have experienced.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	 And the method of extraction when hairs on the temples are pulled or blood is taken from an artery in the temple because it comes out easily through its pumping motion and often regains consciousness after being removed.
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	 "After the dislocation is corrected and any remaining pressure on the limb has been relieved, then release the arm or leg gently but firmly until it straightens clearly.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 Then apply a splint to support the position of the joint.
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	 Then hold it gently but firmly until the artery is clearly seen and then tie off any visible parts.
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 And if it's an internal artery that becomes visible at the tip of one finger, tie off only that part according to its quantity of hits (the number of times you can strike or tap your fingers).
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 If not removed, they will cause harm in any way.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	 Then tie off three veins.
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	 If it's a large artery that can be tied off with two loops of strong silk thread so as not to be seen in front of the recent wound and visible from above.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	 Then apply a superficial cautery as many times as necessary until the dislocation is reduced to its original position.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	 It will be healed with warmth and the pain will subside
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	 The cauteries are effective in finishing off moisture.
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	 Because it is more helpful for moistery.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	 Or, when extracting an artery, one should apply a clean cloth and place it over the area well made.
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if you're doing a lancing, use dry medicines that are gentle and apply them continuously until the wound is healed.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And if you're cutting into the artery, whether it's to cure or lance with a cautery, or you apply alcohol and press down on your hand so that none of its fingers are moved.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	 And if you have frostbite, put it into the cold as soon as possible to prevent further damage and hold it there until it stops shivering.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	 And the extraction of an artery is more severe when you use a sharp fire cure, but make sure to burn it for longer so as to maintain its heat better
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	 When extremities are too cold, if they lose heat quickly
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	 And you must have between the two hands a strong grip to keep it steady against anything that comes towards it, and hold tightly until it cools off completely on its own, then release the hand.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	 And there should be a difference between them as the cure is of all kinds;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 This is the shape of the cure.
des larmes	 tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	 When the tears of the eyes are descending from veins that are close to an abscess, and it is not possible to treat with medicine, you see the wound closing in on itself, and feel the movement against your face.
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	 And so the hairs of the paper are wet and moist, such that they stick to each other, scorchies of tears from the eyes, such is the better remedy for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	 They called it the "rough cure" and it was to shave off all the hair on the affected area, then make three incisions across the forehead equally spaced along its length.
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	 And one of the incisions was just above the eyebrows and went down to the nose while the others were across the forehead at an equal distance along its length.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	 And keep your hands steady as you continue cutting through the cheekbone, and stop when three wounds are made to each side.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 Then take a cloth and wrap it around the wound so that you can clean it thoroughly with water.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	 After making the first incision at the temple, make a second one next to it.
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	 Cut all the flesh between those two incisions completely down to the bone and then make an additional small cut next to it for extracting the arrowhead.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	 The first tool that is used in the opening of the wound is called a "culet," which has two edges and it can be sharp or blunt depending on what you need.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And place the strap around the neck of the patient and then put it against their chest to immobilize the arm on which the wound is located.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	 And cut off the veins that are above and below the incision while it is still open for cutting into that part of the body.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	 Then extract them all at once, pressing on their sides to release the pressure.
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	 After that, put a bandage soaked in wine and oil on top of the wounds.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And after the second incision is made and the arrowhead has been extracted, apply a balm for wounds with rose oil to treat the wound, as well as other treatments that heal wounds while remaining fresh.
dou reume des eulz	 "The eyes hold steady.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	 When there is no joint pain or stiffness, you see the eyes tense and small, and weaken the vein, making them bleed.
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	 And the hairs grow longer, causing great pain to the patient, and the veins are strained.
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	 And as there is no joint pain or stiffness, these accidents matter and the patient feels cured, if they are severe.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 "Then command the patient to raise his head, then make one great incision in the forehead, and another two long ones.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	 Then begin with opening the temple towards the temple opposite, and make an incision through the bone.
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	 And hold your hand steady in between the temples as it moves to prevent injury.
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	 And when the bones are uncovered, if there is no bleeding, then wash between the fingers and apply a sterile dressing.
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	 Then put on wet bandages of wine and oil, and keep from touching it with your hands.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 When bones are broken, it is advisable to immobilize the joint as much as possible until healing begins
En teil maniere:	 Certainly
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	 In two parts of flesh and bone, in four places, and make a plaster
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	 The physician treats the wounds by starting with the afflicted part.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	 The removal of earwax
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	 What you have just heard is one of the four things.
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	 or grains, or beans, or stones, similar things;
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	 Or semen, if you're lucky, feverish, perhaps.
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	 A particular thing that may be
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 If it is in the ear more gravely or another way that doesn't go well with the ear, do not put it in the ear; but rather, put it on the ground.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	 If you see the stone, if you find no oil of blue or white, then the physician extracts it.
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	 And he puts a bandage on his nose when inflammation comes and goes in the ears, and puts cloth or wool into it.
et estent l’oreille au desus.	 And hold still the ear to this end.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	 This cure comes once for each treatment.
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 And if it does not come out on its own, the patient will undergo a subtle pinching operation to extract it.
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	 But if it jumps when pinched, that's good.
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	 If not, perform a subtle pinching with two fingers.
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	 If not, if you do a pinching with the thumb and forefinger or press very hard on the ear lobe or pull it out gently through the ear canal so that nothing can enter with it.
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	 Then remove the bandage because this cure always comes out as we have said.
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	 And if it does not come out in this way, pinch tightly and then hold the earlobe with both hands without any tool to press on.  And put some cotton inside.
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	 "Press firmly onto the base or whatever it may be, until it stops.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	 "If none of these things that we have spoken about happen to you as you pull out the arrow, and there is spasm.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	 "The way to do this is if you make the first cut of the scalp, and then draw out two stitches according to their length, hold the hair between your hands and turn the ear towards it, making a small cut at its base with fat or anything similar.
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	 "And if you do it like this as one piece until you reach the base, and then pull out according to your practice, and spit into your mouth.
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "The treatment should be continued as long as necessary.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	 "And if it is inflamed and you need to extract it,
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	 And if it cannot sit upright, he must support it gently with a soft hand.
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 And perform an incision on that vein.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	 But do not worry when you think the patient's head is wet from moisture in their ear as long as you have tried many times.
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 After gently pulling and supporting it with care, if like we said, the extraction should be quick and gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 When you think the vein is moist from moisture in your ear, ensure that the needle remains still as it enters and gently apply cotton to cover the ear after piercing.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And if this happens on another ear or both ears simultaneously
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 If it is well done, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	 If not, repeat many times with gradually increasing heat until it becomes firm but light and the patient feels a little warmth.
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	 And place ice on the ear and then on the other side of their nose, firmly holding one of the piercings while the other is left free to avoid injury.
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	 And do not stop doing this piercing over time until the pain completely stops and it has stopped completely;
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	 "And if you see one joint moving while the other is burning,
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 "Then continue to heat all of them until there's no more movement at all.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	 In the extraction of a small abscess, as with similar things and wounds, treat it in the same way that we have described for incision.
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	 "But if the abscess is large enough to feel, then proceed with a pincers.
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	 And this is more delicate place to extract from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	 In the extraction of veins from the ears proceed as you would for other extractions and treatments. If it is not necessary to treat the distillation, if you see fit look at the ear in the sun.
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	 If there are no veins to be found, and you find fine needles, if they cannot be seen, then prick the side from which it originates.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 "And it's also important for the eyes and ears to be free from any pain or injury.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	 And place it gently in the ear according to the degree of pain, then continue until the bleeding stops.
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 Keep doing this as long as you feel like pressing on it.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	 And if they do not answer the question, stop and ask again with the same urgency as before.
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	 And if they do not go away like we said before, perform extractions of the previous kind, and you will find or treat these distillations.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 And if you apply your oils and medications into the ear with any other instrument, where it is located as you see;
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	 And either gold or silver vessels are used for this purpose and to distill over.
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	 And for pressing the distillation through an iron vessel is best done this way, and if you see the opening closing gradually with cotton.
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	 Then you apply some oil or juice from your medications into their ear canal.
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	 And then gently squeeze the cotton swab until the oil is completely removed or softened from their ear canal.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	 And after that, gently clean out the ears with cotton swabs and distillate into the ear to remove any remaining oil.
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	 Make sure it is not too cold, as the medication may not work properly if applied while it's very cold.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	 The removal of earwax
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	 No baby was born with any ear discharge in their ears;
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	 And this is the reason why there are no ear discharges in babies when they are born without any injury to their ears.
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	 And there will never be a time where you can see anything coming out of it.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	 "And if you cannot see it clearly, there will be many attempts to heal. And when seen, it is advisable that the ear lobe touches the sun.
et regarde dedens:	 "Look at these:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 "If you see the eruption prominently, then the cause must be simple and clear.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	 "And when facing forward or backward it should cover all of them if it doesn't cover the ear lobe;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	 "If the eruption is due to a knot or of the ear itself if you gently pull it and tie tightly but do not too tight until all are healed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And if one of its ears is detached from the head due to heat and a slight jerk, then it is attached back at its place.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	 "If you feel the eruption from touching the ear lobe slightly, gently and keep in mind that you must not press on the ears of the ear.
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 "Then put a bandage around the ear according to its size and thickness in the Egyptian manner.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	 Do not cause any harm as long as the wound is clean or apply a fresh bandage and aloe vera juice on it.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	 And if you see blood in the ear, make sure to remove the bandage and apply a new one made of rose oil and beeswax as long as it is necessary.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Continue until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	 And if the discharge of pus comes when you put an ice-cold compress on it and apply to the ear other remedies that relieve the pain temporarily, such as distillation treatments.
de la char des papieres	 of the paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	 When the hairs are moist and dry, it is advisable to straighten them with hair ties and combs.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	 After that apply a clean wound dressing.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	 And do not leave it uncured if the surgical procedure causes burns or other minor burns after the incision.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	 And many times heal again, nothing is missing from their roots.
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	 And if they are burned by fire, their roots will not grow back.
de la gresle	 of the elbow
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	 And many times come to these diseases that seem like a swelling on the skin and in its texture, for this disease is called "grandine", and it is an assembly of large moisture on the skin.
li ovraiges est telz:	 The work here refers to surgery or medical procedures.
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	 And it is easy for them to know one way and another, it's just an easy thing to do.
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Take a small incision in the part of the body that is easiest, then take a larger one, and cut through it
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	 If you pierce just slightly into the skin without causing any harm.
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 And when it is done and there is stitching involved, and it continues to be cured as long as it is fine.
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 And if it is small, do not exert any force, as it will hurt the surrounding area very much
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	 And if the large vein descends towards the side of the ear towards the back, when you turn the paper and pull it gently, and squeeze and press from one side to another.
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	 And if the incision is shallow, no harm will come to it
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	 And when a large vein is cut off if you pour oil from the same place it will heal any damage that occurs.
de la graisse des eulz	 The discharge of pus
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	 Exinach is a grease that is found in the paper and other things, it was more common in children, and it caused great harm to their eyes, and they would come with a terrible headache at midday, and could not see the light of day because tears filled their eyes;
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 "And as the hairs of their face recede, and they sleep on their side, and their skin becomes sallow from the moisture that swells it and conceals its complexion when it is exposed to light.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you press down on both thumbs, it forces the elbow to extend outwards.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	 "The manner of doing this is by putting a hand over their eye so they can see better.
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	 "And then they put a cloth over their eye and make an eyepatch in the shape of a circle to cover that part, and fix it there.
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	 "And press at both ends with equal force so that the patch is tight across the circle.
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	 "And then take away the moisture by making an incision with a large needle, and do not make it larger than the wound itself.
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	 "Continue to sew as long as you can see through the patch.
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	 "And more wounds will appear from the incision, shaped like a white fat piece.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	 "Take a strip of cloth between your two hands and stretch it out as far to the left as you can.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	 "Keep your hand away from the fire and do not touch any part of it with oil or grease.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	 "Do not let the incision open at the beginning of the fire, if it appears slightly and only then.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	 "Then stretch out the strip as you have been instructed, make it smooth and even, and place it on your body, and straighten your limbs.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And if there are such wounds that burst open and putrefy from moisture which is drying up
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then the treatment until it has healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if a dislocation occurs at the base of the shoulder, then hold the eye steady as long as you can until it has healed.
des poilz des papieres	 hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	 "When the hairs begin to grow naturally and become even, if they are painful or bothersome, it may indicate an inflammation of the eyes, causing various ailments such as tears and skin irritations.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	 The treatment is as follows:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	 The treatment can be through cautery or surgery depending on what the patient's condition is and which method the doctor decides to use.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	 It is important that you put oil on the wound first, then take paper from your hand and gently press it against the wound.
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	 If it's clean, it's good to proceed.
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	 But if the wound is dirty and has dirt or debris in its fibers,
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	 then take the paper to the barber and let them shave off those hairs.
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	 Then remove all the hairs from that part of the paper and put it in with other scraps ready to be burned.
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	 Then take the paper and make it into a small tent of cotton and cloth; then put this onto another piece of cloth with a pattern, as long as you see fit, and whatever way seems best to you is how it should be done.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	 And if there is a piece of paper torn to pieces, tearing it apart will not help.
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	 After having studied the two lines you have written and starting from the small ones
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	 And if it is one of those scars next to the hairs in the size of a root, then cut off the end near an angle on one of the two lines, and remove all the rest.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	 After joining the two pieces with a needle and thread of fine wool, sew it up tightly, remove the scab, then cut off all excess thread from between the two stitches in any way you want.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	 If not, if there is no cure then leave it as is and let the stitches heal over three or four days.
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	 After sewing it up tightly and constricting the cloth to make it heal quickly, as the paper becomes soaked with the blood and binds together but the stitching is harder (as they say) which causes great fear.
et si a une autre maniere:	 "And if otherwise:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 "And you are to write down the paper of a person who has that form like this:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	 "And if you wish to gently move it with small movements, just like this:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	 "And if you don't have the strength to hold the laces, and it is not right side up when holding an arrow or thread, then tighten it tightly:
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	 "And take the larger rope and the smaller one together between your two hands in a loop.
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 "Then gently hold the hand with stitches in place and keep it tight as you sew up the wound together,
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	 "And after the skin is sewn, if there are any remaining cuts or wounds that have become infected.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	 "No matter how many times you cut the paper:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	 "If you are to follow what we have suggested, cut.
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 "The stitches on the front and back are more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	 The cure of boils is as follows:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	 "And you spread the paper and apply it thinly in the manner I have described, then make a second incision as fine as the first one.
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	 "Hold both ends of the incision so that they do not move.
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	 "Then bring together the two ends tightly over it and pull out both boils from the two parts.
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	 "Let them rest without further restraint until they are healed and firm enough to endure it themselves.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 "If you have to wait if the incision is too painful then apply care while it heals.
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	 And when a wound is healing, if you remove the paper, and they will not grow any more.
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 This shape of the second cane you must follow strictly; according to this length and width as well
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	 The wounds are such that you need a very fine needle, and in the thread of silk you must be very careful;
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	 Then gather them together gently and sew one to another closely, so that the longest filaments are a palm's length.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	 And then you arrange in sewing one thread of fine silk lightly, and knot the ends of the threads;
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	 Then put on the bandage securely.
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	 And let it be removed so that the wounds are clear, for they are small and simple, then pull out the needle at the root of the hair tightly, and pierce through to the paper gently as you remove the hairs naturally.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	 "Pull out hair until you reach it or one of its branches.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	 "Pull the hairs out as long as they are still attached to the branch, and tear off any hair that may be stuck in the paper.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	 "After the hair is treated and removed, it will not come back with any remaining strands of hair if you pull the hair out in one piece until all the hairs are removed and you see through to the root.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	 "If you pull out the hair and thread, cut off any remaining ends or strands after the second or third time, so that the hairs remain in their place.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	 "The hairs are plucked until they become long and even; if you prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move.
de la porriture de l’oil	 "The dislocation of the shoulder
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	 When this ailment is called alecratia or poison comes through oil, if it occurs in one of two ways
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 One way is naturally and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 "It may result from injury, bruising, or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 The way is to bind it tightly with sinew until it is cured.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 And you should use in the treatment of it only things that are binding and restraining.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	 But if you do this, then the ailment becomes worse than before.
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	 but use gentle things like figs.
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 And the roots of alecratia and aloesia should be boiled, and then soaked in water until they are cooked thoroughly; apply a poultice after this to cure it.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	 And the strength of your treatment must be that you stay firm as before in the form she took on her own.
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	 And we have said so often that such a disease will not go away in the manner it came unless
de la char qui vient en l’oil	 "The oil is coming out of...
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 "This disease, which truly means 'axacratia', and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	 The accident is from injury, burns and sores, similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	 When you apply the remedy when someone has a sharp pain, it will have two folds and go into the flesh, and make piercing cuts to the sinew so that it may not move after being cut.
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 Then you apply the remedy on all the sharp edges of the arrow and the large wound.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	 And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is right, it will be good.
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	 If not, if you put a razor and place the paper in the wound and tear it off, and make two cuts at the edges of the paper.
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	 "And let the incisions of the two corners that you have made be straight so when they are closed together that the shape will be as similar to the shape of an 'X'.
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	 "Then after that the thumb according to the quantity of its fingers and toes, do as you did with the incisions on the other side, and cut off a thread from one end.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And then apply the remedy of the moistening medicine as well as the poultice, until he is cured.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	 "And if the disease comes from a cut or burn, it is convenient that you make a straight incision through the skin and hair, according to what has been said earlier.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	 "Then sew between the two ventricles of one tent as I have mentioned.
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	 "And the operation must be done according to the shape of the disease as they are very different in shape and require different skills so that they can return to their natural form.
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	 And his limbs are misaligned accordingly as it is necessary to treat him with more care than others
dou soudement de la papiere	 certainly of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	 When this soreness happens in a way that the paper is torn and damaged by white oil from his hand, he cannot move or perform any of his natural actions if it's necessary to cut off the tip of a razor so as to remove the paper gently.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	 And stretch the tweezers as much as necessary to touch what is small and delicate, but not too tight or too loose so that only a slight scratch occurs on the oil.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	 And when you make your incision, whether it is one or many, gently so that the paper follows its natural shape.
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	 And each of those gathered together is always smooth and free from scratches, but gently apply oil to lubricate them.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	 between paper and oil there was a tent of flax
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the third hour, apply cold compresses and other soothing things as much as they are able to be applied
de l’ungle de l’oil	 the white part of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	 The wounds that occur in different ways
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	 One is nervous and similar to a burn, another is not nervous but itches from cold, when touched with iron or treated properly, if they cannot come off.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	 Both are similar in terms of pain and discomfort, crossing over one by one as they find their way across the entire view and all light and movement of oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	 The manner in which incisions are made is that the hairs must be cut into their place first then remove them.
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	 Then take paper in your hand and wash away any small wounds with these compresses, use them for the injuries of greater severity.
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	 Then take an arrowhead, or a stake, or a knife, and cut it sharp.
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	 Then, sharpen the arrowhead slightly and pierce it through the middle of the fur. Stretch out the string attached to its base, draw it tight as you can, and hold it on the wound to prevent bleeding.
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	 Do not stretch the arrowhead only once or just with string alone, like we have mentioned earlier.
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	 Then, remove any remaining small fur pieces from where it was attached to.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	 And ensure the thin fur does not touch the shiny cloth and tear it, and that the wound is not pierced.
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	 After making an incision a little further in the oil, and then closing it gently with two fingers, leaving one side to the other.
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then apply the treatment that is suitable as long as he remains conscious.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	 And if the patient is not nervous, and you cannot hold the needle in place repeatedly, this treatment may resemble a method of medicine.
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	 and when the division is done, you must view closely, if it is a fire cautery, and remove the bandage quickly according to this form.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	 And gently remove the bandage, and if you see that it is burning or there is a reason for concern in his voice as he ties the ribbon tightly with two fingers on either side of the incision, and burns the oil gently to the other side.
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	 "And repeat the previous chapter as exactly as possible.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 There should be no harm in the oil if you burn it with a candle and treat the abscess as soon as possible, then reset to another place as long as both are sane.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	 "And when the face becomes swollen with tears for some time and only part of it is numb, so that tears do not flow.
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	 And a red rash appears which is caused by exhaustion
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	 of the charcoal that has been put on a wick
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	 "The eyes become red and the eyelids are held open with paper or cloth to prevent tearing.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	 "The veins will turn red and the eyes are opened to see if there is any blood in them. If so, hold back the eyelids until they stop.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	 "First remove one vein and repeat with another until all the veins are removed. And remember to not apply any oil on the wound.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	 And if it's a small incision that we have described in the chapter on incising an abscess and with weaker forces when cutting into it so as to open after this procedure.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	 And when the incision is complete and all the wound has been cleaned thoroughly with a cloth moistened with vinegar if you use an astringent to close it after this procedure.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	 If nothing is done and the stitches remain tight, and you doubt that it has been properly closed after this procedure.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 Then return to your work as soon as possible, and apply the cautery in the oil through this method.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	 But it is important that you use a cure that is not too strong from the natural course of the wound;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	 And from an accidental injury
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	 Do not shake your hand in any of these accidents as long as you keep the affected limb still
des voines des eulz	 "the veins
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 The red veins are covered by the liver oil and tolerate the sight of the wound but weaken over time
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	 The physician is what one should look for, when it is present, there are no other diseases that follow.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	 unless the coil is completely torn
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 Instruct the patient to put his head on their chest and support them with both arms according to their wisdom, or hold onto one arm gently as this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	 And there are two other remedies for burns in different ways
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	 Then forcefully pull the wounded veins gently while holding the wound still after that, until you remove both arms from around them.
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	 And keep in mind not to apply any ointments or poultices until the end of the day when facing the sun and rest frequently throughout the ordeal if you don't control the bleeding.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	 "After you have done this, if you distill it into oil with a colander, the impurities will be separated and removed.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	 "If you don't have enough of the substance in that hour, if you squeeze out oil from things soothing to the eyes, and leave it uncrushed as long as the eye pains are eased or stopped, then proceed according to this method which is best until they are sane.
et c’est li forme des forces:	 "This is the form of a strengthener:
de la fistule de l’oil	 Of the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	 The term refers to fistulous tracts.
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	 When you cure it with cautery and with medicines as I have said before, if she is not healed or is still hurting, then apply the remedy that was mentioned earlier; until there is no more moisture, so long as the eye continues to ache
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	 And when it occurs you will see the damage and the pain if there is something to be done about it.
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	 And he is called "the quick doctor," and if the vein opens up then do what must be done as quickly as possible;
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	 And to clean out the joint cavity after the swelling has subsided and straighten your arm a bit so that the damage is cleaned up as much as possible.
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	 Do nothing once; then apply cold compresses.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	 The eyes are closed when the patient is asleep and to prevent any pain or injury during that time.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	 If not, if there isn't another way then bring the fistula back into its place as close to this form as possible;
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 And if you see the dislocation for the second time with a hammer and medicines, and when it is corrected as shown in this form, either from three points or fixed in such a way that you can observe here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	 Then it is reset back into the socket of the shoulder, and then removes your hand from holding onto its base, and stretches all the way until you feel the bone as you press on the joint if you hold tight to its side.
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	 Then it is reset back into the socket with a fresh force, as I taught you earlier, and when they harden and endure them joints, if there was material on its side.
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If it's lighter on the bone.
de l’issue de l’oil	 of the dislocation
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	 When the eyes open completely and they do not move at all, if you hold onto it tightly.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	 After cleansing the skin and removing dead cells and oil of that sort, put on fragrance oils, aloe, incense, and sandalwood powder, and strain the oil. Then wash your face with warm water and a soft cloth to remove any remaining impurities.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	 The manner in which to apply the powder is that you put enough on one cheek and then place another on top of it so they are touching evenly.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	 Then strain through a fine cloth to remove the fragrance oil while continuing to apply the other oils as directed.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	 Then put on the face masks and let them stay on for one hour to two hours as you see fit.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	 After putting it on in the morning and at night, if the oil is repairing itself that's great.
se ce non;	 And then
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After cleansing, spread out the cloth and linen, tie it up neatly, and hang it to dry until it is dry.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	 tearing of eyelid
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	 If there are tears in the weaving fabric, start by opening it up and look for small pieces of resin to see if they can be removed.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	 Once you have opened it up and examined the tears in detail, stitch another needle into the root of the part that is damaged next to the one already there, then sew another needle through where a double thread from the other side passes.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	 And pierce it with the first needle according to its location;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	 Then take the first double thread and wrap part of it around an eye loop, tie tightly, then pull out the needle and put a smooth piece of cotton in its place.
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	 And leave it as long as the thread continues to wrap around the eye loop, then remove any discomforting pieces of cloth until the wound is healed.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And no wound is held still by any edge of a cloth as long as it is intact
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	 And the eyes may appear swollen if a fine needle punctures and causes bleeding from inside them, causing swelling and discomfort.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then hold it as long as it remains intact
de la bowe de l’oil	 From the base of the skull
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	 This disease is called 'unsane' and occurs when bleeding takes place in the oil
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	 The way to treat the wound appearance is that you apply pressure over the abscess and right away, then hold it between two fingers of your hand, and wait until swelling goes down in your eyes.
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	 Then seal the wound, don't squeeze it or move it around and if you see any discharge from the eye, do not worry. It will be like this unless otherwise.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 And if she does not descend down from above, then the bones are disjointed and do not stand together as we have mentioned earlier.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	 If you grasp it between your fingers and pull out the thin thread gently while continuing with the sinew thread from a bow and using both threads to make the knot securely.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when she is done, if you distill the hot oil with honey or fenugreek and honey, then treat her as before until she is healthy.
des aigues de l’oil	 Of the fire
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	 We have seen the similarity of wounds in this respect, what should we do about it?
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 If you feel sick after eating such food.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	 It is necessary to grasp it between your fingers and pull out the thin thread gently while using the healthy oil as a binding agent tightly.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	 Then put the paper of the oil on your left hand first so that they are straight to the right or your right hand.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	 Then take hold of the paper with your right hand so that they are straight to the right.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	 Then take the tip of the instrument and draw it through the center by placing the blade at its greatest length on one side and the paper on the other. Do this repeatedly as you pull the paper until all the hairs are cut off, and remember that "almagda" will grow from any wound.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	 And it is important that the length of "almagda" matches the width of the blade at its tip, right up to the end.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	 It refers to the hair on your head.
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 When you see the arm on that paper near to its edge, and then press it gently at one end where it is tight, and release it slowly along another way after
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 They now see what they are facing before them and the equipment at their disposal
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	 After resting for a moment, and then gently pull it back to the second way, hold the instrument firmly as it becomes fixed, and when it's tightened and cannot move anymore, strain your arm lightly around in turns slowly.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 Then release slightly from the edge, and let go of its hold to lessen the tension.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then lubricate the valve stems or lines with a brush-on lubricant and plenty of grease, and apply with oil to seal.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 No, those who are from our own stock, we put into play as much as possible.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	 And the maggots cannot enter into the oil through their pores because they have too hard skins that make them resistant to the oil when it is called 'Alberite', so please use a tool that is called 'Alberite' as its form.
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	 And when it is only connected slightly and not too tight, but hold gently as we have advised.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	 and at the end of the work to apply the leech-cup, placing it on the abscess where it lies on its back in darkness;
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	 and may it be free of any movements, light gentle foods, and not move its head left or right but lie still according to where it lies.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	 After resetting it into place, you will see clearly and fix any issues.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 Do it as soon as possible after the treatment or incision has been made, but ensure you do this to prevent any further complications.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	 When the abscess is opened, apply a solution in front of it and squeeze to extract pus.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 When they are cured, if you remove the poultice and place it over a new wound, cover any open sores to prevent further infections; but be careful in moist environments as well.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	 And in some cases, when you do this at home, and the procedure varies based on your individual situation.
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 It is important that no one should interfere with these procedures unless instructed to do so by a professional medical provider.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	 And we have come to you who were of the arrow, and said that in some places it was possible to shoot arrows without any difficulty, but in all places I did not see anything else.
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	 It is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	 These are the forms of armor, because they do not know how to use them
et soient d’arain proprement:	 They are made of iron properly.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	 "And there is also a chief part of this subtlety in that he goes down into the third angle [of hell].
de la char sor le neis	 "From the abscess or from sores
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	 There were no darts that came out separately or appeared to be scorpions in all places
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 And if there are any arrows that have been painted with different colors, and if the arrow is painted red with good fortune.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	 In that case where the arrow is hurt and not painted, it should be held between your hands towards the sun.
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	 "And cover his nose with a cloth, and give him something cold to drink
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 "As long as the patient stays still at one point, it's all right.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	 "If nothing else occurs when the patient stays still at one point and it doesn't move anything, if you gently massage around it in any way.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	 "And if there is no danger to speak of or an abscess to cut into
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	 "And if there are no malignant abscesses to treat and the wound is completely closed, then give them rest, drink water, or whatever they prefer.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	 "If it doesn't move at all and the patient is calm
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	 "And if they do not move even slightly at all and there are no injuries to treat from that point on.
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	 "Once you have made a small incision in the vein, and hold your hands steady, it should not move or less.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	 "And when the hair on his fingers is cut to make it stand out, and he breathes through the nose constantly as if trying to grow longer.
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	 "And many times, you will see him do this lightly when performing it.
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 "Then take the head that comes through the nose with one hand and the other coming out of his mouth to do it again in alternating sequence.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	 "Do it until you break the joint that has been corrupted and then take away the hair, extract the pus, and wash the hair in Egyptian style, and reset him directly afterwards.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	 "Do it three more times until all the joints that are corrupted are broken;
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	 And then let him have an ointment of pleasant smell that is soothing to the skin, so
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 This is how the instrument works for getting rid of lice, by collecting oils and medicines.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	 It can be made with silver or iron, like a lamp wick, if you put it there.
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	 And when you light the wick, so long as you hold it in place, the oils and medicines inside will purge the lice.
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	 And then let go of the wick while holding steady the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	 "From the abscess or from sores
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	 Many times this is seen as a disease called "scab," and it grows large until it is watched closely.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	 So that you get rid of the scab at the beginning by applying a strong fire cautery or ointment.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	 And hold it steady as long as it is big, if you press hard, to prevent the redness and discomfort.
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	 Do not touch lightly with fire as it is very painful if you press too hard because when done once, great harm may be caused to the patient.
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	 And the eye should be held steady during this treatment to prevent any injury and to ensure that it can endure until the pain subsides or is relieved in some way.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	 when they are cut and pulled
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 If you find this text confusing or unclear in any way, please let me know and I'll do my best to assist further.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	 It is important when doing so to check if there are any fresh wounds all over the patient's body as well.
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And after stitching up two incisions and treating them until they are healed
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	 And the cuts are deep on both sides and should be treated all over as much as possible until they are healed, then stitch up two cuts together tightly, hold tight, and sprinkle with sand of healing powder, and incense.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And sprinkle the wounds with a strong or other soothing powder and leave it as long as he continues to cleanse them.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	 The method of stitching is that you assemble the solution.
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	 Or through needles if we have said in the belly stitch.
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	 Or through thread as I told you.
des apostemes des levres	 "The last
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	 When the veins near an abscess harden, similar to arrows and stones, it becomes worse and larger.
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	 Whenever you turn the vein, and pierce through the chest muscle into another part of it:
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 Then seal the wound after the incision with glass, as long as it is not inflamed.
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then seal up the eyelid and treat the dry wound until it heals.
de la char des gencives	 "The corners of the lips
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	 Mainstay still as your hand approaches me;
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	 If you hold onto my roots tightly and leave some of the hair or wound open.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	 Then add something to the wet abrasive powder that binds and dehydrates.
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	 And after incision, it comes back often, if you reopen, and cautery is applied a second time.
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	 If not, then do nothing more
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	 And that's the end of it.
des sordens	 sores
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	 No instances are found at the base of the teeth in between the lips and gums, which are raw and tender;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	 And no instances are found with black or red teeth, as long as corruption comes to the gum, and the tooth is falling out.
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	 If you hold the abscess between your hands and it stays firm, and you remove the sores or wounds as they appear, until nothing more is needed.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	 And send away the blackness and whiteness, green things, etc. as long as they are smooth
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	 If it is done at first attempt, that's good.
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	 But if not, try again with another stick and so on until you succeed.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	 There are different forms of remedies based on the nature of the injury. For example, if one remedies a wound that is between two bones differently than others where it was treated inside the bone, etc..
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	 These shapes and other things should be present with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	 It is advisable when treating the pain of a tooth to apply pressure as long as possible because it shouldn't be applied too hard;
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	 As it is high in juice, therefore there is no excuse for not doing so.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 If the nails are constrained to endure, make sure you take special care of the teeth when they prick.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	 Many times does the pain come from the vein, and try to make it clear or sharp, and force blood out through the veins.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	 And in all ways do not let go of this pain as long as the vein is bad because we have already tried to treat these sores.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	 And when you are certain that the vein is doing well, it should be checked thoroughly to prevent any further damage from all sides.
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	 Then tighten the two main tendons first and gradually, as it is well aligned, then firmly fix the main tendons.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 And if both arms are dislocated between your shoulders, hold them steady so they do not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After you remove the broken tooth directly and if it doesn't move, then pinch any of these points gently along with it to dislodge the clot from its base, and remove it as soon as possible.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	 And make a tight wrap and tie it if necessary to immobilize the limb where it was, so that movement does not occur.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	 "And if he restrains it gently so that it does not break away.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 And always keep the main thing, which is to approach with gentle care.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 And make sure you don't break it further and leave a part of the tooth remaining, and remove any debris from its base with extreme care as more severe injuries may occur at that point.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	 "And remember that you do not act like the fool who always breaks it apart by rushing and struggling without ever having tried.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	 "But they never come from the root of this great disease, or from the path on which it breaks off. If you want to.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	 "When his bones are strong enough, if you soak them in wine or some other liquid and release them;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	 "So that the wounds will heal as they come to expect it, when exposed to a solution of vinegar.
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 "And if he is burned with fire.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	 The extremities need to be shaved close first so that they are smooth at the tips and large in circumference where you will apply the balm.
et ce sont les formes:	 which means "these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	 And if thick members are such that one may not pass without tearing them and should be firm enough to hold tightly, but they must be steady
de la racine des dens	 of the roots of veins
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	 When the roots of the hair are plucked with tweezers if it is convenient that you apply a solution made from boiled cotton to calm the itch and soothe them as they become inflamed.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 And should be done similarly to how we have practiced, which is the shape
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	 And if the roots burst through to all of these veins, it's advisable to take out the instrument called "althali", which is for this purpose, so that its form is
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	 and if they break easily and roots are pulled out in that way, it's good.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	 However if you have tweezers to assist the hairs come after this shape.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	 If you use a tool to help with this process, then do this procedure for example:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	 and others in the reason of pain, and tools that seem to have large tendons.
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	 And if the hair is too thick and cannot be broken easily and some of its roots are very thin.
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	 And other such things which are mentioned earlier
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	 And the most subtle veins are examined by means of one's own instrument; for its various purposes and to which it is related to different things such as those that burst or cause others to be broken if they strike them with force.
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	 And large and well-maintained ones hold the bone securely, unless there is a lack of grip, but are able to hold and maintain it.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	 And then apply leeches according to the rules, if there is pain in an organ and it is small, so that all of its instruments may treat.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	 When the tooth is revealed by nature and its form looks bad, and especially in women who are pregnant or nursing a baby, if you want to save it from pain don't neglect it immediately, but take care of it as well.
adonques lou raie;	 without reason
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	 and if he holds the tool with which this happens, it will not move.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	 And hold the finger gently and gradually towards the direction of extraction, so that you do not move the others, and if it appears to be on a line with its shape as is its form.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	 like how you tie your shoelaces.
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	 And in the manner of holding this tool gently and gradually, if it does not move as soon as he pierces.
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	 In the end it is smooth and clear to all except this tool, which too frequently causes friction and makes the tongue bleed if used excessively or improperly; causing injury to the speech organ (pharynx).
quant li dent lochent	 When one tooth is removed
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	 When the tool is in use whether by friction or scratching, and the bristles cannot hold steady because it moves when he presses against them, then they will be treated with astringents remedies.
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	 if you tie it down with an iron wire, for the silver wire becomes green and rotten but the other ones do not move.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	 And let their fingers neither too big nor too small, according to the amount of space between them.
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	 And if you find that the fingers are too close to each other and there is no space between two healthy teeth, then place them between the two healthy teeth, as long as you see it clearly on one side.
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	 And then cover up the area where you applied it gently and steadily until it no longer moves.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 And make sure your concealer is placed at the base of the tooth, so that it cannot move away.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	 Then cover up the fingers with some tape and stick them together, then press between the healthy tooth and it will not cause any discomfort.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	 And leave them in place as long as they can stay there, and if they move or get stuck to the fingers, then hold onto another thread.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 If one is to succeed and serve all his time, it must be in the form of the dense and figure of the main direction of the two true paths, if you see
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	 And when the head is dislocated, if they let it go in its place, repeatedly, as we have mentioned.
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	 And they don't interrupt or remove the joint and formation of a false vein, and hold it in place until it is right, as we have mentioned, and increase and serve their time
de coper lou liien de la lengue	 To apply a fire cautery treatment to one's tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	 There is never someone who comes from outside the language or nature of things, that should not be.
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	 Or by accident and injury sores.
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	 And the ulcers are such that you open your mouth with a wound but keep your eyes steady, and let the tongue lightly.
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	 Until the tongue is held firmly in place, and if it slips out or not, and that's immediately painful, if you bite on the edge of the tongue tightly.
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	 And remember to keep your jaw from being too open while performing this procedure
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	 After you've done that, if you gently remove the bandage and ice pack from your tongue, put a new one on.
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 And keep the mouth closed for as long as possible to prevent bleeding.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	 If you see blood coming from a vein, stop immediately and seek medical help.
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	 And if bleeding stops while performing the cautery procedure, it is better to proceed slowly with caution.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 Then continue the other treatment as long as possible,
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	 "And if it becomes red or black or painful," if they become inflamed, but do not itch, because that is a sign of cancer;
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	 "And if it declines in color and becomes painful with moisture, then the incision is made quickly and delicately on one side and the other.
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	 "And if it goes without pain when incised through the veins up to where it is inflamed, then repeat until all are cut.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Then remove any remaining lesions and continue with other treatments as long as they are healing.
des apostemes de la gorge	 Of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	 "There is no time to remove the throat bubbles that are called 'godath', and one should treat them separately from the other. As long as they heal, do not worry.
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 This is a dislocated shoulder; it does not want to move its arm if touched, causing pain and injury.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	 If the joint is red and the root is large, do not try touching it with a finger, as this may cause more harm.
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	 But leave them as long as they are short and don't cut them off if you cannot control their movement, or it might break on its own.
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 And if the joint is light pink and the root is thin, try to apply gentle pressure first with an instrument like a cloth; only then should you gently reset it back into place.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	 Do not let the joint be in front of the sun and keep it in good shape by making sure its arm is always between your mouth and first finger. Press your tongue against everything as if you were tasting something delicious to help hold it in place.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 And either gold or silver is so fine, as those countenances.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	 Can you press the tongue against any instrument, and see the tip of your finger if it touches or not?
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	 And try nothing on cloth with, then press the object against which part you want to know is strong.
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	 And whichever way they are bent, and one place to the other, they are blunt, and made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	 And if you do not have this instrument at hand, then hold onto them tightly; because when that is done they will be
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	 And either strong from one side, or another side no.
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And when you have applied one of the blisters according to this manner, and afterwards incision gargle the hot blisters, and vigorously and it is necessary that wounds come, if gargle the blisters or wash with scalding fruit juice are cooked, or firewood, and similar things until they do not remain.
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 For as long as he remains sane
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	 And whenever the second artery is cut off while swallowing, if it does not happen with both arteries being cut simultaneously
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	 If there was a woman who had a heart attack, it would be advisable to remove the artery that is close to her throat.
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 If the woman could not breathe or drink through that artery because it was blocked and she couldn't live without air or water, then she would die.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 And the eyes were blinded by two darts so as to see no more
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	 So, he did everything first by making a small incision in one artery and then the second, followed by removing both arteries as quickly as possible.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	 Then he closed up the other end too tightly against his throat and pressed on her tongue
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	 After closing off one artery in this way, he took some of it out at once.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	 And if someone were to choke a woman's throat and begin drinking quickly without ceasing to tighten their abdominal muscles.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	 And the eyes would roll back in a reflex action as he continued drinking heavily until vomiting occurred.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	 Unless I restrained him and tied off his mouth with a cautery.
ensi demora sens croistre;	 he will continue to drink heavily until vomiting occurs, unless restrained.
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 and I took pity on him in those days, and He alone would forgive his sins after my death.
de l’uve	 from
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	 When the dew rises upon the earth, it is bent down and long, if pressed perpendicular to itself;
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 And when it is spread very wide and thin, if pressed perpendicular to itself.
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	 And when it is cut as finely as we have described in the previous division and does not profit from it, you will see that his eyes become calm, and they are subtle, if one wishes to observe closely.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	 And those who are gathered together and are far away
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 And if it is red or yellow or black, you should make the incision there.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 There is great danger there.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	 When you see it, according to what I have said, of its redness and length, that you make the ulcer face the sun, and press your tongue against the instrument which we have mentioned before.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 Then cut it off quickly and trim the excess, and place on one of the two instruments that we mentioned in making the incision into the second artery.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	 And make sure there is no excess beyond what is natural
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	 if you cut more than necessary and bleed the voice or nose.
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 After the incision, apply what we mentioned in making the incision into the second artery, and treat it as soon as possible.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 "And if you wish to use any cautery on their eyes,
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 The manner of applying the cautery is very important.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	 And when the patient applies heat to the affected area according to the instructions of the fire cautery, and compresses it with a tight wrap, ensuring that it is not too thick nor too thin.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And when using this tool, make sure it fits properly;
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	 And when applying any remedy or ointment to the affected area, as with using a knife and applying it all over the wound;
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	 And if the hairs are on his chest, and saliva and muscle movements cause difficulty swallowing from the medication due to its density, so it is not swallowed or goes down the throat.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	 Then take your hand and apply it all over the wound, pressing as much of its moisture as one hour's worth in order to ensure that you see no pain or discomfort from the medication.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	 "And if you pull the cotton and roll it tightly around any instrument, causing pain in doing so, continue to wrap it tightly around until the cotton stops moving.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	 "And once you're done with that, as long as the fire is still hot, leave it to dry for 4-5 days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	 "And if you've mastered the fire cure technique and it goes well, after applying it to the wound, place a bandage over it and clean any residue from the medical procedure.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And if you apply ice or gargle for as long as you can tolerate being healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	 "This cure is more safe than the fire cure, but still dangerous to the incision;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	 "If you apply it with this method using clove and oregano and rosemary and chamomile and lavender and similar herbs in a single pot, put them to boil;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	 "And let them grow well on hard ground," he instructed, "and make sure to remove any obstructions that might hinder their growth.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	 "Whether made of gold or silver," he continued, "or iron if they are in the mouth near an abscess as it grows and reaches towards the eye, until the eye is damaged.
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	 "After the wound has healed," he instructed, "and make sure you do not move it until after your next appointment with an eye doctor.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 "Do not worry about this," he concluded, "for there are many things that come before the eye doctor's appointment.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	 "And if your instrument is present," he continued, "if you prick a vein and it bleeds heavily from the eye, then do not worry too much.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 "Because the vein may not have given enough time to heal properly," he advised, "and that is a common cure used together with the eye doctor.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	 Many times one swallows or spit out fish, or any thing.
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	 Therefore, it is advisable that you try to see through what you put into your mouth and press the tongue against the sun at all times.
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	 And what you do not swallow and is returned to the mouth, it is advisable that you spit out the food so as to cook in the stomach.
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	 by vomiting, if something has been swallowed.
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	 or swallowing a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or the kernel of dry bread.
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	 and then it swallows the sponge and then spits it out;
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	 and when she comes to her head, she will spit up, and then you will take it.
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	 And if she does not come back because of what we have said, if you hold the instrument according to this form
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	 "And if it reaches the throat with ease, then place its head at an angle to prevent choking.
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	 "Also be careful not to touch the epiglottis or scratch it in any way, as that may harm the delicate structures.
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	 "And make sure not to touch the instrument when you are done using it or any part of it is dirty.
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	 "If he throws away the instrument immediately after use or if it has been used for something else.
de la sansue de la gorge	 the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	 "No treatment is given without consulting a doctor as I stated earlier in the chapter on medical care;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 "And if it does not work immediately and you notice that the abscess is red or inflamed in the throat after using an instrument I told you about earlier.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 If you see the sore, if it is very small and tender, or there are tiny veins which may be present in this
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 If it is not worth it, then take a warm compress and place it in the throat where the sore is after which you should apply gentle pressure on it and do this accordingly
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 And if there are sores that keep coming back again.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	 "Then rinse with ice-cold water and gargle, and gently suck the abscess back to prevent swallowing.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 "and if suddenly he senses heat
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	 and if the patient does not feel any sudden heat as we have advised in the fumigation process.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 Do this many times because she will need targeting of her wound.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	 The method of the fumigation is that you prick or pierce it with a needle where there are charcoal splinters, and in both cases cover the area with gauze and bandage securely.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	 Then apply the fumigation and place a cloth soaked in it over her mouth, covering both lips tightly if she is unable to breathe through it.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	 And now the treatment should continue and repeat the fumigation many times as needed,
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	 and if her wounds become infected with bad smells or tastes, and she does not feel any heat,
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 And after that the injury has become greater than what was expected by this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	 And the form of the instrument used to treat the poison, if seen whole and properly, it can cause convulsions from muscles entering the throat.
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	 And its appearance is like a bee sting, and it causes numbness of the limb if you take it, you cannot stop feeling numb.
et vez ci la forme:	 There it says
li chapistres des apostemes	 The physician instructed the patient to keep their arm steady so they cannot move until they
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	 The forms of the abscesses vary depending on what is described in this book and are perforated or cut.
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 There are two ways one can occur; either it resembles a bee sting but from moisture or
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 The second way it can occur is when there are cuts on the arm
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 The second way it can occur is when there are cuts on the arm
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	 If an abscess is not pierced through and through, as long as the bow remains moist.
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 If you have already pierced them and they are still alive after that according to their completion or the joints, whichever comes first.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 When veins come from joints and are left to be pierced through until they are completely cut through; because when a wound occurs that requires piercing in the vein or nerve of the joint, it is due to a contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	 "When the arm is dislocated from its joint, if you hold it steady while making a small cut on the main part of it.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	 "Or when it is from the base, if the hole is too shallow then make sure that you are cutting through to the middle.
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	 "Do not cut through the bone without making sure you have reached to the middle of it. Make sure that if you are cutting from the base then do not pass through any nerves or blood vessels.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 "And may never heal in this way.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	 "Make sure you have done the cut through the joint correctly and ensure that any pain or movement of a vein is prevented. And be careful with all other signs as well.
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	 "Make sure you have made the cut in such way that it cannot move around freely. And make sure you do not cut through any blood vessels.
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	 "And if it pierces through the long tendons, and seizes the arteries or veins, or in the joints of the nose or ears, then there is no escape.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 The first sentence translates to "The one who seeks...
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 And when the abscess is opened, if it can be closed while still complete in digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	 "And if you pierce through this vein, and it hits an artery of the head, then they are dead.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 "And by that time, their limbs become paralyzed and they are filled with fear.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And if any abscess is pierced through the large part of the limb, that which has been treated thusly will be healed more quickly.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	 "It is also necessary to stretch the patient's arms and legs gently.
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	 "And in great strokes, great kicks, as much force as possible on one arm or leg.
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	 "If there are such strokes or kicks that they should be given with the heel,
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	 "When it has become so, if possible to do so, do what you would do for a fever.
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	 "And if there are teeth that have been broken in half or more, and if they come out with the force of an arrow, like arrows from an animal's mouth,
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 "And if there are teeth that have had a cavity or other holes made in them, and similar things.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	 If someone has no wisdom teeth but only surface ones, it is advised to remove those simply.
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	 "And when the wisdom teeth are large and cause great swelling, it is advised to remove them in pieces rather than removing all of them at once.
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	 After that, you should stop the bleeding immediately and treat whatever blood there is gently.
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	 "Do this over and over again as necessary until all of the bleeding stops.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 The teeth are particularly vulnerable to weakness or injury when they have been exposed for a long time due to illness, old age, or lack of care.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 This sentence means that if the swelling persists after repeatedly pressing on it to no avail (as indicated by "que par aventure muert li malaides" - even though you're pressing on it), then do not press further as this will only cause more harm than good, and could potentially worsen the injury.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	 "Perform the fire procedure with great care. When you have pricked your abscess, if there is a small wound, and observe whether it is superficial.
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	 If it is simple, then try to gently remove any lint or gauze that might be attached.
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	 If it is large and painful, try to gently separate the abscess as much as possible, if necessary, so that one side does not touch the other.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	 If you have exposed a part of the abscess to air and it has started to weep or ooze moisture, try gently pulling out any lint or gauze that might be stuck on its surface.
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then apply pressure until the bleeding stops.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 "And every time that chapter is opened, it often occurs that blood is evacuated from the opening of a vein, and incision into an abscess, and in treating wounds, and in extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, similar things; where there's doubt and fear, many die.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	 And if the abscess continues to persist, try to apply pressure and care for it as much as possible. Take powders that I have mentioned in my hands from this book, or any other remedies you may have, and if they help ease your pain or anxiety, wrap them with linen cloth soaked in vinegar and oil.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	 "And when you hold the eyelids tight and steady, if the patient is good or indifferent to doing so, then close them gently but firmly.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Then remove the arrow and treat the wound as necessary, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	 "And in treating abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	 "Do this before you treat the abscess and follow your physician's instructions.
des soros	 sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 And the methods of us that are in the clouds, and those like one from another, but they say
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	 "It is in such cases, where moisture causes it to move:
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 "and if the joint is very hard and painful to straighten, there will be no doubt that it cannot move contrary to your efforts.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 The length of time until the effect wears off depends on what you call an instrument that is called "entremisoire" which means it takes effect after a while, and then fades away
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 If there's moisture present, if the fire cautery is done by skilled surgeons only
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	 "And when the moisture is very high and you should not leave the hairs containing that moisture alone because it will return whenever left unattended.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	 "Then plunge him into a hot bath if he is present.
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	 If not, gently clean and bandage the wound and place it next to the other one.
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 And those who are suffering from this will die
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	 Then rinse gently with clean water if it is present, and the second wound as well, so that you ensure that it does not move in any way.
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Finally treat the burn with something suitable until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	 And hold the eyelids steady if the patient follows this form of treatment, so that they do not move.
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	 and get your fingernails and remove all the dirt from every place, and apply all of your remedies to where it hurts.
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 And if you do what I have told you after that.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 "In addition to holding them tightly when instructed by the surgeon and during healing, you must also hold tight if the abscess is painful.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 "The incision into the abscess should be deep but gentle, as it can cause pain; because they are soft and tender parts of the body.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	 And if there are any of these bones or joints that no longer have moisture, and the fractures were caused by a broken bone in one place
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	 And I found this bone in the same way, sharp and white, that could not be fractured.
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 If there is no such thing, then apply a dressing similar to one in the same way as an injury.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	 In other bones that come or go from the ears and roots of the ear, it is important to keep them tightly bound with a bandage if they get loose.
et les cure si com il covient.	 And you must treat them as advised.
des scrophules	 scalp
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 Often these abscesses occur at the base of the scalp, and along the hairline; there are none elsewhere on the body, except for sores that open up and heal quickly once they start.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	 And any scab should be securely attached to the side of the body if it is rough and the bone protrudes through the skin as we have said before.
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 The wounds from these sores are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 There were some sores that contained moisture, which refused to obey to the treatment.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	 In that case where you see good alignment of the axis, and there are no problems with the arms, and he is not able to bend or move his head in any direction.
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	 If you want to continue with the dislocation treatment and attempt to align it better by using a pillow or similar support, then do so if necessary.
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 And as you go slowly and carefully, be sure that your neck does not move or touch the face, do not force it too far so that you do not cause injury to yourself; use gentle pressure only when necessary.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	 And if you try to align the veins or arteries and they do not respond, put on a cloth wrapped in vinegar, or any other soothing powder that can help alleviate it.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 And let it remain as long as the abscess is closed, and until the wound heals completely, and until the infection subsides.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	 When he has finished, so that you have done it all:
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 After doing everything to the best of your ability and strength, then examine whether there are any small wounds.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	 If there is a significant vein at the base of the wound and it's not possible to close that wound with sutures alone, then tie a strong, double thread around it and leave it loose so that it can be tightened later.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 After covering the wound with Egyptian cotton gauze and dressing it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 And if you cover the whole abscess, then make sure to tie up two layers of the wound and keep it moist now, and there is no need for further treatment due to its size.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 If you want to understand how the fire treatment works, and take care of the root of it, as we have said
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	 The wounds that are not significant should be examined here or now.
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	 And the one in front of it will be treated with Egyptian cotton gauze and similar things if it becomes infected or corrupted.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "When a wound is well healed, as long as there are no stitches.
de squinance	 Squint
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	 They spoke and talked about the throat stretching
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	 But I do not see anyone in our land who practices it, as this is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	 Those with a cleft palate should have the roof of the mouth (hard palate) removed.
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	 And this cannot be helped in any way because all the veins and arteries are at risk for those with an open wound in the mouth or throat, or both.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	 When the disease is in the channel due to water, it's necessary to cover up the epiglottis so as to prevent drowning that has come from choking.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	 When we want to remove the hard palate (palate), it should be done from within or between the two circles of the roof of the mouth, depending on how much of the roof is to be removed.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 The head of the shoulder cannot move because it is dislocated from its socket, causing discomfort and misalignment in the joint.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	 And if it is painful to do so, extend the skin from the throat all the way down to the chin, and hold tightly as you swallow.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	 Remove the veins of blood, if you see nothing else, and then close your eyes when we have said so;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	 And demonstrate through the section of the throat where it slips out from the left side that is torn and by the defect in the voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 Leave a small cut open.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	 And when time is passing without doubt of strangulation, bind the two ends of the wound together and continue sewing up to the elbow.
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then apply medications that make your pain better as long as it lasts.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	 This must not be done until the throat is completely stopped up and the patient's breath has ceased entirely; at that point they are to be considered dead.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	 When the epiglottis is unable to move because of swelling, it blocks breathing and death ensues.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	 Until the patient leaves the illness and is cured in three days or four, they must leave it open so that the disease does not spread.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	 I saw a woman spit into the fire and burned part of her tongue
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 And I went to call for help, but found it already dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	 I discovered the wound and found that it was caused by an abscess, which appeared to be protruding from within; I knew that its flow could only pass through the throat, as seen in this case.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	 I got sick and cut out the sore until it was cured;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	 And he did not have her speak again after she recovered.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 Because of that, I thought the epiglottis had no fear.
de la grosse gorge	 the big throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	 Hernia of the throat is called an incisional hernia, and it has many colors due to its location.
et est selonc II manieres:	 and there are two types:
naturez, et accidens;	 natural and accidental.
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 it cannot be helped by any means.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	 The accidental type has two forms: one is when the fat comes out through an incision, and another form occurs due to damage from arteries.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	 And there is fear, and it is advisable not to try anything more invasive.
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	 If you pull it out as if from a knot and cannot remove any hair, seek medical attention immediately.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 And seek immediate medical attention, until they are perfectly healed.
des nous	 Of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	 In all these ways I shall tell you everything.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 And it is necessary that I explain the difference between not and issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	 I say that issue means strength and firmness until the ejaculation stops, and it is achieved through perseverance.
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	 Until rest has been obtained and strength has been maintained.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	 Without issue there is no strength or firmness, and contains it self-sabotage which is its own trap and is contrary to the course of nature. And it causes swelling that becomes large;
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 are similar in their effects, whether heavy or moist, and all wounds are like I have said in the previous statement.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	 When you come to the treatment of dislocation, it is important that you first examine thoroughly all the instruments which are called "extricators" as described in this chapter, depending on how they shape or form and after the practitioner who is experienced in their use.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	 And the manner of extracting arrows from wounds is that you pierce it more deeply than you would in a limb, and keep turning your two points until the essence has been extracted completely, then according to the size of the arrow.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 And hold on to your breath as well.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	 When moisture runs through the artery, it will cause injury if not treated promptly and appropriately.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	 After the artery is opened and treated appropriately, if moisture remains present it will cause injury, especially if there are any tears in the wall of the vein that may need to be closed or repaired.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 If you do not treat it properly and promptly, it will cause no harm.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	 When it is treated appropriately and promptly, it may return in many ways.
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	 If it is treated promptly and appropriately even a little bit, preventing injury from corrosive acidic substances that damage the skin, and closing wounds quickly to prevent further injury.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 And they swell greatly if they reach two thirds of the wound's length, and the remedy for which is to cut away what causes the harm
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	 And if the vein is against or on top, and you need to remove the base of the vein bone, let it heal for two or three days until the wound has healed.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	 After that, return to the surgeon who did the treatment earlier
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	 Here are three forms of external wounds:
grans et moien et petit;	 large and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	 There are three kinds, called "albaret," "breb," and they come in the following forms:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	 large, medium, and small, through which to open an abscess.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	 And these are like the needles which pierce the horns, and they are of iron or silver, or gold, and may be yellow, and are more easily removed with black pitch.
et sont de III manieres:	 And there are three ways
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 large, medium, small, according to the quantity of blood vessels
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	 The shapes of arteries are like this:
grans, moiens, et petis;	 large, medium, and small
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	 and if one artery has three ways of each kind.
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	 And if an artery has three openings, and they are the same way in all three.
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	 And if an artery has two openings, but one of them is only half as wide and they are the same way in all three.
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 It must be considered necessary on their own.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	 The head of these is where one finds it most useful, and for those who cannot stand the pain that arises from cutting through them, which causes nerve damage.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	 And regarding these issues are the ulcers healed after opening of veins.
et sont de III manieres:	 The third way is through:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	 great, small, and mild, as you see it
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	 And if you can't find any better way, then by all means do what I have suggested.
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 No other small tool is suitable for cutting incisions like this one, according to this method of making an incision; where the injury occurs.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	 And they should never apply any force when performing procedures involving veins and arteries; none of this violent or forceful behavior is acceptable.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	 No matter how many times they try to break open, as long as they seem to be of the same type;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 And when they are opened and closed, and who cure it as needed according to this way of doing the incision line by line up until .g.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 Then sew up the fat and close the wound starting from above, then gather the two halves of the wound to stitch them together, and cure until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	 And she has lost her hair at its roots, it is smooth because of its greatness like when it was a woman, but now that it has two swords in hand, she faces two dangers.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	 And if both are held at the end of one and the other, then the longer line will contain the shorter in this manner: b. after the line g.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And after cutting through the flesh between the two cuts and removing fat, he must follow what we have said about stitching and powdering, as well as what is necessary in treatment, so long as it remains sane.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	 And if it is not healed or the incision is not completely done, so that wounds do not heal properly, or due to the corrosive nature of the cotton, you should apply the healing wound with absorbent cotton.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 And let him remain until he has finished shaving his beard and chest hair, then continue to hold him steady as long as it is still straight.
des apostemes des asselles	 "of the shoulders
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	 The veins in the arms may be used as conduits for carrying blood to places where it is needed or contains moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 "Whoever is experiencing moisture must lie down as follows:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the vein that is being opened is visible and there is an open wound nearby, soak it with cotton and leave it in the other hole, then apply more cotton until it is saturated.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	 And the abscesses are of similar severity: if it is as bad as we experienced in previous abscesses, and there is a wound bleeding, then use the fire cautery as we suggested before.
de la routure de l’artere	 From the route of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	 When the artery runs through and the skin is pierced as it were, if there are many times the pain occurs at the opening of an artery or vein.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	 And if you suspect that it is due to the artery, if it happens repeatedly in front of one's chest,
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	 and when you feel at your back, if you feel pain.
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	 And when it is due to the vein, if it bleeds in front of a person.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 It is folly to try to cope with this pain, and in particular when it occurs at the angles and corners where one can also touch oneself with other parts of the body, and there are many problems.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	 It is advisable to avoid the cure of fire, and for those who are sick it is advisable to also avoid this, and in case there is a vein cut through the skin deeply into muscle.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	 After measuring its length, remove a significant amount of blood vessels
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	 After piercing one artery and cutting through to the other side, hold onto a single artery with two loops
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	 Hold tightly onto the loop that is between the two incisions until you remove it and the artery.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	 Apply a tourniquet to the limb while holding on tight.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Cure any bleeding that arises during this procedure as much as possible.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	 And hold onto the artery in your hand as you remove it from all of its surrounding tissue, and then pierce another artery into that limb.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	 After removing a stitch or cut from one of two similar parts.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	 And if you are doubtful about the healing process, if another incision is needed on all the similar parts of the first incision and hold steady with four stitches.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	 Continue holding the eye open until it has stopped bleeding entirely, then close the eyelid gently and let that be done.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat with ointments of oil and grease, then administer treatments for burns until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	 of the arms
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	 As veins and arteries become damaged or through too much work
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	 And when this happens more often with joints and dislocations, causing the eye to become swollen or painful, and its colour seems to lose its normal colour due to trauma.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	 And when it is held down during restraint, if the eye causes pain and does not open normally even with ointment, but only with pressure.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	 And must always stay still, not going forward or backward, nowhere to go but straight ahead. The one in joints should remain steady by force
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	 through contraction
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 And those who are up or down or forward, put on the bandage tightly
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	 If the patient's pulse is weak and he has tender tendons around his elbow;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and if he is large, if his spine is tender, then apply tight pressure to the wound, hold it closed until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	 "The large breasts hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	 No matter where they come from and don't go to another place. And there is a disease that is called 'fuge' because of the similarity with 'aus', it has a subtle cause, and large root;
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	 And in its course are many things large and small;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 And I saw one that had II or III bellies which were more similar to the others, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a large root, and they were hollowed out, and in it there was excess moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	 I saw one of them weighing 18 ounces and the other six, and their veins when cut open showed that they were wet, and the color of the artery was bright white and moist and had a soft root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 If you apply it to the inflamed area, then apply fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	 Because dislocations often occur from a joint that moves out of place and is unable to move again, if you tighten the dislocation without performing surgery.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	 And if you see the vein is inflamed and painful from cutting it, if you tie off the artery well and leave two stitches.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	 "And hold it steady while cutting into its base as much as possible, making sure to do so with care.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	 "If the roots are large and there is fear because of its location close to the belly, but you must still carefully cut it out, then cauterize so that it does not grow back.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 "Afterwards treat the wound and make sure you do not cut into any veins that are blue in color and poor in quality as well as those that have white hairs.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	 "And I will come to treat you for the ulcer after this.
quant li boude ist fuer	 When you say that
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	 "And the appearance of the boil comes from a boil or a furuncle, and is on the belly and in no case are there any pustules that come out of veins or arteries as long as it exists, unless otherwise stated.
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 "And it is through the incision of furuncle and removal of boil that this happens; if there are pus from an abscess which come out as well, these will have a different appearance due to their proximity to the belly, and they may be light in color with little pain, but can cause multiple issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	 And if it comes through the intestine, then there are many different issues, and when pressed at its two ends, it returns, and often spreads, enlarging to enter into the bath water as well as causing much work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	 "It is by moisture, it's a light thing, and when you press on it with your hand, do not hold tight.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	 "And by an abscess if pressed at the base of the eye socket, will cause great pain and injury;
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 "And by sudden movement if there is pain in the ear or eye socket, and when you look at its appearance from an artery or vein.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 "If necessary, allow the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 Because there is doubt and fear, as I mentioned earlier in this chapter about the doctor's work, for arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	 "And by the intestine or bowel, if you instruct to take his remedy and swallow it without delay, then be sure that nothing bad will enter your body;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	 "Then command to put in between your hands and then go into the mouth that you have signed with all the saliva. Then be sure of it until death;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	 Then bind it tightly with a strong rope or cord firmly.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	 Stretch the abdomen outward and bring your knees to indicate it, and tighten your abdominal muscles.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	 If you take the right leg, if necessary, and place it on top of the abdomen.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	 And if you use the left leg to pass over the knee, and make sure there is nothing in its way.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	 And if you make the opposite movement or come out of it and then return to your own side and take two more stakes, and put them into the holes that you have made on this side where you think they pierce.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	 Then tighten the abscess with four stakes through the holes, and if you view it from above, the stakes, and leave one loose as much as possible, and pierce the heart by yourself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	 When it happens suddenly and forcefully, then treat as before.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 Treat the wound with moisture or friction until healing occurs, and straighten it afterwards.
dou chancre	 There are two chances
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	 In the treatment of gallbladder stones, after incision there should be done by medicines, and also in doing the cure to remove.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	 And treat the gallbladder in a certain manner, and do much cautery to remove it, and say that when a gallstone is loose or can be removed as before, and then in its discharge, and in the same way, and they should do everything as soon as it comes.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	 And when it is large and old, then you approach it alone because there are no others able to help.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	 No one else can assist in its removal before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	 And if it is loose or can't be held open, as we have said, you must remove the black scab.
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	 Then apply pressure to make the dislocation pop back into place.
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	 Then squeeze any abscesses and the base of all veins so nothing remains inside.
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And leave the wound completely exposed, and press it well with your hand or any object so that no stitches are made contrary to an incision in the artery or vein if it is burned as long as you stay still.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And continue other treatments until all wounds have healed.
de ydropisie	 dislocation
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	 We have said in the division of the signs of inflammation and that the assembly of the fire is made, and the signs of a broken limb, and the treatment which is done by medicines, and the healing which is done with fire.
si est eclites soulement;	 Only if
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	 And they must not try to do this either.
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	 It is important to know that tympanitis and otitis occur because it can be deadly.
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	 When you have this symptom of dropsy that is called "eclights" from the medicine, and its cure does not profit if one sees that the hairs are weak or if there is another disease other than dropsy, such as abdominal pain or similar things.
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	 If you do not try to do this because of doubt.
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	 And if you see the hair very white and it has only dropsy without any other disease but for dropsy itself, do not overdo it.
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 Take the hair in your hand and press firmly to the stomach at its base, near the lowest part of the belly button, then take the spiny thimble according to this form.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And there are two ways to do this.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	 "If one presses him hard enough to the intestine when he is released, it will not be able to come back and will become weaker.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	 "Look if it has dropped into them (intestines).
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	 "If you need to find out where the bone is located, do this: touch his shoulder blade with your finger.
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	 "And if it has dropped into them due to liver disease, then you should look for its location in the third rib.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	 "If it is due to fatigue, and you are on the right side of him, then focus on checking his shoulder blade for any bruising that may indicate weakness.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	 "Then carefully examine his body thoroughly, from head to toe, and gently touch the space between his skin and fur as you would when washing him.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 As soon as the skin is tight and firm at the incision site, then apply pressure directly on it.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	 There should be some silver thread, either fine or coarse, and also attached to the small part of it.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	 Or use a separate piece for that purpose.
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	 And another one on the other side as well.
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 Apply pressure in a way that is like a pen's form and also matches the incision shape from which the doctors measure it.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	 On applies pressure in an elbow when the vessels are close together, and as soon as they come into contact with it.
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	 If you see more than is necessary in those cases, as time goes on and it seems to be resolved by the arm's strength or death comes closer.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	 But according to its quantity, and considering that the wounds of the flesh mean, it follows
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	 Then gather the instrument and hold it steady, as you would if piercing through the flesh of your finger.
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	 Then release the instrument and hold it steady again as you would if piercing through the flesh of your finger.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 Do not pull it until there is no more pain and a moment of rest has been provided.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	 And if you doubt about the wound and let go of the instrument, then seek medical help or soak in warm water, until it is healed.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 And the treatment of drying agents as long as it is healthy, and cauterize over the stomach, liver, spleen after extraction of the arrow, if what I have said in front of you.
de l’estopement de la verge	 "The extraction of blood from a vein".
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 There are no infants who have no injury in the ear, or the injury is small, or it is not present at all
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 "If he desires as much so that there is no pain throughout his spine in such a subtle manner according to this form.
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	 "Then let him put it gently between the finger and thumb, holding it firmly in place for three or four hours as he feels necessary. If it is swollen, and making urine will not help, then he must reapply.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 "And on the other hand, nothing came from it because the urine that comes out does not remain closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 "This is where we put our attention if it's a matter of urgency or importance as you've mentioned, and should expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	 "Those who have lost their grip on the left are blighted, because none of them can hold the testicle at the top if they do not keep their foreskin up.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 "They cannot enter or come into contact with that material as it brings about marriage and is a bad illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	 "The manner of the procedure is that they shave down to their anus, leaving the foreskin and the top as smooth as a fingernail. If it should occur during intercourse, if necessary.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And keep from applying any ointment that often comes with many times, and if it happens when the vein is cut open, or in treating a wound until it heals
des pustules de la verge	 skin lesions
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	 The second sentence seems to be incomplete. Could you please provide more context so I can better assist?
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	 Are you referring to the line "et en i a malignes et non malignes;" in reference to venoms and non-venoms, or something else entirely?
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	 If you want the stitches removed gently, but make sure they are tightly bound in cotton and then apply Egyptian ointment.
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After that, treat the healed wound until it is completely healed
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 If it is a malignant tumor, do not burn it with fire;
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	 After you have applied the ointment and it has spread through the furrow, if it is necessary to remove only that which is dense first.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 And when it is dry, treat with what you like best.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	 When you cure a burn, if it is not treated promptly, the blisters may break open and cause further infection.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 You should apply a paste made of honey and flour, ground from the stems of onions and garlic, to treat burns as well; then repeat the treatment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 And when the patient is being treated with a lunar fire cure as follows:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	 The cautery provides relief by instructing the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold them steady so that they do not move until they grow.
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	 It is also important in dealing with sores and infections;
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	 And if the blisters are broken and inflamed, you should apply a paste made of honey and flour, ground from the stems of onions and garlic, to treat burns as well.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	 And when you find that the blisters are coming to the head of the vein and it has become inflamed due to a wound or abscess, if you suspect that the vein may be injured too, make sure you squeeze gently at all points of the vein, until both ends of it are delivered.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	 "And you are to gently draw it back into its place if necessary.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 "Subsequently, put the limb between two pieces of cloth that are moist and cold, so as to make it stay still.
de la circoncision	 circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	 "Circoncision is similar to other wounds in terms of healing process.
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	 "In any case when we do our best to perform this work of ours with care and properly, if it is done well by us, then the outcome will be better than others in terms of healing.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	 I say that the earlier ones did not know how to circumcise their children, as they were unaware of its custom and we only have what we acquired through trial and error.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	 "But I want the greatest part from those masters and doctors who did circumcision before me, for they were powerful and all skilled.
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	 "And if it is because of the second blow and from chance that it came upon him in this way or otherwise.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	 "The dislocation occurs here, causing great pain to both members.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	 "The joint is often dislocated due to the sharpness of the object, causing great pain and many dislocations.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	 From the strong incision that was made with great force to all parts of the body I got the good fortune through trial and error because the strong ones cut very similarly as those who did it skillfully.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	 "When you press your hand, if you make it move slightly...
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	 "...the fingers are still in the groove.
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	 "...when you press your hand as if you were thinking of a child, should he hold on, make sure to let the fingers stay in place only, and then gently pull them out using all the movements that you've learned.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	 "...then place it between your hands directly and pull the fingers gently out of your hand. When you're done, make sure to close them up using all the movements that you know.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	 "And breathe deeply through your nose, holding it high as long as the dislocation remains.
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	 "After cleaning up the discharge, tie your arm to a double loop of thread with strong binding.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	 "Then tie the other arm to a hook and thumb loop at opposite ends, crossing them, then loosen the loops of binding, release it from its place and cut off the base of the shoulder.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	 "Then let the discharge run slowly, as it must.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And then mix the powder with a mixture of wax that has been heated until it is dry and brittle like dried rose petals; put this onto a hot iron and press flat.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	 "The form of force for purification, as follows:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	 The dislocated shoulder should remain loose and relaxed.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	 There was an error during the dissection when the cords were cut into.
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	 When it is necessary to straighten your arm by bending at the elbow so that they are held steady.
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	 And then gently extend and hold on tight if you're unable to straighten it by bending at the elbow, and release when ready.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	 If they enter the third joint and swell up at that point where it's inflamed, if you let them go until the stitches are removed gently.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	 If your arm becomes numb or there is numbness in that area after holding it tight, do not worry about it.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	 Treat any sudden wounds with powders that we have mentioned earlier in this chapter.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Treat the wounds as quickly as possible,
dou retenement de l’urine	 Retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	 "Hold the urine back if there is a fever or coldness in an abscess, or when a vein becomes blocked, or in the case of a boil, or similar things that we have mentioned in our text.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	 "And if the urine is not held back tightly, and you see that there is a contraction at the base of the bladder, it's important to ensure that the veins are closed.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	 "The buttocks should be positioned behind him and extended on his back side. And tighten the bladder to prevent it from moving.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	 "And when closing the bladder at its peak expression of the base is important to prevent leakage from occurring.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	 "And when it does not work as we have mentioned and the veins cause great pain if you perform an extraction using a tool called 'string', which is its shape.
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	 And if it is a light touch of silver, as when removing an abscess.
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 And if with the palm of one and a half, or lightly on top
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	 The manner of using a needle for urine is that you take two, and tie to the top with wool or cotton, and then tie around the thread as it goes through.
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	 And put an end to the wool and tie around the needle's head with the thread as it goes through.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	 Then tightly wrap the thread around at the root of the thread, and then tie it under where you want.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	 Then tie the needle in front of the bladder and let it go toward where you want to go, but not until it has reached there.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	 And then it is taken to all its wool one by one, and tied in after the wool, then removed and straightened.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 Repeat the treatment as long as there are wounds visible or bleeding, and tie them to prevent movement.
des maladies de la vessie	 urinary tract infections
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	 If scours or wounds come into the bladder, or through urine is gathered together and you view them as clear and treat with appropriate ointments if it has been called "clepsydra".
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	 She is closed off securely; if a third attempt occurs...
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	 On the one hand and on the other hand as you see.
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	 And hold his eyelids so that the cure ointment is applied well to prevent itching and swelling as much as possible, if it becomes too dry.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	 And when you apply your medicine in the vein, put a cloth soaked with water on top of it to cool it down and prevent further burning.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	 If there is more burning after applying the cure, quickly rinse it off with cold water.
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	 If there is moisture inside and swelling occurs, then immediately come to the vein for treatment if they start to hurt.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	 And this is how one performs a subtle cauterization
si est ci:	 so that
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	 It may be from the arm or the thigh, and higher up.
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	 Either on the left side or both sides.
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	 Then take a sheep's vein and put the moisture from which you have heated up the vein between two fingers to form a double knot, then tie it tight with a thread so that the heat is held on the fire.
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	 Then heat up the head of the fire and hold your hand tight around the vein while applying moisture all over it until the hairs feel as though they are hot from the moisture.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	 And if you don't have a vein, then take some parchment and make an even circle around it, and cut it neatly in half.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	 Then take the strong thread in between them and tie it as you would tie a knot.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 And do what you did with the vessel, press your hand until the moisture has gone from it.
de la piere	 of the
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	 We have mentioned in that passage the techniques of piercing and extraction for the treatment of wounds.
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	 I mentioned the difference between a first incision and one to remove stones, and in piercing when it must be done with great caution.
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	 In veins and in skin
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	 I will explain thoroughly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	 I said that when piercing is done in the vein if it has not been made with great caution and it causes an immediate jump of blood from the vein.
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	 And I mentioned that after piercing into veins, and especially near their surface, they should be held gently many times, and then tied
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	 And hold the limb steady during this process.
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	 "And healing is gentle until they are four years old, and increases with age, causing pain to those who are between youth and old.
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	 And the treatment is more mild for those who have a great many, compared to those who only have a few.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to the cure, if it is necessary first to harden or soften the abscess by scraping gently around it, so that all the blood vessels inside are not disturbed.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 "The patient has had no prior dislocation.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	 Then take the abscess by its base and remove it with a probe, if the abscess is at the front of the bladder, so that no urine leaks out.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	 Then place it between your hands and have your hands placed below his legs, so that the bladder does not descend downwards.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	 Then squeeze tightly until you feel a sense of closure.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 If you have already felt the abscess at that point, if your hand is now ready to remove it from its place.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	 If it doesn't feel like you need to press harder on the whole thing, if your second finger feels numb or loose from squeezing too hard, then the abscess is getting softer and more tender.
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	 And insert it into your anus, and hold tight to its base, and when you feel at its tip, if the opening of the vagina
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 And then push it in your rectum, and tighten around that exit as far as possible
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	 And order the minister to press the vagina into his hand and tell him to extend both fists up high in front of them, so that he can see if there are any sores beneath where one might shave the legs;
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	 And then apply the spatula gently as described below
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	 Then place it between where your legs meet and the base of the spine straight ahead;
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	 And tighten it both at the base and at its end, as far forward or backward depending on how wide your pelvis is, making sure not to overly stretch it, according to the size of the opening, do not excessively stretch it;
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	 "When you press on it, where exactly are you pressing?
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	 "It is either at the highest part of it or near its edge.
si est griés a issir;	 "If you say that you are pressing on it while trying to sit up.
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 "And if you say you're pressing on it and feel numbness or tingling in your hands, that is more severe.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	 "When there are edges and corners to press on, the larger size of it will be felt.
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	 "And if you press on it and do not feel any numbness or tingling, then you need to strengthen the grip with your fingers.
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	 "Or if you've tried using subtle instruments such as a needle for example at its base, but it doesn't work.
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	 "And if you try to push or pull on it and cannot straighten your leg without pain, then the dislocation is severe.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 "And if there is more than one, pierce the first with the largest at its base, then close it, and after that make little cuts on either side.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 "And if necessary, make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	 "The two things I mentioned earlier are:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	 "Or if they die or the urine comes out with a great burst and leaks,
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	 "but you'll try to stop tearing by restraining it, or cutting through the tendons, until you tear it in small pieces;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	 "And when you've finished your task, if there is a wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood to heal it, hold tight until the wound heals. You can cover it in oil or wine, either hot or cold, to soothe the eye;
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 "And then rinse off the area around it and leave the connection as it was.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "When you dislocate it, if the bone is loose and flexible, then only hold onto its ends until both are healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	 "And he will hold in the bladder and prevent urination:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	 And if you are in pain, and feel it again after surgery, as it causes the bladder to swell and urinate excessively.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then remove the bandage from above and below, and help him in all ways as you can, until he is calm.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 And make sure to follow the prescribed treatments that are given to you by a doctor.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	 The last sentence translates to: "And his wounds will be small and closed off from the skin, with no ability to urinate.
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 If you follow these instructions carefully many times, then please excuse any delay in receiving the treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have already provided a translation for this sentence.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	 Place it at an angle of three degrees, fixed to one side:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	 Then take this file and insert it into the base of the urethra if you are unable to urinate immediately.
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	 "Heeding the doctor's instructions, he gently rubbed his forehead, as much as it hurt.
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	 He then pulled on his brow with gentle strokes and as far to the other side as he could.
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 Once it is this close, press your hand firmly on that area between his brows which has been shaved very short.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	 If broken, and the patient bleeds, and gets a cut in their brow hairs.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	 And if you don't do this for any reason, then shave off the eyebrow hair on one side and another, then put it back together with a single cut between them both.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And keep treating him until he is healed.
de la piere des femmes	 of the very worst
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	 Whenever the forehead is shaved on both sides in women, and if it has no times been done before, then treat him for three things;
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	 One thing to note about a virgin woman
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	 The second is that you can't find a good match for her if she isn't chaste to some extent, especially when she gets older.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	 The third way is that through experience you cannot find a good match in the field of hands;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	 The fourth way is that the first of the woman may be stronger than the first of the man. As you get older, it becomes more important to have fine judgment and great care, or else fear will come upon you. And when one loses this subtle wisdom, they cannot find true love;
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	 The fifth way is that a wise woman in the life of women is like one who learns and masters part of art, and commands what you command of her inquiry into her heart.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	 "And look well to see if she is a virgin.
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	 "Or, he should inquire of its location and seek out the source;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 "And if he truly finds its location and restrains it with his fingers, then he recommends that she prick her finger into the abscess, and wishes for her to press her finger into the vein;
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	 "And if she truly finds its location and desires to move it in small steps from the entrance of the vein down towards its source until she reaches the root of the arm;
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	 "Then he severs the tendon at its base and in that area where it is most apparent, so as to see what part of her arm it is, and sees the source in that same part;
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	 "And does not move his second finger from its place or remove it, but rather cuts off only one at first.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	 In length, when you sense your pain from the wound as long as it is not healed yet, and there are many ways to relieve pain.
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 It includes knowledge of small things and large ones, acute and chronic, short-term and long-term, and others.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 "To ensure that everything is clear and to know what comes next.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And if it is not healed within a certain time period, hold them steady as long as they stay put;
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	 Then come back to your work while the wound is still there, and apply remedies I have told you in the extraction of a stone by helping it heal.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	 And if it is from the artery that is cut off, then apply powder to the left and right side of the wound as well, do not repeat this anymore, leave it alone but not tear the vein completely, or else you will cause more harm.
puis cure la plaie.	 "Apply a dressing to the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	 "And when the cold sore is painful, if it returns to its place, as long as it's healed.
de hernie carnouse	 Hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	 "Ramie is nothing but an assembly of moisture or white pus, which contains the evil spirits.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	 "It is called 'syfac', and once it is on a clean cloth there should be no more pus.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	 "This is what we mean when we say 'syfac'.
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	 "It does not happen.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	 The growth of this blister is a result of inflammation that causes the material to spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	 "And once it comes from pus that has been squeezed out, and the moisture is present in many places:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	 "Or there are colors becoming yellow or black or aqueous stains, which has more.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 "And these are the signs of knowing that assembly exists; whether it is 'syfac' or pus as we have said, if there are wounds open because moisture fills everywhere.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	 And if there is moisture inside it [the abscess], then pierce and explore with part of the blade, as for this reason we believe that it is another injury.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	 And if there is moisture between the skin of the veins and the white fascia, when it feels good;
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 If you see where the moisture is coming from, through which orifice it entered should be clear to you.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	 "After examining the injured part, determine what has caused it.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	 And when we cure it with fire, if necessary make sure the hairs are healthy and filled up for their growth.
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	 Then tie a bandage to his back, put something soft on it.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	 Then bind the side of his chest and tell the minister to do it right, extend the bandage over one of the two ribs on the right.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	 Then take a sharp blade and make an incision through the muscle to the bone on both sides of his chest until you reach the spine, then tie it tightly so that the white skin is pulled taut as possible.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	 After applying fire cupping to the right shoulder, hold your breath, and then raise it up.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	 Do not touch any other parts of the body except for the area being cupped.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	 If you apply it too lightly or don't do it correctly, then it may come back with an abscess.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	 After applying fire cupping to the left shoulder, if you miss it completely then make sure that you perform the procedure correctly.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After wrapping both joints of the affected area with bandages as similarly to other wounds, hold it steady until healing occurs.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	 If you believe the cupping has caused another illness, make sure to consult a doctor about supporting vessels as needed.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	 Then treat the joint with fire cupping and remove it, then apply treatments similarly to what we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	 "And there is one more thing to remember. It's always assembled into two parts.
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	 "If you follow the same procedure as before for each part then drain out that one and put it back into a clean oil bath.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 "And then drain the second one out and put it back into an oil bath with vinegar and oil, and place both of them on a rack so they can dry completely in that form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	 "Then take both the racks and apply them with wool glue in that shape and arrange them by stitching on top of the wall frames, one at the back and the other at the front.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	 "Then attach the second rack to both sides and make it all one continuous strip around the wall with twine.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	 "And never use this kind of cautery for anything other than a small superficial wound and only if you have already used the medical cautery. If it is not white that contains vinegar it may be corrosive.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 "Perform this cautery carefully according to these instructions, and prick at its gentle point with great care.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	 And do all the things you have mentioned earlier as well.
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	 And make sure it doesn't touch your eye.
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	 And remember, this method is more painful.
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	 And be careful of any harm that may come from the treatment and make sure it doesn't worsen the injury.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 And nothing contrary to my instructions should happen, whether it's from touching the abscess or anything else; if something contrary happens, according to what is in front of you do.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	 And the pain is great and it's difficult to endure this treatment if you get a hole, as advised, and remember that when you are certain about what we have said regarding this method, then prick at its gentle point so that it doesn't move until it grows.
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	 "Pierce near the base of the bone through to all parts of the limb, making one cut from the back.
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	 And if they are too small, that is, when every little flaw occurs.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	 Then cut through to the bone and tie it up, leaving enough of a gap for any little flaw. And then treat as long as the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	 And do not let the white cloth come out of the wound's mouth when treating it with a tool that is sharp or similar in shape to help close up any gaps.
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 And you should open up the wound and wait for it to heal completely after six months or more, at which point it will be closed as before, except that the healing process is complete.
de l’aposteme des coions	 "from the base of the arm
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	 Be careful in this part of the passage where there seems to be more concern for safety.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 "I will tell you about the work of the chapter and its contents.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	 "Each patient may come with different needs and complaints;
et c’est par mout de cas.	 And this is in most cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	 It's important to know by experience and skill, which is widespread among healers, or from striking the wrong spot
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	 And it depends on how deep the abscess strikes.
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	 And there is no pain to speak of, and the patient grieves;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 And in that case there is great fear and trembling, and many die.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	 When it's by the blood, if the abscess strikes at your fingertips when pressed against something hard,
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 Then you must touch gently.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	 Those who do not have the expression of their fingers to measure properly and feel for hardness may use the other hand in this way.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 "And once you have coped with the eyes, open up the vein in a high place, and deliver the suspension of all veins.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	 "If the vein is closed with those hairs you should tie it off, and then cop.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 "If the vein is open at that point or if it is dense with veins, then you should deliver all of those veins and the cop again.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	 "And if it is from the back side, you should tie off all of it and extract the substance, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And when your wounds are closed, if you apply the healing ointment with rose water and vinegar, then treat other wounds as well while they are fresh.
de l’aposteme des coions	 "from the base of the arm
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	 "This is an abscess opening similar to the incision with the softening of the veins, and you must hold tight the muscles as it happens.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 "The treatment of this disease should be as severe and painful as it appears to be right now, and we will explain the course in detail that they took.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	 "It is necessary that you make yourself into the vein at one end and tie off the suspension of veins around your two wrists to all the veins that are pointed towards the edge, and extend them.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	 "Make a small incision on the forearm to draw out blood vessels that are near the arm.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	 "Pierce it with a single needle or two needles. Tie one end to the first vein where you inserted it and tie the other end tightly.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	 "Draw out all the blood vessels gradually, towards their length, and squeeze any crooked ones tight.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	 "Treat the wound like other wounds or seek medical attention if no blood vessels continue to gush from one of the cuts.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	 "No harm is done and all the vessels are extracted if you tie off the veins to each other.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 "If they do not cease their gushing from a cut and become uncontrollable, seek help immediately.
de la routure dou syfac	 "The road runs through the village.
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	 The veins of this vein may be cut where the section enters or extends towards the abdomen in the area of the ribs.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	 There are two ways that this injury can occur:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	 Or by impact, or from a jolt, or by crushing, or raising the pain and similar things.
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	 The signs when it is from a sectioning injury are that the pain comes gradually and gradually, in the short duration, and does not come suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 And if the section presses on the intestine,
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	 "The pain is sudden at the start and varies in intensity; it's also because of the stretching and squeezing from both ends.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	 "There is no defecation while holding it in place, and great pain is suffered by the patient due to the squeezing.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	 "And in these treatments with fire there is fear, so it's convenient to withdraw.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	 The method of treatment is that you command the injury to hold it tightly against the intestine at its base if there is a wound, so he can be brought back.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	 And hold them steady with your hands
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	 Then release the cord and cut through all of its length
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	 After that, remove the staples in a way you think is best to open up the wound and make sure it can heal properly.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	 Then burn off all of the flesh surrounding the incision, as long as there is no longer any sensation from all parts;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	 After that, you take your second needle in the same place as before, between the white flesh which is now exposed skin and between the second layer of tissue, and pierce through to where it ends behind the incision, and between the second layer.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	 And then move to your left hand to cut through the cord and expose all of the flesh surrounding it, and hold the white flesh on top with your right hand steady, and gently remove any excess skin towards the bottom.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	 "Command the minister to extend his arm upwards, then remove any clothing that is attached to it.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	 "If there are no wounds or ulcers on the abdomen, he should gently remove any clothing from his waist.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	 "Then take a needle or thread made of the material 'X', and tie it behind him where his clothes end.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	 "After removing any clothing from the waist, tie each finger to a thread as long as there are four threads.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	 "Then gather them together in a cross shape and tie the ends so that it is behind his back where his clothes end.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	 "Then tie the fingers together with threads and make two parts as long as they are. If any of them will not stay still then do not release until you have tied it.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	 "And after completing the first lien, leave it alone for a while. Then come back to the second one and attach or detach as needed.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	 "After everything else is done according to the previous instructions.
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	 "Then proceed with the part that is next on the chain of events. And bind or loosen as needed, just like we have described earlier.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 "Then anoint with oil and apply it to the wounds, then fasten in place what we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	 "And no time is there a burn on the veins after incision due to doubt of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	 "But this often happens, and leave the thing as long as it is safe for you;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	 "And if it takes time to come out with a hot tool then apply what we have mentioned while it is still in.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 "Then treat the other wound as well until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	 Hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	 The treatment for this wound is not to be performed by fire.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	 And they said that it was done similarly to how you tie the laces after cutting off the excess material.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	 And then apply a poultice over the abscess as soon as it becomes inflamed.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And do this similarly to how we have mentioned, until he is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	 No time comes when the wounds will not heal, as we have said, and release them open.
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	 And do not allow any of the entrails to protrude, and if it does, quickly correct it and treat all wounds.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	 If at any time this becomes too painful in that area, whether from an injury or a fistula, as long as the intestines protrude.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	 And when it has been prolonged by the extension of the fascia which is inflamed, as we have said, for it is stretched and then moistened and inflated with water to release.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	 And if healing occurs by cauterization as we have previously mentioned;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	 And in no case is healing achieved through this method;
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	 and if the limb swells up between your hands after a deep cut is made so that it hangs down in three sections.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	 And then remove the bandage from the wound and apply a compress soaked with alcohol to the exposed area before dressing it up.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	 And press down on the belly and count the two protruding fingers with alcohol onto each of the wounds and count one by one.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	 And then remove the cloth and do not apply any bandage or nothing else as I mentioned in curing the inflammation of the bowels.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 Then treat with the treatment for wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you apply the stitches, if it heals and treats the wound as long as it is closed up.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	 The shoulder joint is inflamed, it has no appearance when dislocated, the muscles around it are relaxed in this state, and those who attempt to move it will experience greater pain
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	 In the treatment of wounds
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	 There are often many bruises from blows in any place because when they are heavy the skin becomes softened and it shows.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	 "And when you see a wound on someone's back," [it is important to] cleanse the area gently with water and apply gentle pressure.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	 "Then gather up the two layers to sew together, first making sure there is enough space for the skin to be relaxed at three stitches or four firm ones.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	 "Then put a stitch between the layers as you would with other wounds, ensuring it is as smooth as possible and ties it tightly.
dou chastrement	 severely
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	 "This is why I asked that you refrain from mentioning or discussing the law in this book.
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	 "No, it's not necessary to mention two ways.
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	 "One way is simply asking for a response when you ask him and then curing his wound.
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 "The other way is simply to treat him well with whatever you have at hand and of whatever nature - like a dog or sheep.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	 I understand what you mean by "chastremens," but it seems like a typo or an error. Could you please provide more context or clarify your question?
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 Do you want to know the translation of "chastremens" in English, regardless of whether it means traction or severance?
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	 In doing so by traction, we must hold the patient's hand firmly in hot water until their muscles are relaxed and remain still.
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 Afterwards, lead them gently with your hand so they are steady and you no longer feel any more.
Du chastrement de taille:	 This is the way to proceed
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	 It is necessary that you apply heat, and press the muscles of their hand firmly with your hand afterwards, then wrap it in a cloth soaked in cold water to cool down.
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	 And I let there be no slack or loose movement at the joints;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	 And this method of traction is more gentle as it does not cause any movement in the bones during treatment.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 Treat the wound as long as it is clean
des hermofrodites	 "Hermaphrodite
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	 Heremofrodeye is according to two ways
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 The first way is that between the two veins visible as a female's shape, or it has hair and never pierces through the urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 And another way is through wounds, and with an arrow like a thorn.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	 And its treatment of flesh and wound is that you pierce through all the close veins and treat it like other wounds
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 In the second way, from veins whose urine pierces through the skin of those veins, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	 hair
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	 Tendonitis is an injury to the natural part, as long as it's too close to see;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 And none of them have this way like a hand, and that's treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	 It is necessary to remove the excess of tendonitis from your hand or arm, and it should be treated gently;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 "Do not apply excessive force when applying remedies, so that other cures do not worsen the condition, until it is healed.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 And another remedy that is applied to the mouth of the mare and its application, and by chance alone it works, and according to which the resemblance of a cow, and for this reason they called it "cow disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If you want to help them, like we have suggested earlier, continue treatment as long as it is necessary
de erratique	 excruciating
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	 If the nature of woman is not properly perceived or her body is weak.
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	 It can be due to birth defects or accidents that happen later in life.
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	 It can be due to excessive force applied, or it could occur through subtle or severe strokes, and is performed in the horse's mouth, or in its flank, or in any other place.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	 They prevent conception, and miscarriage, and can bring about flowers to bloom.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 And knowing how to treat a burn requires knowledge of fire therapy.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 When the body's strength is diminished by old age or illness, they may appear weak in two ways: either from weakness of the muscles and bones themselves; or through fatigue and lack of energy to perform even simple tasks that were once easy
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	 If the patient is very thin and has poor circulation, if they lose consciousness, then act quickly
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	 And tie your two arms together behind their back, spread their legs.
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	 Then stretch the patient's limbs as much as possible while keeping them still and trying to straighten out any bends they may have.
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 Then put cold water on it, oil the wound and lay them down flat to prevent shock if they go into shock
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 And if you gently press it, as shown by the small finger,
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	 If their wounds are very bad, then support their head by placing something under their chin or putting an object on the ground in front of them.
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	 And apply any ointments to the wounds if they are very bad, such as honey or dragon's blood mixed with camphor, and gather a lot of aloe vera.
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	 And set a splint on the broken limb so it cannot move.
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	 And keep it still for a while and wrap it in a linen bandage.
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then continue with other treatments as long as the patient is conscious.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 If the patient is to be treated with fire cautery, then instruct them to let their hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold their eyes steady so that they do not move until they grow.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 And in the treatment of an abscess, you must be gentle;
des emorroides	 hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	 Those are symptoms of veins that are not usually encountered and if they become worse over time;
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 And we have already discussed in the previous chapter, the symptoms and signs, and I will discuss those that occur with treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 "I tell you to apply ice packs and hold them in place as long as they are attached to the shoulder, and if not held steady it can be painful because of the movement.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 "Those at the mouth of the arrow cannot feel them so they are unable to cure them.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	 It is advisable to put the patient in a cold place and warm them with towels, wrap their wounds tightly, and apply powder on any sores or abscesses, as well as ointments, incense, and similar things;
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	 Then put his feet in cold water for an hour, then wrap him up warmly.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 "And when he is in a mixture of sumac and pomegranate seeds, gooseberries, and similar things, and then add wheat flour, mix with honey and apply it to his back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if you break a bone
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	 "And if not, tie the hands behind the back and gently twist them so they do not hurt.
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 "Then apply liniment made from the juice of fresh banana or alligator vine with vinegar, and tie it tightly around his back.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 "And when the abscess heals so that it is no longer painful, then you can loosen the bandage.
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	 "And the abscess that comes from 'albather' is red and is similar to an ingrown hair if it suits you exactly like what I said.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And then, when the cure has healed as much as possible.
des apostemes de la marris	 incisions of the arm
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 The various incisions of the arm are treated similarly as I described earlier; including hemorrhoids and fistulas, abscesses, erysipelas, and other conditions mentioned in previous divisions.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	 It is important to treat each of these traits separately, as they are not the same type.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 And if you see signs of fire, look for redness and swelling, and if it turns red, seek medical attention immediately.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	 If you are not in pain when piercing but the pain persists, stop doing so until the pain subsides.
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	 And then pierce through the middle of it and around both sides to close up the wound, aligning all its pieces towards the leg.
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	 And spread his limbs out wide, put his hands behind his back and tie them together tightly with a bandage.
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	 After that, put the ball over the left ear and bind it tightly with something to cover your mouth, so after you come out.
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	 "When you use this instrument to measure the depth of the incision, make sure that when it is inside the wound, it will not move any more than necessary. And ensure that you do not remove any hair.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	 "If the instrument is longer, if covering the depth of the incision with cloth, make sure that the instrument does not cause injury.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 "Make sure you put the handle of the instrument inside and hold it tightly.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	 "When the abscess is opened up, and one feels heat in their hand, if necessary cover with a cloth over the finger.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	 "When the bone is visible and it is necessary to make an incision in a moist place with oil or fat-based grease.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	 "Put the cloth over the wound in such a way that it covers the front of the incision and extends to the base of the finger. Make sure any moisture or burns are covered.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 After two times of bleeding has occurred, until it stops.
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	 And no matter how many times they are burned and treated with honey and vinegar, until the wound is healed.
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 After the bleeding stops.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 "The wound is dressed with a bandage, if you are to be burned do not cover up the burn as we have mentioned in our instructions.
de l’enfantement	 "the infant
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	 The physician is first to observe the natural growth of the child and look for signs that it may be injured; when you see a woman pressing her abdomen, and smelling of urine...
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	 unless they are properly held.
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	 The child is considered injured when its appearance corresponds to the natural growth of a child and the urine odor indicates it...
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	 And if you see these signs, gently press on his abdomen so that he stops moving as quickly as possible.
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	 because when it starts to move its leg and urine is excreted in large quantities by the kidneys...
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 And so he comes naturally
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	 And he comes nowhere near his limbs, and towards the heart or joints, hands, stomach, thighs, buttocks, and through various other bad things;
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 The best way to deal with this is through both surgery and subtlety in these matters, showing all the things that need help;
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	 If it occurs naturally at the top of his head and the infant woman tightly holds it with her fingers, or its virtues are very weak if placed on a stool, women hold onto it.
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	 And if it arises from oil or fenugreek, when cooked, a balance must be maintained between its two small pieces of that shape.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	 The second one, holding on until the moisture which is at the base disappears.
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	 "The woman's belly should be held tightly until she finishes giving birth and is not in pain. If it is necessary to apply pressure on her lower abdomen with oil of lavender.
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	 "Afterwards, place a cloth or napkin between the woman's legs and keep it in place for some time; hold her mouth and nose closed for one hour.
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 "Now that she has finished giving birth,
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	 "And if necessary, gently stretch her arms one by one and repeat the process.
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	 "If they cannot be pulled out when placing a hand on it [the baby], gently pull her feet up to your chest;
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	 "Then lower the baby back onto the ground, then hold the woman so she doesn't move when she gets up.
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 "And if the hands cannot be pulled out and are numb, hold them by their wrists at the end of which is closest to you, then remove the baby gently.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 "from the child standing on their toes
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	 When a finger comes out of its socket, if you gently push it back up.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	 And then turn it slowly and gradually as long as it is loose.
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 Then straighten the finger out slowly and gradually.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	 He may leap from one side to another if he is commanded to do so, but it should not happen unless the conditions are met.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 If he leaps, then death shall follow.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	 And if not as we have said, then gently loosen them slowly over time to their natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	 As long as it is gentle.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	 And if not, as we have experienced, and he becomes a murderer of people, and kills himself through bitterness, and grinds everything into powder.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	 And strips the nature from the woman's face and burns off the wound, making her sit in a hot bath until all wounds are gone.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	 And when she is tired, he applies the mirror collar and puts it on her, then leaves one hour to rest.
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 Then he lies down on his side, then lies still with closed eyes and mouth, and presses gently at the belly
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	 of the child with its arms
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	 When he finishes in this manner, if he moves his hands slowly and slowly
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	 then he stays still on the ground between his stomach and buttocks, holding onto the edge of the table
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	 then he holds his hands slowly and slowly against the belly, loosening them from above as much as they can be seen below
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	 then he opens his eyes slightly and moves his hands forward, then lifts them up towards the belly, and pulls them back to a certain distance.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	 and you gently hold him by the hand slowly and slowly.
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 Instructs the woman to lie still as he finishes the exercise.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	 The issue with a child who holds one arm wide
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	 It is convenient to practice holding your hand
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	 "Once [it] cannot be reset if it is removed while the woman stands up.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	 If she can't stand up with her leg bent, and both legs are bent.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	 Then you will hear the muscle twitching I mentioned earlier.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	 And if she can't stand up while holding onto one side with her hand.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 And you should support and guide the child's growth while they are lying on their side, and instruct them to keep trying as long as they are able to do so.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	 Of the child is separated from its mother
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	 I recommend that he lower his hand slowly and gradually, and gently hold it while guiding the arm movement.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	 And when he gets older, if his muscle twitches badly and shakes it, then gently hold the muscle as we have described earlier.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	 And when you have done this, if it is placed on the eye, command its removal with a tweezers.
et la fai esternuer.	 And make sure to remove it gently.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	 Of this method, try the same as everything else
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	 When he comes this way for the second time and if the second joint is swollen, as long as it continues to be inflamed.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	 And hold the fingers firmly but gently, and pull on both sides if it feels too tight to prevent death.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	 And then hold the child firmly but gently, as long as you have held it in place as required, and command the woman to remove it once.
adonques si istra legierement.	 Unless it is too tight.
de l’issue des gemelz	 of the shoulders
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	 Wounds that come and go many times, but never in threes or fours.
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	 This is not the removal of any other thing, nor could it happen
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	 This sentence translates to "The separation is not good, it causes harm.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	 "You are many, and you will be defeated by the sword which devours those who oppose it,
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 "And once they are naturally separated as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	 "If there is a severe attack like the one that has been described and it comes with small movements and gentle force as we have said.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 "And make sure to do what it takes to get better.
de plusors enfans	 for very young
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	 "No matter how many times you are injured in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, or seventh place, or more than fifteen places, they will always take their shape from measuring with a sacred measure, and if the blade seizes them as it should, then everything happens because of chance.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 "As you wish.
de l’enfant mort	 of a dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	 When healing a woman from a dead or dying child's belly, as I mentioned in the previous text, and it does not return, you must perform the surgery while holding both hands.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	 If you wish to heal a woman who is healthy and has no accidents or fear of death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	 If the woman lies on her back with her arms bent at her sides and legs spread out.
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	 And minister to her with two pillows or if she is lying on the bed so that her head does not rest on the child's chest.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	 Then wet the mouth of her dry lips with mustard, and oil from flax seeds and sow thistle seed, then hold both hands over them.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	 Then gently wash her face with this mixture, and wipe them gently when they are dry, and remember to remove the powder that may remain on your hands.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	 When the ninth ribs are affected by sores on their back or collar bone, or in their mouth, or in their tongue, or near their beard or from between fingers and toes.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	 And it is advisable that the ninth be held in their right hand and put the bandage between both hands of the left arm. It should be applied gently to all the parts we have mentioned as long as it remains visible on the thing.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 And this is how it is performed for the ninth.
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	 Then apply another tenth one, or if you are doing a double procedure, and its extractions should be equal to those of the ninth.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 Then apply alternately from one side to another, as you have learned, and both the ninth and tenth should be equal in their extraction.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	 If he moves a part of it, if only one or both of its eyes move, then hold the remaining part still.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 If he moves it not at all, if only one or both ends of it move upward, then hold onto it as much as you can until it stops moving on its own.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	 And if one hand comes in front of the other and cannot be pulled back due to stiffness, as long as you hold onto it tightly, do not let go until all movement stops.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 Then wrap the bandage around the joint or wrist, and if you have another hand to spare, use that one too; otherwise just use this one.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	 And if the child's dislocation is severe and causing much pain or injury, then bind it tightly between your fingers to stop movement.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	 The instrument is called "almidach," which forms come with tools or physicians who follow it.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	 He puts the patient on his back in order to perform the operation
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	 And then he cuts into the bones like tendons, and holds them steady, so that they do not move unless moisture is present or otherwise
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	 If it cannot be held in place with stitches alone, then you need to close the incision and apply pressure on any wounds that may have developed.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 If it is swollen in the abdomen or chest, if necessary, you should press as hard as possible until moisture returns.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	 "And if it is gently drawn towards the mouth of the lady, then gently guide its movements to that end.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	 And if it is swollen in the belly or groin, if necessary, you should extract it while holding it with your other hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	 Until moisture returns to the belly or groin.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	 And if another member becomes inflamed, it is often the shoulder blade that becomes red and swollen with a boil on its mouth.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	 next time
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	 and the mouth of the abscess is treated with warm wet compresses if it does not improve, then moist and gentle remedies must be applied.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 And they apply plasters, using those that are soft and moist or damp.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	 And you put a poultice on its chest, if it is necessary to do what we have recommended for the infant.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 and if they are unable, then you leave nothing of the second kind.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	 And when you have done this, apply what we have recommended for our patients who come with boils.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 And the dislocation occurs when it is held firmly with restraint, and other treatments are applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	 She gave birth to a baby who died right away, but later bore another child, and the second one survived.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	 After leaving behind the abscess, it swelled up quickly, causing great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	 I called for treatment but they were unable to stop the bleeding.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	 I placed a very strong adhesive, and it stuck right away, but after some time other things came off as well.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	 I became weary of my mouth because there was no longer anything to eat.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	 If I thought it were the bones from a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	 I wanted to treat a wound, but first I tied up my hands so they would not move in the process of treating it better.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	 and then she left her hand loose for a short while;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 And I do not remember this treatise stating that when the master surgeon removes an object, he should assist with it.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	 "Bring the arm back into its place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	 After this comes the form of pressing, where one holds tightly to the books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	 And then it turns into two dislocations.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	 In every case the corners are more subtle or restrictive, and either make things better or worse;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	 or a mouth with two small fingers in the middle of it, the edge where there is a palm and half.
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	 "And the limbs should be set in a firm manner one to another, with half palm length or slightly more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 They are set at an opening of the mouth when you turn the two horns
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	 Another form, more subtle and lighter to be made from one end or the other according to the likeness of the tendons;
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	 And having set the two joints as seen above, with half palm length on one and larger on the other;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	 And when you see opening the mouth to all the equipment, if she is sitting on one leg, put her feet down and then hold the two joints together in the mouth and hold the head of the equipment between her thighs.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 And after you have taken your hand to all the equipment, if you did it as above with the joints in turn according to how much you saw open the mouth of the opening, while he does what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	 These instruments are sharp, numerous, and dangerous.
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	 When you look at them, they appear sharper, and the sharpness increases with each view proportional to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	 Even if you do not have this instrument, its necessity is undeniable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	 When the second part is in place and it's time to cover your mouth and nose with gauze or cloth, then tightly hold both hands over the wound.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 And if you sneeze through this, do well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	 If you are unable to cover your mouth with anything else, then hold a handkerchief or cloth over the nose as well.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	 All these herbs, or none of them, should be cooked or dried in the fire.
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	 Then put a cloth over your nose and mouth as well, and tighten it so that no air escapes from the nostrils.
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 "Then follow what I said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	 If sentence two is finished.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	 After this treatment, if the patient's hand remains after it is healed, he should move his arm naturally in a circular motion or an upward movement of the elbow, and then rest.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	 And when it has healed properly but slowly, so that the arm does not pull out of its extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	 But you should gently move your hand to the front and back, and then tie it up tightly.
si venra et se desaerdra.	 If he will come and get dressed quickly.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	 And hold the mouth shut during the treatment we have instructed to burn herbs with fire cautery;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	 and if you do not follow what I said, then you will fail in this task.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	 And it is recommended that the mouth be closed when burning herbs with fire cautery, you should tie it up tightly and burn off any hair around it.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	 If he falls and gets up again
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 But every time when she swallows something bad happens to her stomach and throat, bleeding from the nose.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	 If you want to perform fumigations, then it is advisable to do so in this way
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	 None of the old ones have experienced successful fumigations with dry figs and raisins.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	 The shape of the instrument used in fumigating the woman's eyelid is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	 And it is like seeing an arrowhead, placing it gently into the fire, and drawing out broad arrows from the fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 Or perform fumigations over coals, burning until they are dry, then start again with another batch.
de percier lou fondement	 Of piercing through the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	 The small child who does not have the foundation of learning, has it spoiled by subtle methods.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	 If you want to perform fumigations at the bath, make sure he puts his hand gently on it and does not let it touch even a small thing, or damage the bandage if it is torn.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Apply ointment made from wine and oil to the wound, then apply a poultice as long as it is healing.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	 If there are doubts that he will not stop moving, if you place a heavy bandage over it and let his hands go loose while keeping his eyes steady; then apply oil to soothe him when he falls asleep.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	 There will be no sudden movement of the limb or joint.
si covient coper celui soudement:	 If you need to cover it quickly
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	 Do not do this if a poultice has been applied; as we have stated earlier.
de la fistule dou fondement	 From the foundation of a fistula
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	 Fistulas that arise from the bottom are draining, and grow towards the outside of the body or towards an external opening if there is one.
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	 And when a fistula arises from the bottom and is small, it can be treated with gentle or subtle heat, and will not cause pain in most cases.
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 They are closed by applying pressure until the fistula stops producing discharge or leaking fluid, and sometimes when a finger is inserted into them.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	 And if there are fistulae coming from the vein, or even from the edge of it.
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	 They come through the incision, and also through the artery wall.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	 And it is known that the fistula will not go away by itself.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 You squeeze your finger or the base of it, and insert a small needle made of iron or steel into the fistula as long as there is no tortuousness in it.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	 And if it has tortuosity, you gently squeeze the base of your finger or the hair on its tail as long as you feel the tension or sensation in that area.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	 You do not feel it and cannot be extracted or move; just like we have said earlier.
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	 That is what matters most to me.
si te haste dou curer.	 If you want more details, here they are:
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	 "And when the fistula is found in the vein or urinary tract if it comes from urine and cannot be treated by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	 She has dislocated her arm from its socket.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	 If there is no bone injury and the dislocation occurred spontaneously, then it should not be treated immediately by repositioning.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 And in these cases, there is no cure and the wounds worsen as they progress.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	 In those who are not pregnant and have no recent injury, there is hope for healing through force, as I've experienced, and it is that the arrow must be removed from between your hands on its back.
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	 And lieg his legs down to his hips, and place his hips in front of his stomach;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 Then apply a compress of cold water or ice if there is a dislocation that cannot be reduced immediately, as long as you maintain pressure over it and it continues to protrude.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	 If a patient pricks at their base (the root of the hairs), if you want to hold their eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	 And whether it is between your thumb and the finger that you suspect it is a thorn or needle, say so because this will allow you to remove it.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 If this occurs then please seek medical attention immediately.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	 In any case it is best to seek medical attention quickly anyway, but it can happen in a short time.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	 And the aid is provided if you have done this carefully according to the size of the fistula opening and as it has been described earlier.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	 And continue holding on tightly until they reach its base
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	 Do this two or three times as long as you make sure the hairs to be pulled are firm and like a bird's feathers.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 "And apply a poultice made of fresh bear's grease as long as it lasts and then apply an ointment containing honey.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If a patient is well-treated, it's good (meaning successful treatment).
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	 Unless otherwise specified, the cure cannot be applied unless [the patient] is healthy.
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	 And place the poultice between the two fingers, so that it presses on the boil, and put a thick layer of honey or bear grease over it.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	 When the poultice is applied to start a boil, and before covering it with honey or bear grease, and after holding it in place for as long as possible.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	 The poultice will be delivered when the instructions are followed closely.
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 And after application of the boil dressing, nothing remains but its marks on the skin.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	 And if he cannot remain still while holding his breath or when a fire cautery is applied to him or medical treatment causes such movement.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	 The fire cautery consists of two main parts
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	 "To understand this, you must first understand the cause of these wounds and the source of the moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	 "And for the treatment of wet sores, or those that are inflamed and painful, apply as much butter as you can to them, keeping them moist until they become healed, and seal their base with butter.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 "Then treat the deep wounds by applying hard charcoal, and seal the medicine in place to dry out.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	 When restored, he is sound and does not move again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	 And if it occurs from the base of the fistula, or if it is located in the base of the urethra, then squeeze here.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	 "If you see the tent and between two things or stones or it is close to piercing through, if there are no other options but patience and hope, then by one of these three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	 "or you perform the cautery as we have described, or burn it with a flame below, or if you cover it with something and treat it as mentioned above.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	 "And do not apply too much at once so that you do not damage the foundation holding it in place and prevent any movement.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	 Then the treatment, as we have spoken
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	 through which means you cover it completely and leave nothing of the foundation, or by any instrument pointed at it
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	 then apply whatever cream is in your possession as much as necessary.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	 and study to restore the wound, and to remove the fistula from its foundation
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 if there is only light damage to the wound.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	 There are no fistulas of this kind ever
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 If you cut into the fistula and it is close to its root, if a piece of cloth is placed on top as this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	 "And in case it happens on the second finger as well, and you prick all the way through to the fistula from its base.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	 If it lies near the edge of its root, remove a piece from that and place it over your wound.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	 And tie the joint together, let it move freely in either direction.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	 Do not restrict it at all unless its ends are between two surfaces and touching each other
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 And heal the wound as long as it is wet and clean.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	 "If the fistula doesn't pierce if you prick it in all the ways that you do, then...
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "In order to perform surgery safely, it is important not to prepare for too long a time beforehand, and then to proceed with the treatment as we have advised, so that he may stay well.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	 The form of a fistula is shaped like that of an abscess or one-piece type.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 And the other way around, because you cannot touch what you cannot reach without touching it.
des emorroydes	 hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	 Emotions can be shown in two ways.
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	 Either by the root of the matter, like the basis of justice, and in small or large amounts, with great pain or more than one, and it penetrates to the base and at the bottom of a foundation.
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	 But those that are destroyed when there is little moisture, and cut to the bone or a little bit of blood, and have the color of the flesh.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	 "And in the treatment of those who have lost their base, if you instruct them to stretch gently with fingers on the affected areas as long as they are still moving.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	 "If one feels tense and clenches their fists, or if you hold tightly onto your own hands, then gently apply pressure to the roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	 "And if they cannot hold themselves due to moisture, whether it's from touching something rough or a thorn, or any other cause.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	 "And extract the eyes and put powder on to prevent further cauterization.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	 "Or you may cauterize them if instructed by the chapter on cautery, and continue with other treatments as long as they are stable.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	 "And the limbs will not move if you cauterize them in a harsh way and press firmly on the affected area to prevent it from growing any further.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	 "The patient must avoid pressing on them, as they will naturally straighten out with light use.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 "And when you pull them to your ear or touch their earlobe and the base of the ear lobe gently, then treat them as advised, until they are healed, and ensure that no incision is made.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	 "If you must sew in this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	 "Take the upper thread and tie it to a needle, then pull the lower thread through the eye of the needle in both directions until you are sure all is done. And if you miss twice:
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	 "Then hold the thread tightly and pull it through, remove the needle, do this with all your strength to release these other things from the abscess, until you are free of all pain.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	 "Then place a small drop of oil on the thread or wool and place it over the base of the ear lobe, tell the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And let it rest as long as they grow, until they are healed if there is healing and other treatment, until he is healthy
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	 "Soak the wounds gently with water or apply a moist dressing over the foundation.
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	 "Occasionally, pus in the intestines, and by natural constriction, as well as when there is a long illness that has no cure.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	 If it's necessary to reset the dislocation at the tip of a small finger or on an edge that is exposed, do not allow moisture.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	 And heal as long as he is sound and convenient.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	 If you cannot support it, if the dislocation occurs again forcefully than before, as long as he is sound and not in pain or burning.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And heal until he is sound.
dou fremit	 "Doux fremet" could be
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	 Formica is a little hard substance that can be seen on the skin and may itch when it rubs against something
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 And there is no respite from its touch, which feels like death itself and covers the whole body, and more than any other place.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	 And the treatment is that you take a needle of an onion or a very sharp one, and place it under the eye, so that it circles around the eye tightly.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 Then turn your hand over completely as you hold the eye and press it gently, to release the eye from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	 And if you see it through a thorn or iron, according to this shape, and keep the eyes steady and quiet.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	 Do not worry, just hold tight and apply gentle pressure.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	 And if the fire application goes badly or by a skilled physician, as it is in front of him/her who performs the cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	 according to this shape
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	 There should be no mention of silver or gold, or arrow wounds that penetrate deeply into the flesh;
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	 Nor any mention of these harmful and large substances mentioned above.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	 These who are to be treated in the treatment of children and are weak and painful, have a tendency towards death.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	 The shape of the cautery is small but strong if it enters through a hole or wound; its effects are tied in this manner.
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	 Or if you see that the veins are tied up or blocked, so act accordingly as you see fit and tie them securely;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	 And say to one of his arms, "Let it down gently.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	 And if you want to make the stomach empty with a pessary or parchment, and pierce every small vein in turn, but at each point an artery must be chosen first. Then let into these veins flow as much as possible, flowing straight through this vein until it arrives, and assemble the belly as tightly as a drumstick;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	 And when the medicines are dense, if they go to an instrument with a strong thread, then strangle.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 This is how it's done in a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	 And if the medicines are neither too hot nor too cold, and you apply a stranglehold of oil or any other substance, then let it go gently;
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	 Then the surgeon takes his two hands and assembles them tightly, as long as it is still alive. And if he can't remove the clothes any longer than that;
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 And if he sleeps through the night, then great help is needed
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the abscess is in the belly, and the medicine has already been prescribed for him to drink, if his pain increases so much that he becomes sick
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	 And if their roots are pulled out at all points, or from an abscess, whether it be done with subtlety as when the child
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 This is the form to apply in order for it to hold fast.
des plaies	 wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	 We have spoken of curing wounds in the previous passage.
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	 Or we will discuss treatments for hands and feet depending on completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	 I'm saying that wounds are different depending on how they were made, and whether the wound was a cut or an arrow wound for example
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	 The things done by wounds are done with a knife on the thigh and buttocks or the arm, leg, foot, or anything similar.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	 Or they are done according to the openings of the groin, if there is a wound on the neck or chest, abdomen, or liver, and similar members.
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 I will discuss curing of each type of wound, and how to treat simple wounds, for they remember it in their chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	 I say that when a simple wound comes or head, and it's not broken off, if you gently pull on the base of the hair, then your eye will remain steady until it grows.
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	 if a vein is close to the head and it has an abscess nearby, then apply pressure on that part of the face instead.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 And make sure the wounds are soaked in wine or large pieces of meat.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	 If that is not enough pressure, if you use meat for the bandage and do not drink any wine or eat any bread.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	 Apply something to the wound that causes pain when it is pulled tight but can be eased by rubbing with oil or wine.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	 If the wound does not take pain when pressed against it, and is fresh all over its surface, and does not move with air or dust, I will say a little later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And he will have his arms restrained if any harm is caused to him.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	 "And if the wound is large like a spear or similar, and they cannot be stitched together by forceps because of their size, then stitches will need to be used instead.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	 If the wound is from the bone, and it hurts, but only for a short time if they pierce.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 Then treat the wound with medicine and restore the hardness of the flesh in place of the skin, and command the patient to eat large amounts of meat if they are and come out cleanly without further treatment, as we do.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	 And if you throw off the skin through corruption and it is not to the bone, then pierce it with a sword.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	 And if the artery is in the wound or vein without any doubt and cannot be treated with medicine alone, then you must remove it by piercing.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 If not for the fire cautery.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	 And if the wounds are small and simple, then a light treatment is given.
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	 And you apply this powder that will help heal them quickly.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	 The way to use the powder is as follows:
pren encens une partie;	 Take a portion of incense.
sanc de dragon II parties;	 Two parts of dragon's blood.
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	 Blend three parts and apply it lightly to the wound, holding it in place until it heals properly and adheres securely to all its cuts.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	 Then smooth it out well, and leave it to dry naturally if it does not heal.
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 Because you do not want to use the medicine until it is completely healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	 And once this occurs without incense or a healing balm, but the sores will not heal.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	 And if the wound has been closed properly and is already healing, then you do not apply this powder.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	 But if the digestive symptoms persist or if you use a mixture of equal parts egg and honey until it becomes better.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After applying other treatments as well
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	 And a fracture of the bone comes with small wounds and they are slight if the stitches are fine.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 I will tell you after the fractures what to do next
de la plaie dou col	 of the sore
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	 If the sore comes from a cut and is mild, but do not mix with the other sores unless they are treated separately.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	 If there is nothing else except leaving the treatment and not putting anything restraining on it because that causes harm to others.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	 Do not put anything cold onto the wound, as the blood of patients is cold and continues with the brain which is the most important part of the body.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 But if you have medicine that is warm and soft, or mixed with rose oil, or any other ointment in this way, and many more injuries will follow according to this method, and wet areas.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And if the wound is large, as long as it remains clean.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	 And if the wounds are full of pus and there is a hole at its base as well, if you pierce or penetrate it further down low.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	 And the artery is opened up, and bleeding occurs, if there's a burst or hole in it, and cautery must be used to stop.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	 And the nose of the throat is cut open or pierced through, and held tightly while it heals to prevent movement when the meat comes out from under the chin, preventing one's finger from touching their throat but resetting them back into its natural position.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And then the bandage is applied tightly, and left alone until healed;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	 If it happened on bone tissue.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	 If it happened on bone tissue, if the veins are torn apart and you don't sew up any of them unless there is enough skin left to cover over the wound, then make sure to clean it thoroughly and dress it properly.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 And if the wound is fresh, with powder as I've said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	 "And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, as well as performing cauterization as I mentioned before with my previous text.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	 The first line of the text translates to "from the wound of the lance or nail".
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	 "The lancet is sharp or pointed; if you look at the wound closely, the pain will increase.
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	 "If the wound is mortal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	 "If it is not mortal and fresh with its wound to the core if you do not apply powder immediately upon the wound then tie a bandage on top of it.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	 "But if it's attractive, and you bind it twice tight.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	 "If there is no attractive appearance and you apply the wound with wet cotton to remove moisture. And if it does not go away after three or four times, put it under a bandage for five more times.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	 "If there is no spasms and trembling of the body nothing to remove then the wound will go away on its own.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 And when you see the bones are injured but not too badly.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Cure all injuries, no matter how severe they may be
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	 And if it is not healed, and there's still pus, then open the abscess.
si la cure si com on doit.	 If the treatment should proceed as follows.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	 And if the wound is one of a spear or a bullet, and it's not too deep, then it should be treated on the side where the treatment was first given.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	 If it is large, cauterize.
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	 If it's large, cauterize.  If it is small, powder, and if the wound penetrates bone and requires suturing, then treat with sutures.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	 And if they are not healed, let them drain pus, or else risk infection from extractions.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 And other injuries are similar to joints, just like what we have said before.
dou derrompement dou ventre	 Abdomen rupture
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	 The abdominal muscles are large and powerful.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	 From no wound does the intestine come out or the bowels burst through entrance of any such thing;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	 And the seams are harder to heal and no wound is as small as it should be compared to large wounds because when they do burst in, they will not stop tearing inside, unless they are stopped with great force.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	 Because the intestine swells so much that it feels like frostbite when they burst and because large wounds heal slower than small ones, which is why we must reset the intestines back into their original position after each exit.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	 And the way of making an incision in the abdomen is different from other incisions;
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	 The common seams used for the abdomen are used on wounds elsewhere on the body and other private areas have their own stitches.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 And every way they are cleaner with a double seam on the belly, and I will say one word
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	 And that when a wound is small, and nothing of the intestines comes out, it's best to remove it by one of the following ways
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 Or through a small incision, as we have said, or because the intestine is inflamed from frostbite.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	 And when it's cold, freeze in the following way:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	 moisten a sponge or place it on ice for only a short time, or you can soak it in cold water and squeeze it gently to cool the intestine.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 And once done, remember that any swelling will go down as long as it remains cooled.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	 And when you see the swelling leave, if moist or heat are applied and cooked properly as described in previous answers, because this method is reliable to prevent more coming out.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	 And if it cannot enter, then apply some oil to lubricate the place where you can ease the swelling.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	 The first remedy is to cut off part of it while leaving enough for need and not to have excess that will cause trouble.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	 And these are the instruments needed for cutting open:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 If you prick at the base and do not remove it promptly, then
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 And when a wound is healed and the intestines return to their normal form in their own way, if you allow it, for this matter
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	 If the wound is large and in the lower abdomen, you should have the patient raise their legs higher than their head.
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	 If it is in the lower abdomen, put your head and buttocks higher than the other parts of the body, so that the opening towards which part you want to close should be on one of these two parts.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 And if it's a great and many bleeding wound.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	 "Your wounds should be closed as quickly as possible with a strip of cloth placed on the wound and held firmly by your hands.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	 "This is the common way to dress a wound. You would either use one or more stitches based on the size of the wound and allow it to heal completely, leaving only the stitching in place.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	 "Secure the two stitches on top of each other with four stitches.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	 "Secure the two stitches with one or more strips of thread and then close the wound completely. Then remove the two remaining stitches.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	 "Continue stitching until all of the stitches are in place and all of the wounds have been closed.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	 And have thin needles between gentle and large ones, as the small ones pierce right through to the bone, while larger ones may not be able to enter well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	 for that reason it is necessary they are fine
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	 and you don't want to pierce the bones too hard or break through the skin so they cannot penetrate into the wound before closing it up.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	 And then remove the needles from the wound so it doesn't bleed while sleeping, and cover or bandage over them until the wound is healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	 And this method of stitching with needles is more convenient in small wounds because it only takes one needle or two.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	 The second stitching method is common and consists of sewing the two outside needles through to one inside needle or using thread that is very fine.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	 And when you have gathered these dislocations, if you put the needle on to where you had previously started, in this manner it will cut through the tendons.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	 and between every two ribs a shorter distance
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 This rib cage was a severe injury to the abdomen, which extended beyond one palm's width and involved two or more intestines of significant size, and it caused an abdominal cavity wound.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 "I removed his intestine, then he lived for 40 more days, and the wound healed in 15 days, and it was cured.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	 They realized that he was going to die, and there was a miracle.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	 And they could not cure him by bleeding, as no medicine was available in that place.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 They treated the wound with honey three times per day until he recovered
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	 "Here are two different ways to cure:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	 To remove the thorn from its upper part and near where it is dense
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	 If the thorn has pierced through both sides of its place or if you have pulled it out from near where it is dense, then remove it completely from that part of the dense area.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 And you should follow this method as closely as the barber follows his hair, leaving it once trimmed on one side and then retrimmed on another until the cure is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	 The second method of cure is to clean and neatly arrange the two sides together naturally as if they are already connected, then shave one side of it off and leave it to grow.
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	 Shave only the part that is in the way or pierce through just that alone, leaving the other two parts untouched.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	 Then twist the arrowhead and pull it out from between the feathers of his wings, removing the arrow.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	 Then pull out both sides from between the feathers of his wings, in two separate shots.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 And that is how it must be sewn and done properly.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	 If anyone doubts this statement, sew the belly with two arrows, or it may pierce through flesh.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	 And when you are sewing an arrow in one side, and the other side as well, in the manner that archers sew arrows.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 And it is important to note that when removing an arrow from the belly, if there was stitching on other parts of the belly, then that stitching may be more pronounced in those areas as well.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	 The people with the wound are like the people with all the other wounds;
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	 And if you cleanse all of its wounds when it is clean, so that the arteries are cleaned up, and the blood vessels.
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	 Then apply powder in advance, so that when it is cleaned up, if a wound appears before this, as long as the wound is clean.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	 And let it breathe, and keep its skin soft and supple.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then treat the wound as you would any other, so long as it is clean.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 And if you have no medicine, as long as it begins to bleed, keep it covered and move it twice in the morning until it is clean.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	 But if you don't have any other medicines for these wounds,
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	 and if you doubt that the wound is spreading to the main parts of the body, it is advisable to massage gently with warm oil or rosewater until the wounds are closed.
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	 If there is pain or bleeding in the bowel, and it often happens if they make incisions with a blunt knife, then the pus comes out into the intestine.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 The bigger the bowel, the more difficult it is to heal if there are incisions made.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The small intestine is called "young" and cannot heal as long as it is inflamed, due to the inflammation of its lining, through the subtlety of its course, and by approaching its nature.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	 If the abscess ruptures and it's treated by reinserting back into the intestine while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	 If they are thick and dark or blackish in color, it is recommended to tie off the artery which has not yet closed as it will cause bleeding.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 After that, tie off the part of the wound between the two cuts to stop the bleeding and make the extraction easier when it bursts.
de la routure dou boueil	 from the course of blood
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	 When the bowel is small and the wound is small enough to be healed without stitches, for this reason that some men have died or suffered from a lance.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	 This is a stomach ulcer that became fistulae over time.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 I used my best efforts to heal him until he was well enough to move around again
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	 When I tried to make his hair better, I doubted that his belly would be okay.
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	 And he wasn't ill anymore but remained stronger and started eating and drinking again;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	 And no one could say that when there was just a small hole in the intestine, he should be sewn up in this manner
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	 After removing the top layers of the wound, the surgeon should close it with two stitches, if it's strange for her mouth to be above them, and sew her mouth below;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	 After closing the top of the wound, it should stay that way until all layers are stitched up, and then close another stitch after in the same manner as you did before, so long as there is no hole or opening in the wound.
et cout la plaie.	 and cut the wound
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	 If the injury occurs in the intestine, and no harm is done to the body as a whole, you can sew up the intestine with a thin thread that runs through the intestine of another person.
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	 Take the thread from another person's intestine that has been sewn up, and then tie it to one end of your own thin thread, then sew this thread through an opening in the intestine and stitch up the wound.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	 This manner of stitching wounds is never used unless a more gentle and patient approach is taken instead.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 And if the wound is great and wide, especially when it occurs in one of the larger intestine segments, even with patience and gentleness may not be enough to prevent infection or save the patient's life.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	 of fistula or when
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 wounds that occur from fistulas, and especially when they are open or exposed to the air
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	 And fistulas are characterized by painful and bleeding ulcers that do not heal well or at all, which cause the patient severe pain as if they were a thorn;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	 "And every time you have a clear view, but sometimes it is thick.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	 "Every time or once in a while, depending on the situation.
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	 "In the treatment of wounds, any wound that does not heal and has no cure is only curable by one of these seven methods:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	 "It's to know how to cut or sew.
ou por sa malice;	 "Or through the application of oil and vinegar.
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	 "Or by using heavy weights to compress them so that no longer compresses.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	 "Or if there is too much swelling and weight.
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	 "Or the limb may be paralyzed and its matter of poor quality.
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	 "Or the medicine is not enough in curing it.
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	 "Or if there is a corrupt condition that leads to plague.
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	 "Due to an obstruction in this area, digestion is delayed, health deteriorates.
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	 "Or it may be due to internal issues such as
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 "I have already mentioned all these causes and symptoms in the previous paragraph.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	 I will tell you the treatment for fistulas which is performed by hand surgery.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	 "Skin abscesses occur in all parts of the body except the head.
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	 "Because it may be due to abscesses occurring in the large veins, arteries, nerves or organs such as the sinus, intestine, bladder, or any of the limbs.
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 "And if it occurs due to an internal member, and there are lesions on this part.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	 "All the abscesses that occur in this way cause pain and suffering, and do not heal quickly or with proper care.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	 "And if there is no abscess mentioned that I have already spoken of, and you did not mention the treatment or know how to treat it, then please specify what kind of lesion it is.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	 "The fistula is closed when a search for a subtle touch succeeds, as the long process of closing it may cause pain.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	 "Do not try to open the fistula yourself if you cannot find a skilled professional. Moisture can harm other body parts.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	 "If you suspect it is touching your nerve or eye, hold the affected area firmly and ask if they are feeling any pain in that spot.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	 "If you are sure it is touching a joint or a nerve or an artery or a vein, then do not hesitate to seek medical attention and report any worsening conditions that may arise.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	 "As long as the fistula is closed and located in a suitable place, you can gently touch it. Make sure to wash your hands before touching any part of it, so that no germs get into the wound.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And then I will send you sentences one by one, as fresh as possible.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 And if it is not safe through fire, if the cautery method as we have described does no good and if the abscess is corrupted by a fistula, then cut.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	 Arm or leg bones do not move, like we said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if the eyes are swollen and it has become corrupted from the abscess as much so that it is all black, then treat for eye things while being safe.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	 And if it's not safe and the abscess is severe enough so that you are making things worse, then do not attempt healing;
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	 If the cure has been discovered and will be at its deepest extent, and all corruption is to have been removed, then restore the limb.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 And if it's safe to do so, then you may proceed with treatment;
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	 "If not, then you must endure this corruption.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	 "...or any other remedy besides letting nature take its course...
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	 "...and if it is due to a small amount of corruption, then you must restrain them as tightly as possible until they die...
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 "...and if the moisture is against it and there's no fear or pain, then you must let them be free...
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	 "...and if you do not cure the disease before the wound is opened and begins to rot until the bone or flesh has healed...
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	 "...and if it is a large bone such as the leg or arm, only cure the corruption while allowing no movement until all the flesh has healed and you have restored the wound...
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	 And if there is a large part of corruption to it comes out of bone.
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	 If the corruption is treated and healed completely, then he will be cured as soon as he arrives.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 And if you have an example of one that happened in his leg, please provide it and assist him with your knowledge.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	 He was a young man of about 30 years old who had pain in his leg due to swelling of the veins, while he lay on it, and there was no apparent reason for opening up.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	 But they thought that opening up the veins would help, and so they ruptured many veins and became fistulae, which caused much pain due to swelling of the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	 And the more they tried to cure him for two years, there was no improvement in his condition, and he kept complaining of pain from swelling of the body.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 And became reddened were the cheeks of youth, and had a hue of yellow
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 I saw a tentacle of these worms, and then tried to pull them out with tweezers, but found that one worm would come out opposite the other at all points on his leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	 I immediately suspected, and in one of the cuts as much as I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and perforated, and came from corrupting the dense bone.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	 I saw that which could reveal the corrupted bone, and cared for it to ensure there was no other corruption, as such.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	 And coming to restore the wound with various ointments, without success;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	 And then I came back, and saw the bone as it was before, and found the corruption still in the bone, and she continued, and I took her out, but could not remove the pain.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	 But I couldn't as much as I pressed on one side of the bone, and it was all over its surface, then I tried to remove with medicines;
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 "And he was healthy and strong until the wound became infected, from which he could not recover, causing great fear of death for me.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 The extraction of blood was frequent, but it healed completely and left the leg uninjured, except for a sharp pain at one spot where there were no further injuries or consequences of any kind anywhere else in all that time.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	 And if you were to break it in any way as follows:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	 If he is to strain the muscle at the end of the bone that you stretch upwards.
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	 If you were to use another joint that is larger than the first one at the end of the bone and tie it onto the tendon which runs along the bone, stretch them both upwards.
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	 If you were to use a strip of cloth tied around the bone to cover the stretched tendon.
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 And it is good that one can see and feel the corruption, and again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	 "The eye is inflamed, it cannot open fully, the cornea may be torn or partially torn. If you find a full tear:
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	 "Then apply ice and gently compress the affected area to the other side, until the tear is healed or the eye is fully closed.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	 "The cornea may be torn in the joint of the eye if it moves out of place and causes tearing. Apply ice and gently compress the affected area.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	 "The cornea may be torn in both joints when there is no other cause for pain or redness than compression. Apply ice and gently compress the affected area.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	 "The cornea may be torn due to injury from the hand or arm. If it is very painful but you want to treat this tear, then gently compress the affected area so that it can open.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	 "The eye may be torn in any way at all times, but not by nerves or muscles.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	 And if you cut through the bone and flesh to expose these bones, according to their size and shape, and their strength and subtlety, and their magnitude and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	 In order for him to resemble the same limb as his instrument.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	 It will reveal the instrument you have mastered according to your knowledge of this art and testimony of its methods.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 If that is the instrument you master, then it serves well.
dou feu	 The fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	 Dislocations can occur either due to swelling or freezing.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	 And when you have medicines that cure the corrosion by treating wounds, and it does not help if you cover only one limb until the corrosion is gone, whether from death or malice which is greater, of a member's defect.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	 And the limbs become black when they become burned, and after being burned appear to be in flames, as soon as you blow on them
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 If you apply heat compress and it is by the percussion of certain venom stings, like those of a scorpion and water and similar ones, the corrosion begins at the site where the sting was applied, unless you give them space to come back into contact with your hand
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	 If it comes in contact with the hand or if there is an open wound near to where you applied the compress, then the corrosion will not stop.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	 And if it gets on the arm, at the site of the sting.
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	 If it passes through the body, that is death and nothing can save them from their wounds.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	 Until you know where the corrosion has entered or exited.
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	 "The first joint has dislocated after another one.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	 "It has come out or to the side if it is complete and whole.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	 "If the dislocation occurs in the arm that shares with another joint, then it moves into the leg at the base of the other joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	 "If there is no other cause for dislocation and only tearing occurs to tear off the arm, then it comes out of the socket.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	 "The manner to reset or straighten the member is by lying it down and fixing one end of it on each side. Then stretch out another member in front of it as far as possible.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 "Then apply a compress to the other side and fix it with something solid if it should not touch the healthy limb, and prevent further damage and abscess formation.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	 "And when you burn it," if you apply fire to the wounded part, or you put on any unguents restraining them;
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 "After performing your treatment as much as it is done," then bind the limb with a suitable bandage and treat it while it is sound;
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	 "And I will tell you what happened at home:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	 "He had a burn that seemed to be an injury from fire, and the damage was worst in his right hand;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	 "When he felt the burn, if you covered it, then it healed.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	 "After that he came to me and I put some poultice on it after the wounds were made, but they could not stop the burns.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	 "He said that you should cut off his hand and I did as he asked, thinking there was no hope to stop the burn.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	 And doubt there is such a thing as the elbow moving, because its strength was weak.
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	 It relaxed and returned to earth, and tried to cover its head with its hands, and became calm;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	 I do not know how one can treat this, if it is known to someone else.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	 No time comes to me empty-handed and stays longer than necessary for the gathering of many people;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	 It runs and jumps, leaving behind its bow and moves on with its eyes open, just like a servant.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	 Its skin is as subtle as the feathers of a falcon, and it does not hurt when touched, unless specifically mentioned as dangerous;
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	 But if it is too short, it becomes dangerous to touch and is considered harmful.
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	 "And if it's cooked thoroughly so to speak, then hold tight until everything stops, even the smallest movements.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 And do not let go because of its corruption
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	 If the cautery's heat has caused corruption and no bleeding is observed despite applying pressure to stop it, then cut into it.
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	 See that the hairs are large and do not move, until a cautery with Egyptian medicine is applied.
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	 Take it, oil and vinegar, gently, and apply the cautery with a heated iron until the medicine turns red, and becomes thick like honey.
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	 And then take what you need according to your situation, and the make it hot and sweet, and cauterize his forehead, and hold steady its movement.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	 After two hours of treatment, it will be removed by pulling.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	 Do this method repeatedly until the skin is completely healed and smooth.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	 Do not use this method if there is still burning sensation when the medicine is applied, and do not apply it to any other part of the body.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	 The patient should not experience pain or burning sensation from the medication, and if there is any itching, it may be due to a skin condition.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	 Or you can apply honey and vinegar mixture, as the honey has properties to soothe and heal wounds, and the vinegar is antiseptic.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	 After you have done this and are sure the skin is fully healed, if there is still burning or stinging sensation from the mixture, it may be due to an allergic reaction. At that point, apply aloe vera gel mixed with olive oil and vinegar as a remedy.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	 "Instruct the patient to use all necessary ointments and dressings for wounds.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	 "Hold the patient still to prevent them from bleeding if a small wound is inflicted.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	 "If the wound is too large to be treated with a single dressing, hold pressure on the wound until further assistance arrives.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	 "When applying a bandage in front of the patient and they start bleeding, do not allow them to remove it.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	 "Do not let them remove the bandage if it covers their chest or neck and they start bleeding; as any application in such a manner that the bandage covers the base of the wound.
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	 "The bow is straight but not loose.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	 Take conservative medications to strengthen the skin and ensure that all wounds heal.
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	 Follow the same force when removing the bandage from the second part of the wound to ensure that all wounds heal properly and do not leave any loose pieces that may cause infection or further damage.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	 And the one who is on the wound should gently remove it and check that nothing remains of the bandage. If there are any pieces remaining, they must be removed or digested as necessary.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	 And the patient should report any pain or discomfort they feel and whether there are any wounds present. If medication has been taken in such a way that its effects have diminished, observe how the skin appears around the affected wound if it is healing well and approach the healer for treatment.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 "And then you wash it in the morning or at midday, when you apply the dressing if there is any other drip and re-open the wound.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	 "The eyes grow weak after a long time, so they do not adjust properly.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 "After long periods of being closed up tightly, the veins become subtle and if proper circulation is not maintained, they approach closer.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	 "And it has effects that are contrary to those who do otherwise in their wounds;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	 "and after every meal, its taste leaves his lips dry;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	 "and it makes his eyes dry and sore, as well as the ears, if there are medicines that soften in dryness and harden with virtue, until healing is complete, for it has great acidity, and this is detrimental to treatment.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	 "when the wound finishes, they treat with rose oil, and apply ointment rich in wine on top of it;
puis le confit et en use;	 "then apply a poultice and wrap.
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	 "and when the wound is finished and healed, you put honey on it if it's dry or moist, if there are no blisters, and you scrape off the scabs, powder it with flour while it is still hot from the fire.
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	 "And then you put it under the arm and extend its shoulder, never let a doctor examine it for too long, and roots should not be pulled off or torn out, which are similar to pulling out one's hair.
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	 using simple or complex solutions.
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	 break them and make powder from it, put the ointment I have mentioned on it, and apply
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	 the treatment is continuous until the impurities are removed completely, and it will press upon the bones or limbs, causing pain.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 if the cure for the fistula has already been mentioned earlier.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	 of the elbow
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	 Panarice is a stone which lies in front of or behind the fist, and may be found elsewhere.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	 and when it is removed, if the stone comes out of the fist, it will roll away until its root is pulled out completely, or in any case.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 "And come dislocations at the bone; when it comes to pain so great that it hurts both ends of a limb, and is the shoulder dislocated.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 When treating it as we suggested in the previous section and the treatment doesn't go well, then you should proceed to cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	 The cauteries are most helpful if the body is in good health.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	 and it presses the eyelids, makes them open, and blots out what is below, if you remember to put on strong and corrosive medicines after all.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then the treatment of wounds while in good health.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	 And the cauteries at the bone if it is a fracture or a sprain, because as long as the bones are corrupted, they cannot be healed.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and if you see two corruptions when it is clear that one of them must have caused the other to be in this place before now, then treat until they are healthy.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	 "If it's dislocated, set it back into place, as you may experience great pain.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	 "After checking for any sharp objects in the area around where it was dislocated and making sure there is no damage to the joint itself because of too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 "If this occurs, apply ice directly to the affected part.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	 "The pain from the injury was in his hand.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 "The second joint was dislocated in his hands; and often it is out of place, or the bone does not come back into alignment with its root.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	 "Neither should it be moved without consulting with someone who is knowledgeable about joints, nor should you move a dislocated joint.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	 "The size of the person being treated must be known so as to administer treatment appropriately:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 "Take it from its base in a long strip.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	 "If you reach the root of a joint, there is risk of injury:
si te tien dou coper.	 "Be careful when touching.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "For the one who has or must endure pain, it is advisable to apply gentle pressure at first and then gradually increase it until he feels relief.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	 "The others who come together are born that way or they unite in a fight, or through the use of fire, or through similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	 "If you encounter this southern accent, then they must correct themselves as naturally as possible;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	 "Hold tight with the ropes or rope ends to prevent them from slipping loose.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 "Or hold tightly between two thin pieces of wood as long as they remain steady, if necessary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	 "If they come together at one end with the palm, then treat that sore spot if necessary.
des vils	 of the
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	 "The veins filled with melancholy fluids come out more than twice in a short time from the members of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 "And often occur in the legs when they are walking and working hard or carrying burdens.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	 It is important that you do not administer any purgative without consulting a doctor first, and then cleanse the base of the skull.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	 "The treatment for this ailment is done in two ways:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	 "One way is to burn the blackhead with a cautery, and another way is to drain the blackhead.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 "The other way is to tie off the vein, and remove it all at once.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	 That size must grow according to this manner:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	 The first foot to become warm and large as it gets without being subtle is then restrained by the ankle against its base with a piece of iron on the heel of the same side.
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	 And then apply the vein in the left hand, or the right, or the third as needed with a large size, and remove and tie off any black veins that are seen by holding them between your thumb and finger on one side of your mouth, from each to each, until you do not suffer any more than what is felt at the time.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	 Then continue with that and instruct him/her to pinch off all black veins as soon as they appear.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 And start the evacuation again when the wounds are clean, and stop on the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	 The arm is restrained according to this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	 "Take the leg of the patient to the fire, if they have short hair then apply oil on it and hold the leg steady as long as it remains red and the veins are inflamed.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	 "If not burned already, apply oil to the vein near the shoulder and hold it steady until the redness fades away.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	 "Then cover the wound with oil from close by, and clean around it as much as you can until it is healed.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	 "You will see it red and black like a fresh rope.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	 "Then bandage the wound with oil until it is covered by clothing and then bind tightly in another place above.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	 "Then clean the cloth around it until it is healed and then remove it to another place like you did before.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	 And after that, if it moves more or less, you should gently guide it towards the second position.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	 Repeat this process until all joints are aligned.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	 If there are any doubts or fears, and if an arrow pierces through the bone deeply twice, and the limb swells and hurts, and tears itself in two parts, then you should gently pull one hand towards the other as much as possible.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	 Keep it still because if it moves, if it cannot be held in place or lifted up, and many die.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	 And when you have treated all wounds with rose water and oil applied,
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Treat it as long as he lives.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	 And if the veins are cramped and tight, and the limb is bent, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must gently bend it but do not stretch it excessively.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 And if they prick at their base
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	 The fire cautery is to instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, and if they prick at their base, hold steady so that movement stops until the hair grows.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 And there is a large fear if it were subtle because they could move the vein, but severe if we have described, and that's what happens.
de la voinne civile	 "Cleaning of a civilian vein.
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	 The vein is inside the arm or leg, in hot places where there are no plants or trees, and on earth where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 And in another place is not inside the leg, and there is a fear that comes from the body itself, such as when it goes down the chest towards the heart, going between the skin and hair.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 "The sign of the beginning of this vein is that it comes into a leg with a very large inflammation, then cuts through the flesh and begins to open as if it were the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	 When dislocations occur, it is advisable to roll the joint gently from two and a half times in one direction at 2.5 seconds, then back, leaving the ligament loose on the leg, and every time that it doesn't move away immediately after the roll, if you roll over the ligament and the new.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	 "If she is too long, if a part of her is cut off, and the rest swells up around it, do not touch anywhere near its root while it's in that state.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	 "If you cut her off, if she enters into the wound, and causes injury to the flesh or limb, and causes great illness;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	 "To ensure that nothing remains of her after each treatment is done gradually from time to time.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	 "There are no occurrences of this vein when it has been treated with palm oil or X, and one time brought harm to me at which it was inflicted by X palm long, and if you cut her off, if you approach too near the bottom or top, she swells up as a result;
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 "And there is a substance that is dense and brings pain to the patient if taken in large amounts before any treatment can be carried out; then treat it as prescribed by the doctor.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	 And once this bone is injured, whether from striking it or not, and if it falls out, then it will be in vain.
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 In the treatment of these things as we have described before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 between skin and bone
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	 This disease is called 'bone fever', because it often occurs between the bones and flesh, and goes up and down through the body from head to foot, causing great pain in each joint as they become inflamed or irritated.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	 And it is preceded by the discharge of various humours if they come out and go through and liver, and gallstones or belly.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	 And it causes doubt about its nature, because as it goes through the body and rises to the head, and comes down to the oil, by chance returns, destroying the oil.
et ceu avient maintes fois.	 And this occurs many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	 When curing or treating it, if they cannot be held in place as soon as they are
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	 If you fix it firmly and tightly with a strong rope, then tie its end securely and make sure it is not moving before applying heat.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	 And the larger the wound, if it occurs through oil as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	 If you see that it is coming in close proximity to the oil, tie it tightly and then fix it, and apply heat.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 It is to use remedies for the cold, wet diseases of the humours and wounds, and be careful with foods that can cause illness.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 "The pain that comes from swelling
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	 This disease is known as "wakirir" in our land and it is a pain that spreads to all members of the body.
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 "And I know what you've done.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	 I went to ask for help from an angry woman and she revealed her breasts, and saw a small bruise on her chest.
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	 Then he noticed that it had grown to the size of an arrow, more than anything else, as if silver were being drawn out from its base.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	 The pain left his shoulder, and then spread to the chest, as it moved towards the other breast.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 She told me that she was tearing at her chest as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	 I was amazed by how this disease spread from one part of the body to another as she kept moving around like a snake; because there's no way that this disease could be treated in such a manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	 Everywhere, I wanted to make sure that everything was in good order and that the pain from there did not move elsewhere, but I didn't want it on her as I saw it with the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	 And I thought that this was because of how strong her chest muscles were and the breasts revealed, as well as what seemed like restraint.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 And they do not see as to this reason for those who are delicious, and have soft cheeks and rounded noses.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	 And when you have cured this disease and the patient's nose begins to hurt as we have said before if it opens and the doctor holds tightly so that breathing is not obstructed.
et cauterize le leu;	 Cauterize the eye
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 And if you do not see your eyelids as the treatment causes shortness of breath, as with bitter pills and pills of serpents, and similar things.
des saiettes	 arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	 Arrows come in various forms based on their shape and location where they penetrate.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	 The dislocations occur when there are some joints that have large points, small ones, and crooked ones;
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	 And those that have two holes, and those that have long tongues, and those with pieces;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	 Those who move in any member by the same method.
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 "The body's main joints include the spine, shoulders, elbows, wrists, knees, ankles, and many other parts.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	 "If you see any of these joints in the state of death, I will tell you what to do after this.
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	 "It is advisable that you remove an arrowhead because it can lead to death more quickly.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 "If the sign does not move and is still in place but you think it's a splinter, try to remove it gently.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	 "The sign that means the splinter has pierced and entered the bone. If it is seen on the shoulder, hold the eye steady so it does not move until it grows.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	 "And if you notice anything unusual in the nose or ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	 And through this ordeal comes the loss of speech and voice
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	 It is accompanied by a white pus-like fluid discharge, and burns similar to those caused by fire.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 The wound will be revealed if you apply the treatment without a bandage; however, do not leave it exposed for too long as it may become infected.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	 The sign of the sickness when it arrives or is caused by a blow to the head, are that it occurs near where the brain is located, and similarly as if it were inflicted in another part but still causes damage nonetheless.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	 And with the sickness, the hair grows similarly as if it were from fire, and cuts off black blood vessels, causing coldness and sores.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 There is a sense of doubt that many will die.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	 The eighth sign indicates that the patient has a high fever and their face turns pale; their lips turn blue as they lose consciousness due to shock.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	 If the abscess bursts through the skin without a bandage in place, it may cause injury to smaller vessels.
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	 And he gets great pain and difficulty breathing
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	 They dislocate their limb from its place.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	 The tenth sign indicates that the patient's stomach is upset; due to shock from injury nothing can be eaten or digested properly.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	 The patient's stomach is upset and they cannot eat or digest anything properly; there is no hope in treatment, not even the extraction of an abscess (i.e., surgery to remove it).
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	 And the patient vomits and urinates forcefully, and great pain comes to his limbs
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	 The wound is mortal
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	 The other limb when it is cut and colled by the neck, and the throat, and the shoulder blade, and the elbow, and the wrist of both arms, and the ankle, and the calf, and the legs, and the limbs similar to these are affected in various ways.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	 When the aneurysm is in the nerve or artery and it is not venomous, if you know what I am going to say next, because that's what you did instead.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	 He had a large abscess that hurt or burned his nose, causing him to
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 I tried to drain the other parts of it with olive oil, but was unable to succeed in relieving the pain of my ear fat.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	 And to another abscess he applied olive oil that burned on the fat of his ear and paper, and it was healed, but no more pain could be found except at its tip towards the head, and it was large in circumference like an arrowhead, causing great injury to the ears.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 The wound was healed, and there were no further accidents.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	 "And tying a knot around one's neck to a strangler," they say.
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 I tied the bristles, and gently as I could, I bound them tightly; and thusly my master was pleased.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	 And tying one around the neck at home, whether it is head or belly, I thought he was dying.
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	 and then passed away with great difficulty, if his disposition could not be changed;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 I loosened the knot around it, and pulled hard, and tied again, but there was no mistake in it at all.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	 And if one around the neck is tight or from above, then it is a swelling caused by that;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 and he loosened the knot tightly around its base, but could not change its natural disposition or find any flaw in its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	 And another man to whom one was tied around his face, and it swelled up the swelling occurred there;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	 "and he will suffer great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	 "but also others like it.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	 And he will have a disease that affects the eyes of the king who is blind in one eye and has a cataract in the other.
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	 It was a very severe disease.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 I called upon the remedy after having tried it for three times.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 If you find a deep wound
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	 I put it to her with great subtlety and she did not feel anything;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 And he felt no pain or discomfort on his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	 I thought it was from the disease itself so I put a strong medicinal and digestive substance on his left earlobe in order to prevent its swelling.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 And as soon as he applied it, it caused him no swelling of the ear.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	 Then I put on a poultice and quickly healed the wound with its healing powers and made his ears long as he felt it.
et il le me dist.	 "And he lets go.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	 I applied the corrosive wound dressing with rough hands until it was done peeling off and feeling the pain from the swelling of the area.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	 After applying the corrosive dressing on the wound, I waited for it to reveal the abscess clearly.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	 And waited for three months and then pulled the bandage off, looking at it from all sides but couldn't see anything.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 Until I used more and different methods of treatment until the wound was well healed, according to which it would be in shape at the end of this chapter; until then, I kept pulling at the bandage.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	 And his eyes were blinded due to cataracts.
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 "I will heal it completely when I find it, because I have found a solution to the wound.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	 "I have described the quality of the extraction of any arrows when you put your treatment where I do not say anything, because these books cannot take care of it.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 "The master craftsmen do best when they are in good health and fail otherwise.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	 "I say that the arrows only occur on members or where there is a different manner:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	 "or by one way they enter into it, or by another.
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 "The arrow that enters through the way of itself becoming infected will be within the bones and not leave now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	 "And if it does not enter now, as long as its course is smooth through the pores of the skin, or through the other ways.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	 And if it's fractured or broken inside a bone, it cannot be set back into place even with force.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 And if she jumps around and cannot stay still, if you gently touch the bone with a very small force, then it should be stretched out again afterwards.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	 And if the dislocation occurs in a very large bone like the upper arm or lower leg, and it involves one of the nerves I mentioned earlier, then there are certain complications that can occur.
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 Do not force it to stay still after all the pain has passed because if you force it into place, then that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 "The skin should not be injured when the abscess is opened and incisions made, causing no harm to the patient's nerves or muscles, unless there are complications such as bleeding.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	 And if she is already fractured and cannot be set back in, if the medical treatment I mentioned earlier fails to work.
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Treat it as soon as possible until it heals completely.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	 And if it cannot be seen when it is restored to its place, then try everything that you can do.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	 If it does not respond even with the use of any available equipment.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	 And if it does not respond to the stretching of the wound and its firmness due to lack of nerves or veins even when the wound is large.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	 And stretch the wound if you can, and if it has ears that are not fixed to two parts as required by your method, and breaks or tears the ears of the abscess while stretching it, until you have stretched it enough.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 And gently stretch it so that you do not break it, but stretch it harder and harder.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	 "And if it fails once due to tearing of the ligaments, then the treatment is immediate.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	 If the remedies for the abscess contradict what we have said in this chapter of medical treatment.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	 And instruct the patient to make a cut on the nerve and vein, making sure they do not move while cutting, whether slowly or quickly, firmly or gently.
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 And make the incision in line with how it was when the arrow entered, for that is where the greatest help comes from, and be sure not to cut if what you see does not show you should move.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	 The arrow came from another direction or did not go through anything at all; in any case, if you see the arrow enter somewhere else.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	 until the tendons allow it to be released and then stretch.
si saut fuer maintenant.	 if that happens now
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	 "If she is held firmly in the bone as your hand goes into it and stretches it out, then treat her.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	 If it does not loosen up, keep applying pressure and continue the extraction until it loosens up.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	 When the arrow has entered all of its shaft is treated
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	 "And you will administer promptly if the instrument is present. If not, then prick at its base.
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 "Then apply the tool and pierce it in the direction of extraction to alleviate pain.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 "If the patient's finger is bent or twisted, then you should apply pressure and correct it as much as possible.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	 "The abscess may be on any part of the body - head, shoulder, belly, arm pit, etc. And it's painful, and you should apply pressure to extract it.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	 "Do not press on veins or nerves, and then the wound will heal.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 "The treatment is complete.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	 "The shape of the bandage that is applied for wounds are similar in appearance to bird feathers,
Et en sont mout de manieres:	 There are many ways of treating it.
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	 "Big, small, and in between, according to the size of the abscess.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The shape is done similarly to when holding an object by its handle or tip, depending on the situation.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	 The shape of the stitches will depend on whether it's for closing and sealing wounds versus merely closing them temporarily.
des voinnes dou cors communes	 common veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	 What does that mean?
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	 After removing them from ears, you remove the two external earwax plugs.
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	 and the second pair of arteries in the temporal region.
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	 and two veins in the eyebrows, which are called "eyelashes".
et li voine que est emmi le front;	 and the vein that runs from the forehead.
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	 and the vein at the top of the head, which is also called the ophthalmic vein
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	 two gutters which are present in the ear canal.
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	 and the two veins above the mouth, which are called "jugular veins".
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 and the two veins below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	 The veins commonly known as the radial artery, which is in each arm
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	 one is called the cerebral vein and runs from the forehead to both temples, it's commonly referred as the "foramen magnum
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	 "The joint becomes inflamed, it is composed of the skull bone and the base bone, and they call for assistance from those who know best.
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 "The base bone is to the left or right, and they call for assistance from those who know best; it is located at the navel, and that one who sees clearly above the belly.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	 "The salvetella is between the auricle and the naricle, if it has two ears;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	 "In the leg and in the foot there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	 "One is at the shoulder point of the elbow on the right side, and the second vein is at the knee on the left side;
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	 "The vein that is called 'ness,' it is in the valley of the other side's elbow.
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 "In the other leg there are also three veins, as well as those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	 The patient is instructed to clean their ears after using ear drops or ointment.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	 And gently wipe the eye with a soft cloth if you remove the eye drops.
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	 Then apply pressure to the eyelid towards the nose as far as possible, until both eyelids come together behind the ears.
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	 When you are done with one eye, if you feel that everything is clear in that eye, stop there.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	 Then take the lancet and apply it to the skin just below the eye, then gently press your hand down on the skin all the way back, making sure there is no pressure on the eyelid itself, until you are satisfied.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 Then strain and hold it tightly, as long as possible.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 And I have just said the incision and the cautery of the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	 "The veins of both arms, when opened, will cause bleeding and the eyes to become inflamed.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	 "The quality of blood vessels is such that if you say...
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	 "...the hairs stand up when the veins are opened very quickly.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	 "And the two hands lose their grip, and one falls forward.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	 "...then gently pull your hand up to the vein on top of it and prick it with a needle, then gently move your arm back, just like you would do if there were two veins.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	 "Then release the vein and place one hand on top of it for an hour, then put a bandage over that hand.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 "...then let the formation sit until it is healed.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 "And we have heard and learned their method of treatment from them, as well as their incision or beginning of a book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	 The vein on the forehead is equivalent to the facial veins that have become diseased and inflamed.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	 Its quality is such that it strains when pulled apart as long as a vein is exposed.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 the instrument referred to as "pumpkin," its shape being
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	 and hold it steady against the vein while applying pressure with your fingers or whatever else, allowing some to come out according to how much you squeeze.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 Then apply the burn treatment by pulling it off while keeping the vein steady and smooth, never letting go until a wide flame is extinguished.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	 In all cases, only allow the flames to be too high;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	 And also in a crosswind as it is close and breaks when it is subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	 The veins of the two arms are to be inspected for any injuries such as cuts or bruises, and in checking them, one should pay attention to their appearance and condition.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	 The qualities of the veins that need examination are whether they show signs of injury such as tearing or any other damage when inspected.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 Then check the veins closely for any tears that may indicate injury; also look carefully at their color to see if there are any signs of bruising or inflammation.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	 And if the vein is very small and bursts easily.
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	 Then apply pressure to stop it as much as you can, and then hold a bandage tightly over the area until further medical attention is provided.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	 The veins in the arm are to be inspected for any signs of injury such as swelling or other problems that might appear on them and cause discomfort.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	 And the quality of the blood vessels is that they sting when touched with the fingertips, and hold tightly to the hand immediately thereafter, and gently blow out the flame in between the two nostrils, as veins do not open right away, and begin to contract now.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	 And don't apply too much pressure, but correct it according to your need, and let it rest for a night, as it is most likely to be restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 It means the way of fire
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	 The blood vessels of the two fingers help in swelling and beginning of fever, and many diseases, and poisoning, and corrosion, and herpes sores, among others.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	 The quality of the blood vessels is that they pinch at both ends simultaneously as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	 "And the master's arm should be placed on top of the shoulder blade, and the shoulder blade should sit in front of the elbow joint. Then extend the arm fully and quickly as possible.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	 "Then repeat this with the other arm. Lift it up and down gently, so that the shoulder blade does not get in the way.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 "Let him rest throughout the day until the pain is relieved.
de la sainie des leivres	 "the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	 The liver helps digest food in the stomach, and causes indigestion, and sores of the liver, and is responsible for hiccups and restlessness.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	 "And qualify for healing by making sure the shoulder blade lies in front of you and holds its side as I have said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	 "Then raise and look at the two wounds. One will be to your left side, the other to your right side, you can identify them by their color, as well as by how short they are.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 "If one and the other are not clear to you, then there is doubt; if one wound on your side seems bigger than the other, and so do both wounds that are next to each other, it's a common way.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 The liver's qualities are to make you ill when it is in front of you and hold its
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	 The sick person's mouth is the first place to check after checking the nose, and it includes diseases of the ears, and ailments of the throat.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	 The physician should examine the patient's tongue between their fingers in front of a mirror with black cloth to observe any sores.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 Check both ears and nose together, but do not force them too much because they are the arteries
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	 The wounds that are commonly treated by two methods:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	 either you can burn with the entire flame in one go, or apply a fine powder as prescribed to treat it;
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 And they are large and fine depending on the size and depth of the wounds.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	 "The shape of the fur is important; either way it is named or not. It should be long if you see it that way.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	 The best method for treating those that have flat and deep open wounds containing large and severe wounds and problems;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 And this is how you perform a flame cure.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	 "And it is more subtle; to make them even and fine, or if there are subtle ones hidden within.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	 The gallbladder disease, which is one of these veins, if it helps diseases that are located in the throat, and the nose, and the stomach.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 The physician should ensure the artery is clear, and the patient must stay away from it as well.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	 And if he copes with the artery, and the wounds come down to that extent, as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 And it must not prick the fire so severely but mildly.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	 The gallbladder does not open completely if convenient that you extract and change another one.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	 You can either remove it or sew in a vein near the arm instead.
elle apert manifestement;	 It opens completely.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 The fire cure is complete as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	 And if you feel pain when straightening your arm, as long as you can straighten it completely.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	 Then release the joint and tie the arm down so that only the elbow moves freely.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	 And be careful not to cause any harm when straightening your arm as you may cut into an artery.
eschui la donques.	 I'm done.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	 And if it swells up like a child's urine and is red and subtle, then you know it has cut into an artery.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	 Do not do this again, lie down for a while longer, and put your arm up so it can stabilize without moving much.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	 Lie down the arm, and leave it like that, don't move the limb.
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And hold tightly but not so tight that you can no longer move it at all.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	 "And when there is no artery present,
et estainche li sans.	 And the artery is absent
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	 Take a fist-sized incision and make it deep enough that you have one sharp edge on each of the two sides.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	 And when there is no artery present,
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	 When the cure fails, as we have mentioned before, with powders that stop bleeding.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 and there is no longer any desire for more treatments due to the small size of the wound and the strength of both arms.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	 The vein that helps in treatment of the abscess and both arteries are present but combined from the basilica and the cephalic veins as mentioned before.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	 And it is advised that the patient should rest after the nerve is treated and if not too much force was used, and hold the nerve tightly to prevent swelling and ensure healing, but in any case may not heal.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	 And if it does not open with any force at all due to its subtlety, then you should apply a healthy dose of the instrument around.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 and this will help him/her?
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	 And if there is a vein between the two nerves, at that point they should perform the procedure
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	 The healthy dose of the instrument around helps with headaches, which it treats in particular, and also helps the eyes.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 And it is advisable to apply a healthy dose on the cheek or chin, as this is the most effective for all veins, because it does not cause any burns in those areas.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	 Overall, you should try to use a lighter dose, and do nothing if it's the first time, and repeatedly.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 And in case swelling occurs with no harm done at all, there is no need to apply again from the start.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	 The quality of health is related to one's thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	 The first thing you should know about applying this treatment is that it must be done gently to maintain health and prevent future ailments.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	 "And [make] one of them cuts on one of the three veins, which are...
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	 carotid, brachial, and basilic.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	 And they should hold the eye steady when bleeding begins and continues until the signs of exhaustion appear.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 They should hold it for one hour or two hours after the third cut is made.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	 The medical treatment provided does not have a specific cure, but when bleeding occurs or injury is inflicted in any way, within hours and without delay.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 And it does not matter whether children are between 12 and 14 years old or older than four months; what matters is that they receive treatment within seven days.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	 They are no longer capable of caring for themselves having passed 60 years
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	 And if any are treated for internal bleeding, in whatever manner that may be, whether by holding the veins of the neck closed or by applying pressure to them from without on all parts of the body.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	 "Do not apply heat to wounds unless instructed otherwise.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	 "After a colic attack and vomiting and stomach ache, and multiple times of passing urine, and lying down to sleep with the body bent forward or on its side is beneficial.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	 "Then gently regulate the humours by means of food and drink, and medications. If you do not, you will lose.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	 "Then between a hot bath and ice, do not let go of the pain or prevent it from spreading to other parts of the body as we have mentioned.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	 "And keep in mind that work and leisure are two different things.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	 "And lie down and rise as often as possible, so that the hair is longer than on average, and pull the arm up twice or three times every time you get out of bed, then stretch it gently without causing injury because if it is too rigid or stiff, it will not straighten itself.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	 And then he takes hold of the loose skin with both hands while the veins are inflamed and feels for them.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 Then he applies a small amount of heated oil to the vein and places his finger on top of it while feeling for its location so that the vein does not move or tear when moved
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	 Because it is like feeling for strings in a violinist's ear, and if the vein is too thin or easily torn when touched, then when one puts its finger over it, it will remove heat, and cannot open up veins, so this occurs.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 And if the vein is broken or very thin, then it is advisable to make sure that the veins are not easily torn in these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	 But when the vein first opens, this is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	 If not, if there is a recurrence of that same thing or worse later on, the veins will become inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	 And his limbs are inflamed, they swell, he lies on one side or the other, and does not raise his arm
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	 because of this occurrence
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	 do not enter or bathe him while continuing to treat the wound
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	 and if his pulse is weak or he has no faint pulse at all, then you must gently massage him until the bleeding stops completely, as vigorously as possible in the area where it occurred.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	 and apply some heat to his limbs so that they are inflamed.
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 because this occurs frequently when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	 If you see the limb is inflamed and cannot continue treating it without pain, apply some olive oil. Olive oil helps reduce swelling in this area of the wound and it soothes the skin.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	 "And instruct the patient to keep their veins open while performing the cautery, by holding down the artery.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	 "Then when they are placed into the liver and spleen,
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 "This is why it's important to be very gentle with them, as any excessive force can cause injury.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	 "If the abscess is large, which can often occur when performing the cautery, but only if you are extremely gentle and it takes place at this time of opening the vein, so that your haste in placing them into the liver causes a small amount of blood to come out quickly. And they will be held steady for one hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	 "After evacuating the vein and if there is no bleeding or discoloration after a short time, then they are not needed.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 "And you see them removed gently without any fuss; if there is nothing to be held back calmly and easily, then they are finished.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	 And many times there is swelling and appearance at the base of the hairline.
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	 when your hand is loose or if you use too much force in applying pressure to the palm, it will cause swelling and appearance of redness on the hand
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	 except if you do not follow everything we have said, due to an accident without a vein.
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 but the patient must endure for a long time until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	 "And if there is any doubt about its strength or color of the wound.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	 But if he does not bleed excessively when letting off blood as much as they are red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	 and if you see a large amount, if you let off enough so that it is subtle.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	 And if he has too much pain, if he lets it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	 and for those who are plain and skilled at the extraction of wounds, they will make larger ones too, and also have wider flames.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	 "For the weak one do it contrary, but let him stay quiet and still, so that he does not move in pain.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 "This manner of healing is saved from injury and excessive nerve damage, and it ensures that the healing takes place smoothly.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	 "And for one whose veins require healing, let them be given gentle pressure in the groin area;
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 "If he is exhausted from three or more times of bleeding and cold complexion, let him be given gentle pressure in the groin area with honey syrup, or aromatic honey syrup mixed with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, if necessary.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 If you touch the sore after it has healed from a blister, then it is advisable to apply a warm brown syrup and also an aromatic honey as mentioned in the previous paragraph for the extraction of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	 If the sore reappears and gets worse, then it is advisable to apply a warm brown syrup gently and frequently as mentioned in the previous paragraph for treating sores by its virtue continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	 If the sore reappears after the first one and is severe, then it is advisable to apply warm brown syrup gently and frequently as mentioned in the previous paragraph for treating sores by its virtue continuously.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	 "And who shall heal him from another place if he is to heal his second wound.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	 "Because he has dense pain in the chest which is exhausting him, it causes fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	 "If it is desired to draw out a large quantity and expand the opening as much as possible.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	 "And ensure all the body's conditions are maintained as well. Keep your hand steady when the healing process begins, so that death does not come in place of healing and this happens often times.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	 "And do not worry about seeing the second wound and making another incision. Once closed, press firmly into it.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	 "If he is very sick, let him extend his arms, as this would be bad for him;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	 "And leave it at that second time.
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 "Or if you prick at the tip of the flame until it burns out and closes its vein opening, place your finger on it gently and press firmly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	 "And if his vein is open, do not close it yourself; rather let it be closed by someone else as soon as possible.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	 And if you need to drain a second abscess or vein, whether it's in the arm that was operated on or another limb.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	 The arm is healthy and whole because of what it contains.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	 "The healing method is to hold his hand in hot water until the boil stops being red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	 "If one wishes to do this, first ensure that the vein is held firmly in place. Then gently move it slowly back and forth, avoiding both ends and the middle.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	 "Or if the vein is large and close to your hand's joint, hold it firmly with your other hand but cannot remove it otherwise. If you bring it back gently hot and leave it in its own heat as long as you can.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	 "And if holding onto the vein with hot hands is not possible because it would make your hand too numb.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 "The vein of this kind is more effective than any other veins and does not cause pain or numbness.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	 "This remedy for the hand affliction can be applied to all ailments of the liver. It is this way:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	 "Hold your hand and bring it into hot water until the vein is free from obstruction if you can.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	 and then, it will heal itself
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 Do not apply excessive pressure as the nerves may become damaged; instead, gently warm up the affected area and hold it steady to prevent movement of any pain.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	 "Once you have treated the sore as much as possible, if you hold down the limb tightly and let it rest constantly, then make a fist.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	 The disease of the hand is better when it attacks the hand itself; and do everything as I have previously advised on the other side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The disease of the finger is better when it attacks all other diseases that are on the body; such as joint pain and swelling, and leg cramps, and old age ailments.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	 And the quality of his healing will increase if you gently warm and massage the affected area while holding it steady to prevent movement until it heals.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	 The vein must be held still when massaging at the shoulder region as otherwise blood may drain out of the wounds.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 If there is an injury on any part of his body, including the shoulder or elsewhere, this must be attended to.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	 And if you apply heat to any wounds that are open and exposed, it will help the healing process along with rubbing.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	 And he must hold his breath until there is no more pain.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	 If it cannot be done, if you apply healthy oil and leave the vein well moistened.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	 "And if he sneezes for the first time, after sneezing again a little while later, as his nose is sore.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 "Do not doubt what has been said and proceed with the healing of the other wound immediately.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	 The dislocation of the shoulder joint is at its base and causes great pain when it occurs.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	 "The quality of his nose is that the hairs between or on the chin must be trimmed, and if he sneezes with a sore throat, it will open.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	 "And when it opens in all the ways you mention, or through its passage.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 "You must heal this wound with great care because it is severe and comes from the nose itself which can be easily closed by hand.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	 "And if you do not heal it quickly and the nose does not open or close correctly when opening any of the two wounds in quick succession, beware of the consequences.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	 "And do as much care to these wounds that you see and then take away their link, and tie them off with bandages tightly.
ele est maintenant sanee.	 It has now become clear
des sainies de ventouse	 "The treatment of wounds
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	 The veins are made of sinew, or iron, or leather
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	 and the extraction can be done in two ways
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	 Either by cutting through veins and arteries, or through opening sores
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	 And the extraction that is through opening wounds can be done in two ways:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	 or she is through fire, or by means of heat.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	 and the extraction that occurs when cutting and through drawing blood can be done in twelve ways, depending on whether it is drawn completely or just partially out of one vein.
et li autres est emmi le col;	 And other things are made from collagen;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	 and the second thing, which has two costs from collagen.
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	 and veins of these men.
et li ventouse des II espaules;	 And the veins of the two spaces;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	 And the veins under the eyes.
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	 "And they (the dislocated joint) make both arms tremble.
et les ventouses des II jambes;	 "And they make both legs tremble.
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	 "And the buttocks make both cheeks tremble.
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	 "The dislocation does not cause injury to the tendons that are sparse in the thigh, and because of this reason it is feared that if one makes an incision into a vein.
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 "And this must be done slowly and carefully without any sudden movement in order to prevent the fire from spreading anywhere, as long as you are visible.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	 "It is necessary to treat the wounds as soon as possible, or when you see that they are already there, and may apply it at any time.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	 "Because it has such an effect on the wound if you delay treatment for too long.
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	 "And if they prick at their root (base) or tip, and on their face, and in the corner of their eye, and under the brow.
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	 "And if they prick a vein in their mouth, causing them to lose consciousness.
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 "And if the patient faints, sees nothing but darkness and dies, similar things happen.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	 And when we see these signs, and especially within the first month, our commands to attend them after three hours from now
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	 "The healing of the wound depends on how long and thick they are. Once removed from all flesh, it is best to wait for their removal after evacuation.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	 "The operation to remove the cephalic abscess is different. Only those with a cold complexion or who have already had scars should avoid this as it would result in great discomfort.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 "For these reasons, it is best to wait until they recover and those with cold diseases are healed.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	 "And those who are about to undergo this treatment should first place a bandage slightly lower down towards the armpit in case of dislocation.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	 The dislocation occurred in the shoulder joint due to damage from above and below, which caused it to swell up at its base.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 It is important to gently push down on the arm, so that if there is stiffness or swelling in the elbow or stomach area as well.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	 The dislocation occurred in the collarbone so that it caused pain at its base and numbness and paralysis of the arm.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 It is important that you instruct the patient to raise their hand so they can put it down without causing an artery to rupture and bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	 The dislocation occurred in the jaw, which caused mouth diseases such as tooth decay and other mouth ailments.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	 It is also causing damage to other vital organs.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	 The dislocation of joints is an illness that comes from heat and filling
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	 Dislocations of the thighs are similar to those of the arms because they cause large bruises.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 Instruct the patient not to strain too much when coughing, as it may tear the lungs and vessels (arteries).
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	 The dislocation of the shoulder is particularly severe at its base and causes damage to organs or vessels (arteries).
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	 And if it were subtle enough, it could cause tearing.
et i fai grans plaies.	 It can lead to severe bruises.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	 Dislocations of the legs if severe can cause damage to all parts of the body and lead to ancient burns or wounds from fire.
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	 They are in lieu of the second phalanges and second toes, and they tend to weaken the body after a long time use, causing numbness more pronounced.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	 This passage describes the method to apply a tourniquet. The first step is to tie it tightly around the wound and secure it firmly in place until bleeding stops or there's no longer any need for it as soon as the bleeding has stopped.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	 Then remove the tourniquet and place the patient in a recovery position to ensure they are comfortable.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	 If only one artery is severed, it is advisable to attempt surgery immediately, but make sure there are large wounds and some perforations in the way as well.
et suce legierement.	 Gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	 If not all arteries have been severed, it is advisable to perform surgery a second time.
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	 The first time by making the cut smaller and more precise.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	 If it is too thick for a third attempt, surgery should be performed immediately.
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	 And when we only want to cut small and small, if we perform the operation just once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	 And if we wish to heal a wound, when they become inflamed
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	 And if it is swollen and painful, let it be wrapped in a poultice made of oil to soften and dissolve.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	 It can be with olive oil or with almond oil, or with the juice of mild cucumbers, or with sesame seed oil.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 And it can be made from the juice of onions, leeks, or chamomile, among other things.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	 And if it has excessive swelling, cold, or if it is filled with marigold oil, balm oil, or any other oily substance, and the rest.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 And if it has tender and large pores that need to be washed after using a warm washcloth or a cold washcloth, or after applying rose water, or cold water, or watermelon juice, or porcelain-root water, or any other similar substance.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	 And those with dampness who remove it gently, or of mint, and sumac, and other similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	 And those who have too much swelling should be bathed with a strong wine infusion or from strong vinegar infusion, chamomile tea or other similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	 And it is not advisable to bathe the wound in hot water immediately after washing but wait for about an hour or two after washing.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 After a dislocation occurs, it is important to remain still until further notice, so as not to worsen the condition.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	 And remember those who have colic pain, and stay away from foods that are too spicy or inflamed
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	 if you want to drink cold things like green beans, lentils and lettuce, similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 And include meats such as chicken and moist vegetables.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	 And those with a cold complexion should drink honey syrup and scented wine that is between sweet and sour, including water, pork, chicken, fish, and vegetables.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	 and for those who will become thirsty if they drink more than necessary;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	 And it is important not to scratch the area or massage it after a dislocation, in order to maintain alignment of the joint.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 And let them rest quietly, but it must always drink something.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	 The veins that are to be cut are those placed in the liver, and under the tongue, and behind, and beneath the belly button, and between the thighs and buttocks, as well as below the ribs on either side. As for this member it cannot harm itself by piercing another part of its own body;
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	 in order to increase the blood flow into the member when we place veins beneath the belly and buttocks in order to strengthen the member;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	 And hold pain when you prick or pierce it through its own virtue by attraction with the needle on the extraction of hair, or to cut off part of itself.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	 And it stays still when placed beneath the liver and tongue as they retain freshness for so long.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 "The patient must have their own fire cautery to ensure the hair grows long and even, as well as any other remedies they may require.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	 The form of the venipuncture is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	 "And in opening a vein or extracting arrows, the patient must hold their breath for as long as they can.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	 "And in passing through veins or with a needle, the patient must hold tight and steady.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 "The veins of children are different from adults, and small ones from large ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	 "And when to apply this cautery to a limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	 "Take a piece of fat or twine and wrap it around the vein, making sure not to burn the hair. If you see that it is burning the vein, do not remove it immediately.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	 After placing it on that member, if you look at its top part which we have mentioned, if there is any crack or opening between them
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 And if the separation is visible and the edges are smooth, it should be fine.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	 In the case where it is caused by a disease of many types, and there are no cracks or openings, and no edges to be removed.
et c’est li forme:	 It means
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	 It does not matter if the joints are still intact or not.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	 And in the eyes of those who have been blinded due to illness and injuries.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	 It means that if you remove the sutures gently and carefully so they are soft and neat when removed, but it is not advisable to remove them prematurely.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	 "And hold them steady with gentle touch, as long as they are growing, and do not have any roots.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	 Then you should apply a poultice to the limb when it is red, and hold them steady.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 When they are flat, meaning no longer growing, then you should apply a poultice and hold them steady; because it is then too late to apply anything else, as this may cause further harm.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	 If you loosen the bond between them and gently separate them, properly, then bind them again securely.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	 Then you should hold them steady when they are too cold to touch directly with ice, and apply something hot to bind them again securely.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	 Then you should hold them steady when there are blisters or sores, and until the wounds heal completely.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	 "Or as you lie on your side with a pillow between your knees, leave them there until they stop hurting.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 "And if it continues to hurt more, please take other measures.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	 "If the pain doesn't stop when you prick your finger or hold it steady as long as you can, then put them down and let the pain subside.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 "Once they are cut off or fall out on their own, if you pinch a little and hold it steady for a moment, or burn them with fire.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	 The book begins with the explanation
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	 These chapters are essential to the art of medicine and explain how to treat fractures and heal wounds.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	 "Take care when following this chapter that you do not follow any previous books or letters.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	 "For this reason, the art of medicine is now extinct in our land because I could find no book about it.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	 "And knowing no better, having studied the ancient books and practicing for so long that I have mastered this art, through experimentation and experience.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 "In this chapter I have described what is contained within it and explained it at the end, so that you understand completely the forms of the remedies to be used in these chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	 It is convenient that we begin with the prologue of this book and discuss the authors or those who have mastered it, so as to deepen our understanding and learn more about what follows.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	 "I say that if a fracture or dislocation or sprain occurs in any limb, and you want to heal it from both sides without causing harm, then be gentle with the part on one side and hard with the other.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	 "Or if too tight or too loose.
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	 "And if the fire is too hot or cold, that you must find the right heat and adjust it to prevent harm from occurring in any part of your body.
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 "The patient must lie still while the procedure is performed.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	 Once the dislocations start to improve, it is advised to gently stretch the affected muscles as needed, and do so gradually; avoid sudden movements or forceful stretching that could cause further injury.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	 "The head must be held steady.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	 "And it should be made clear that any wounds or injuries will not easily heal because of the nature of the limbs, and those which are too tender, like infants' flesh.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	 "But there is no cure for dislocations, and must immobilize the dislocated limb so it can be held together as before.
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 "And nothing more of its own flesh, because that is what we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	 "Dislocations come in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	 "The dislocation of one arm is different from the dislocation of a leg or any other limb; I will discuss all types of dislocations in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	 "There is one type that occurs suddenly and violently like writing with a quill.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	 "If there is an associated dislocation with injury,
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	 "And there are different ways to restore the engine and equipment in repair depending on how much memory it has.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	 "And if a dislocation occurs through this, the patient must lie still and hold tightly with their hands.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	 "And when dislocations do not occur at the joints or near the tendons, they cause great pain for the patient and there is no relief.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 But it can also be caused by twisting movements, tearing or small fractures.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	 If it is not convenient for you to move your arm now but rather apply your medicine right away, and then gently restrain it afterwards
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	 And for the breaks that happen at the joints themselves, they should be immobilized immediately as possible to prevent further injury.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	 If the arm is held in place with a splint or brace, and if there was no significant joint dislocation, it should be immobilized until advised otherwise.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	 Afterwards, they apply a splint or brace and encourage light movement gently and gradually as the healing process is easier than fixing broken bones.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 After that, if advised to do so, it should be immobilized for further recovery.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	 If there are fractures in the bones themselves, if they try to move their hands or feet, or even both at once, use one hand or two hands and legs, or an arm with one hand.
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	 "Ensure that when the parts of the member are severed and reconnected with appropriate tools, do not remove any part of the limb during reconnection to avoid injury.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 Ensure that all joints of bones align properly after reconnecting them.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	 And make sure both hands are in the correct position if you suspect there is no mistake made.
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	 If the swelling is significant and not too much restraint should be applied, do not push as hard as those who come by their own effort to tighten and pull on the limb if you want many times experienced.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	 And when limbs are in place and the wound is well closed, do not hold tightly or relax, do not twist, nor anything else.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 Ensure that the limb feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	 When there is no pain, it's best to put him into a comfortable position so that he doesn't feel any pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	 And keep them in place while you straighten them as much as possible without causing further harm.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 And make sure both broken limbs are aligned according to what I just told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	 The limbs are different in size, shape, and extent.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	 Because he has two broken arms, one on each side and so forth.
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	 It's best to gently wrap the limb with soft and gentle cloths.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	 And those that are large, like an arm or a leg
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	 If you need to wrap around something big and hard because the bigger limbs will grip all of it tightly, and prevent any movement at all unless there is no pain.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	 Then wrap around the smaller limbs in three or four turns according to the size of the limb, and hold the hand close by it all, then go over the break and hold less as you move away from the break;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	 "And moisturize it gently and gradually, as long as you apply a significant part of the skin, then reapply every hour, and turn off the heat when removing the bandage.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	 "Then reapply to the bruised area and gently hold it, not too tight nor loose. As we have mentioned in the previous paragraph.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 "Then put between the layers of gauze or cloth as tight as possible and hold it in place until there is no longer any bleeding.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	 "And if there is still bleeding or an abscess, apply gentle pressure until the bleeding stops and let it rest without any further action.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 "Then hold your gauze tightly with a wide strip so that it seals the wound well, or you can fold it into a cloth to stop the bleeding. And apply this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	 "The bone must be slightly larger and wider than others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	 "Or as long as it is convenient for the affected member to be small or large.
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	 "Then hold it steady with the same method you used for the first incision. Then tie it tightly when making an additional cut.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	 "Make sure to tighten it up as much and as little as necessary.
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	 "It should be just right in size, not too thin, not too thick, and be long enough.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 "If the thread is too thick and causes threads to tear through or if it is not tight enough, then that particular cut will not be steady.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	 And the veins are closed after removing them from their wounds if they prick or pierce through the flesh, unless it is bleeding heavily and cannot be stopped.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	 When a wound has occurred with an abscess, I will provide instructions on how to treat it later.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	 And it is advisable to break them at their first joint.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	 "For when the members are large, it is not advisable to use sutures or stitches after 3 days, or 7 days depending on your personal preference.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	 "And regarding dislocations, sprains, and twists:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 "And regarding sprains and twists, it's important to use flour paste applied evenly around the stitches, not too thin or too thick, and apply this mixture; this is how the plasterer repairs a broken bone in more cases, especially with women and children, as there is no pain nor discomfort.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	 "Another way to fix dislocations, sprains, and twists:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	 "Take barley meal, dates, honey, aloe vera gel, and gum arabic, then mix it with water;
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	 "Mix in the aloe vera;
alechil VIIII З.;	 "After that, you have a paste to apply evenly around the joints, not too thin or too thick, and then apply it; this is how the plasterer fixes dislocations, sprains, and twists.
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	 "And when you have powder, mix with some flour;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	 The skin on that arm is hot if you apply this plaster because it has good composition and can heal broken bones quickly but may cause burns
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	 Another way to castrate (castrate meaning 'to neuter or geld') would be through twisting.
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	 Pour one ounce of sugar and three ounces of vinegar
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	 Mirrors and aloe gel
acaice VI З.;	 This is six ice cubes.
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 Boil the aromatic X ingredient until it's well cooked and mix with oil or fat to taste, then serve.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	 Another way to castrate is to tie and stretch the skin tautly so it feels tight; then apply a pain reliever, stop any swelling of the joint, straighten out the bones, relax.
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Take new linen and boil in oil until it is cooked through, then lay it on the shoulder.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 Straightening devices do not cure dislocations themselves, but they can help alleviate pain by gently pressing on them to release the dislocation.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	 "Another way to straighten broken bones
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	 Soak dry leaves of fig tree bark and the ground, grind all together, then plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another way to repair or fix a broken bone is by removing the remaining part of the arm
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	 Take root of thyme, chamomile flowers, violet petals, wheat flour, some cheese, and mix them altogether
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 Then grind it with wine, and apply to the limbs, or mix it with fresh ginger juice, or any other kind of moistened vinegar, and you are good to go
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another way to fix a broken bone that is more severe than the first one when an arm comes off restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	 Take root of thyme, and flax seeds, barley straw, mallow leaf, and chamomile flowers, from all or a part thereof;
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 Then grind it with salt water, or sweet vinegar, or wine depending on the limb's need and rest period.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	 When you have finished your book on how to fix a broken arm by using wax and oil, then put it between two pieces of soft cloth or hard ones, according to which one is warmer than the other.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	 "And it seems strange that you should put them back together again, for a quick restoration, if they are injured and inflamed and similar things, as we have mentioned.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	 Another way to straighten broken bones when in pain and suffering
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	 "Heeding his physician's advice and following the prescribed treatment plan, he will improve rapidly.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	 After a short time has passed, his limbs should feel no pain and the eyes of their sockets.
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	 If he does not follow through with hands as directed.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	 His pain comes back in the form of numbness or weakness if he does not follow through on this treatment.
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	 and gently wipe the sore, soak it with clean water, rinse off the dirt, and lift the leg as long as the pain continues to subside, until the soreness goes away.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	 Then let the member rest for one hour, then apply dry cloth soaked in clean water or oil, and tie it with a bandage while waiting to see improvement.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	 "The inflammation of one member causes pain in the other. Gradually increase the heat and intensity until they are both inflamed, at which point you should not apply so much pressure.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Gradually, as it becomes painful.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	 "And you see that the eye and brow and face are swollen with pain and distress, I have healed all of it, and you should also cleanse your hands and nails if there is any injury, as in the first time.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	 "If the member does not react to what we have suggested at all after three days or two days or five days or seven days.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	 "Do not let it go for twenty consecutive days. Leave a break every so often to check on how close it is getting.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	 "If the restraint exceeds what I mentioned before and the member grows in size as I have suggested, then...
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	 "...you know that it is not going to come out.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	 "You always use the same level of heat regardless how long you have been doing it. Gradually increase the intensity until every day.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	 For this injury to heal properly, it is important that they stop doing whatever is causing the pain and rest their limb gently.
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 It's bad news; if there are doubts or fear arises, I will do nothing but wait and care for the wound properly
des diverses manieres de brisure	 Of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	 The main methods of injuries include various factors that contribute to it.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	 if the injury was caused by hitting or stabbing that part of the bone where it is now causing pain and discomfort.
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 To heal this type of injury, we must follow a specific method of treatment "heaping.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	 Or if the bone is being pierced with such force as to cause death, we call this absolute dislocation.
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	 And there are both large and small wounds from these injuries.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	 If the impact is from above, below, front or back, or other sources of stress on specific areas; these are also considered fractures.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	 And if the break occurs where it touches the bone or is close to it, and this injury may be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	 And if there is a wound that has been healed in this small bone, and it bleeds slightly, then it is called a "hairline" fracture.
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	 And if the wound is made by a piercing of bone or from a sharp object, and it enters through the bone, then you hold tight as when you are holding fire.
si entre li piere dedens.	 If between bones
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	 And if this occurs in bones or those with more moistened bones as children;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	 and there are all these ways of fractures that small pieces become separated when they occur;
et je em parlerai en son leu.	 I will talk more about it in another passage.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	 "We know all the ways of fractures through examination and questioning; and through investigation into it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	 "Hairline fractures are caused by the fact that when you discover an injury to the bone and look inside of it, if you see black cracks.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	 In the treatment of a fracture, be careful about the swelling and pain that may occur after injury; if you see any bad accident like vomiting or loss of consciousness, then apply cold compresses, regain control over your thoughts, extend it gently, prevent bleeding, and let the eye remain still to avoid further harm.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	 If you do not see any bad accidents immediately after treatment, then continue with the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	 When you've held it in place for as long as is comfortable without causing discomfort or pain to the patient, then proceed to apply a plaster bandage around the joint at its fourth quarter, making sure not to cover any of the previously mentioned injuries.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	 And if you've held it in place as long as is comfortable without causing discomfort or pain to the patient, then proceed to apply a bandage around the joint at its seventh quarter, making sure not to cover any of the previously mentioned injuries.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	 And if the bone fractures come to a place where you can grasp the brain stem, then you must hold onto the separated part tightly;
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	 And you shall first straighten the arm in all directions that it is able to do so, and search for the bone beneath the wound in every way possible, and apply pressure over the abscess as well, until blood stops flowing.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	 And keep applying pressure to the wound until the bone is straightened out completely and stabilized.
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	 Then, after you have applied the necessary pressure on the arm, start working towards straightening the bone in every possible way.
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 One method is to gently squeeze it tightly at its narrow part first, and then continue on with other methods.
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	 "And then you apply another dressing that is larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	 The second method is to have multiple different sizes of tweezers or needles at your fingertips, some narrow and others wide, sharp and blunt.
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	 Gently handle the joint without hurting it.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	 "And if you wish to straighten the limb as well, also stretch the tendons with rollers and do not let it pass over the bone point, so that...
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	 "...if you wish to have more, if someone old in its bone of the arm, so that you apply pressure from both sides of the joint...
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	 "This is one of three methods for treating:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	 "...the quality to straighten the bone is that you apply pressure directly on the joint, and hold it for as long as you slowly release your tension from both sides of the joint...
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	 "...then remove the pressure to another part for a short time afterwards, and keep doing this all over again, then gently stretch out the space between your knuckles, and do it more subtly than you did before, and lightly if at all, while keeping hold of the bone in one hand or none of the other things you have as tensions...
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	 "And remember to avoid touching the forehead or scalp.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	 "And when you have broken the bone and stitched it up, if necessary, make sure to use stitches that are more delicate and subtle than others used for cutting.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	 "If there is nothing wrong with the other bones, it's okay to gently handle those as well;
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 "Then treat the wound with whatever remedies we have suggested.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	 "And another way to heal if that is how Gauls do it, which is more straightforward;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	 "But be cautious and let the healer's word guide you.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	 "First it is important to cut away a part of the bone where there was a break and if once you have cut through that part then apply the thread which cuts deep like this.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	 "And do not cut on one side only if there is another area that needs attention as well;
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	 "Then, with a small hammer, if you gently strike the entire bone without missing any part and take care of the stitches as well;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 She is at rest with her arm, if it moves gently because she feels no pain, or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	 "The bones of the arm should not be stretched out in front; instead they are supported only by the muscles, and it is necessary to have a small opening through which you must pass various instruments for making any incision conveniently along with the most suitable angle according to the shape and size of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	 "If you are dealing with larger or more delicate instruments, after which there is a need for even smaller ones; do not stop doing this until everything is done properly.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	 For other hairstyles and subtle splits, make sure to adjust the position according to its direction
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	 This is what makes those who practice this art stand out from others.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	 And if it is swollen, you must apply a compress of damp linen according to the size and severity of the wound, and move it towards the injury.
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	 Then apply another bandage of a double or triple fold, moistened in vinegar and oil, and place it over the first one.
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	 Then proceed more gently than before, so as not to disturb the bandage, then apply another one and do not restrain it from moving only as long as the wound is healed.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	 And let the fire cure continue as long as the patient's eyes are closed and then remove it, and apply medicines such as root extracts, flour of saffron, incense powder, aromatics, and similar things.
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	 And with these powders applied to the wound and administer other medical remedies for pain relief.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	 And remember that the wound should be cleaned well and not left open, nor should it be bandaged up tightly, as when the bandage is tied too tight on a burn, which can cause additional pain.
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 As for when an acid is applied, then it must be neutralized by another substance.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	 "When one of the joints dislocates due to an injury, if what we have described is true, then it is doubtful and full of doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	 And if you want to avoid blisters from the acid, then apply a medicine that has been prepared with honey and three parts of rose oil mixed together.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 In order to perform this treatment method, ensure that everything is in place as much as possible.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	 The two bones are broken and cannot be put back together again, only one may remain unbroken because it is a bone.
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	 And their cartilage is flexible, and does not break if they are bent or twisted properly.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	 And if one of the two bones is broken, you should straighten your other arm to support it and keep its alignment as much as possible according to its natural form.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 And perform this treatment gently, making sure the patient doesn't feel pain through your arm.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	 And if it is on top of the knee, then you should try to straighten it a little bit.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	 And if both bones are broken, perform this treatment as described before and try to restore the first joint if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 If not, after the eighth or ninth time when the eyes are closed and you try to move one of the bones but it still doesn't move, then that bone is broken in half.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	 Or you take another part from the other side, it is broken.
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	 And may they be so large that they fill both ears with sound but do not hear.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 There was no improvement so you should try to loosen them up more and move around some joints.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	 I think this is right, but it's best to use a mixture of flour and meal powder.
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 Then let the tent be open until the ears are fully healed; then close them tightly.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	 And never put the ears against any other ear while they are still sore and swollen, or if there is a rash on them.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	 Or if you do not have one available
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	 And if you are sewing it up and there is a risk of tearing the eyelid, or if they become swollen from oiliness or dirt, then you must be very gentle in your movements.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	 And hold them steady if you are not near one, using flour and meal powder mixed with incense powder, put it on lightly, do not cover the ears lightly.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	 And when the injury is small, and it has been broken into many pieces, if they are unable to remove them completely, then cut off what can be removed, and deal with whatever remains separately.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if there are no more small injuries to be treated, and the treatment is complete, then let him rest as much as possible.
de la routure de la mandibule	 "Movement of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	 When the jaw is dislocated without any prior injury and it only moves in a single direction, do not attempt to realign or reposition it forcefully, as this can cause further damage if done incorrectly
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	 When dislocations occur in the right arm, you should bite your left index finger off.
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	 If the dislocation occurs in the left jaw, bite your right index finger off instead and switch hands to treat both dislocations simultaneously.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	 If the jaw dislocation is severe on two sides, you should administer two doses of medication as soon as possible to alleviate any discomfort.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	 And if the movements become too intense or violent, then tie a silk thread around their neck and use two towels to hold them down.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	 And place the strip in a proper position, or a leather strip long and wide following the jawline, and lay it along with the muscles you want to massage, and command the patient to lie still, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	 And if you see that his face is changing, if the disease worsens further, then stop and consult with your doctor.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	 And apply a paste made from flour or cornmeal after you have applied the poultice;
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	 And apply a light compress and let it stay in place, the condition of the patient does not change, leave as is.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	 Do this three times daily.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	 And if you want to prevent dislocations as mentioned several times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	 And if there is a large crack and injury to the bone, put some of the bone from it on;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	 "When there are subtleties of the outer garments, they can cause confusion.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	 If the wound is very deep, you must open a flame to help treat it accordingly.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Once you have all these items and there is no need to reapply them as the wound heals, if it's large place some light bandages over it so that any infection cannot enter until it is healed completely.
de la forcele	 The arm
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	 The wind blows harder multiple times against his shoulder, and it breaks in three pieces.
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	 It is broken into two pieces, but the repair work is lighter compared to the first one.
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	 Or it has a fracture with an injury
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	 And the shoulder joint may become unstable if the fracture is accompanied by an injury, and you need to perform two treatments, especially after the bone breaks;
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	 It extends towards the side.
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	 Then you should put it in two parts if its shape is as good as can be expected, and there will not be any appearance or smoothness.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	 And if you need to extend it further, by wrapping the shoulder in a tight bandage or linen, and make sure that it is large according to your needs.
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And gently apply force to it, and hold steady its base with your hand if you break off any part of it as desired.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	 And if you don't want to move the elbow any more after it has recovered fully and is strong enough but still wants to keep it immobilized, put a pillow under its head so that as soon as the elbow lifts itself up, it will be held back down by the pillow.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	 Then straighten the fracture by placing it in that position and secure it if desired
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	 And tie them together with thread gently, but they cannot be joined by any strength, unless one of the incisions has been made.
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	 But you must hold firmly this instrument to maintain it securely
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	 And use a spoon instead and do not worry, and make it as long as desired according to the size of the bone and the strength of the arm;
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	 And make it crooked if you wish and put some wide ones next to each other according to the wound that was made when you treated the bones;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 And when you apply an ointment and press gently on the abscess, if it does not burst immediately or with a small squeeze, then you should doubt its effectiveness and reapply as needed.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	 "And if you have stitches that are coming out, do not squeeze the bandage tightly while holding it; and let them fall in place.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	 Joint dislocation occurs when the joint becomes painful and swollen. To treat it, apply a poultice of ground meal mixed with water to the affected area gently, and wrap it in light gauze or cloth. If you feel better after applying this treatment, continue using it regularly.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	 Then take a very wide band of gauze or cloth and wrap it around the affected area twice tightly.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	 Then take a very narrow strip of gauze or cloth three inches wide and long, and apply it over the affected area if you feel pain during wrapping.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	 Then wrap it around your neck and tie the strip over the collar of your shirt or jacket to provide warmth.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	 And when you see that the lower part of the chest is being pulled forcefully and you see clearly that it is no longer moving its bones, if there's a severe sprain, and as soon as the ligaments are stretched too far
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	 And when you feel both legs move independently of each other due to a severe sprain and lift the arm upwards
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	 If the dislocation is caused by a strong pull on the shoulder joint or pulling one arm across your body, you should not allow any further bad accidents to happen.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	 Then repeat the traction and hold it as long as possible while allowing it to heal.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 And she was restored in 28 days, but less than any other.
de la brisure de l’espaule	 The dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	 "The shoulder blade breaks or dislocates, and it is unable to return to place by touch alone.
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	 "If the dislocation follows a certain form of the fracture and is consistent with its natural shape, in all ways that you know.
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	 "Then put a bandage soaked in water over the dislocated limb and gently support it with a second strip.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	 "Then apply a larger and more delicate strip, just above the shoulder blade, making sure it does not cover any part of the shoulder. If you want to support with straps from under them, make sure the strap is securely in place.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	 "Then firmly hold it with a large bandage, so that the strip does not move from its place and look at the joint.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	 "And every time you massage it, hold the bandage and adjust the strip as needed from its place, making sure not to move it on your chest.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	 "The shoulder joint is dislocated for 20 or 25 days.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 When it's completed, and the dislocation occurs, then you must stay still because it is not easy to move afterwards
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	 "And the arm bone is connected to the shoulder bone
de la brisure dou pis	 And the elbow bone is connected to the shoulder bone
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	 The patient experienced no harm from this procedure but did experience some discomfort.
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 And it will break apart due to excessive force.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 If the leg bone is broken at its base and it declines downward, causing great pain to others nearby and breaking into pieces, then it will damage those in the vicinity of the break as well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	 Then the dislocation will be corrected by pressing between the spaces and straightening them out, then pressing on them, and assembling the bones of both arms into one hand as you please.
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	 And hold the eyelids and eyelashes with gentle pressure to prevent them from moving;
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	 Then press the eyelid firmly down and hold it tightly, and repeat with the other eye every hour until you lose consciousness.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	 "And if there is pain or an abscess coming to the head of the arm, whether from corrosion or pruritus that comes to it, or any other cause, then you must apply a poultice made with remedies.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Then hold the poultice steady until it is solid.
de la brisure des costes	 of the break of costs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	 "The veins that are pricked do not burst until after a while on the back and at the root of their origin.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	 "And it is good to perform an incision for this purpose.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And if you reset the dislocation as needed.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 Then apply an ointment and hold it steady with a bandage so that you can treat it properly.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	 "If the veins that are pricked become detached from their base and cause great pain and bleeding, causing loss of blood.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	 "And all the above causes pain, suffering, and great injury to the body; it is also very harmful.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	 And if those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that inflame the stomach to ease the break of costs.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	 "We do not interfere with this matter as long as it does not harm others.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	 If you have done something that may harm someone else.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	 And he said it was due to something swelling up against his liver
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	 Certainly doubt arises that the swelling is not causing damage to the liver itself by reason of its weakness
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	 And they will cover the arm with a warm compress soaked in oil to help them breathe easier and then give them medication for wheezing, coughing, and pain relievers as needed.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	 And the joints feel great pain that they cannot endure by touching it with their hands without injuring themselves, and doubt arises to the bone if it is cut through its fragile part, as a result of which equipment should be used in order to heal.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the bone is broken and treated gently with a splint as long as it remains healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	 And those who get frostbite should cover their ears with heated oil cloths and put them on the bone;
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And as long as it is healthy, one should be cautious about how much to apply the oil on the bone;
de la brisure dou col	 The dislocation occurs
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	 Any time there is a break in the bone, pain comes quickly.
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	 And similarly to the spine's bones.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And when there is no break before it dislocates, and you know if it will be alright or not, if pressed gently with a needle to move them, they cannot be moved nor stretched, and when they are pricked by an arrow, do nothing.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 Then you know he is mortal and many times are lost, but if they cannot be moved when held steady, then the bone joint is saved, and wounds heal as well; so it's best to treat them right away.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	 And similar things happen to the spine's bones as well. If you see if they are broken or not, and whether their pain is severe, and accidents occur where they fall, and in jumping, bending, and stretching.
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 And when it happens to the stomach area, as with any other injury.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And if it is dislocated on the back and cannot be restored by itself,
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	 They are mortal wounds.
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 If they do not recover from their treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	 And if the dislocation occurs lightly, it may not be as severe.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	 And the cure is to hold it steady if you prick at its base when putting in oil from a good source or bad one, as long as it remains still.
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	 Then apply an unguent that is soothing and healing, bind it with thread or some other material, tell the patient to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	 "And he shall not sleep where there is such pain, as long as he lives.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	 And if any bones are broken, it should be treated with a knife.
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And then close the bone with stitches when it is large enough, and treat the wound by first cleaning it out.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	 And if the bone is broken but you call it "bone of the arm," then apply an external splint to your hand and put another one on the other hand at that time.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And then hold it in place if there is another bone broken as well, and treat the wound while it is still fresh.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	 fracture of the arm bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	 And if the bone of the arm is broken as well and it has caused some discomfort in the upper part.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	 "And then it becomes painful, and drops to the ground, and strikes at a nearby limb, causing injury.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	 The reattachment is done while holding your hand steady, as long as you are steady with the stretcher.
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	 And what about the fractures and the shape of them?
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	 The only fracture is at the end, if there are any, as long as they are of their natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	 And if the fractures are long or fall from a distance, as you pull away the bone with your abdomen, until the restoration of those fractures is complete.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	 And when you will have made the incision and then put on a strip of cloth or gauze, and hold it steady, so that it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	 Cut off any loose ends as long as they are tight.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	 Instruct the patient to sleep with their head resting on a firm surface, or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	 And if there is a problem with the stitches, so that it does not move, as long as the stitches are tightened and hold what we have mentioned earlier.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	 And then come to repair it if necessary, holding tight as is convenient until no more accidents occur.
et c’est li maniere.	 That's the way it should be done
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	 dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	 The adjutants are those who are between the lower arm and the shoulder blade, if it is dislocated, then you should restore in one of the following ways:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	 One way is to gently pull your hand away from the injured area, like this shape.
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	 And the other way is to hold it tight and keep it in place, while pressing into the sore spot.
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	 Then hold your injured arm tight until it feels stable and straight again, then support at any point or where the elbow bends.
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	 Then place both hands on the ground in front of you while holding onto it steady as possible.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	 The other way is to hold the dislocated shoulder against your chest with one hand on its collarbone and instruct the other hand to touch it gently at the dislocation point and the others to extend outward towards their side.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 And if you see that it is necessary to extract further, hold tightly the edges of the wound while extracting through and across them towards your side.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	 "The dislocation occurs when the shoulder blade is dislocated and you need to immobilize it as much as possible by keeping it in place.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	 "And also when the dislocation occurs towards its base, you should gently stabilize it by keeping it in place as much as possible while ensuring that the shoulder blade is aligned with both upper and lower parts of the arm.
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 "Then, immobilize it if necessary by putting a bandage over it and making sure to keep your hands still.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	 "And then hold the arm steady if necessary by placing a cloth roll on it and keeping your hands still while you continue to support.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	 "And then hold it steady and immobilize the arm as you put a bandage over the dislocation and support with your other hand on the shoulder or side.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	 "And hold the arm tight while moving it around, and keep the shoulder in place if both arms are out of position, so that nothing moves them unless they move.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	 "If you doubt that the eye does not move unless it moves itself, then hold one eyelid open and steady while making a cut through the other, which should be larger and stronger than the others.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	 "Then hold your eyelids tightly, as I said at the beginning of this chapter, firmly but not too tight.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	 "And if you see the seating of the eyelids and the closing, as we have said in the previous chapter when resetting the arm after it has been dislocated, hold tightly so that the eyelid does not separate completely, unless it happens on the ninth occasion as we mentioned.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 "The third joint of the limb, which is too stiff to move, will not come into place or join with its member.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 If that happens as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	 "And if nothing else happens after the third joint or more, and the limbs become numb from holding them against their body, then they put their hands on their stomach;
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	 "And continuously stretch the shoulder joint and watch it closely every hour or as needed to ensure that the limb does not become stiff nor misaligned;
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	 "If this is by virtue of medicine, then it applies to the meat we have placed before us in a manner that the meat should be cut into small pieces;
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 "And when he starts to restore, let him do so slowly and carefully.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	 "It is customary that the shoulder joint and the limb should be restored in one piece;
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 And afterward, he will lie down and administer ointments and remedies for healing purposes to the affected area.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 The tightening process may cause soreness or bruising if done more than two months later.
de la brisure du bras	 fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	 The arms are composed of two bones called the forearm and the humerus, which extends from the elbow.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	 And the other is large, and that one is distal, toward the little finger;
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	 For example, when a large bone breaks only or both bones break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	 When the forearm bones break, the recovery is light and healing occurs quickly.
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 And when large bones break, if both are broken, then healing may be harder and more painful than when only one breaks.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 The patient must gently stretch and straighten their limbs as much as they can comfortably do so.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	 And for the long bones, if you need to hold it even tighter.
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	 And extend your hand to the chest and pull it up higher than the other arm, and make sure you hold the wrist tighter than on the other side.
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 "The arm extends downwards towards its opposite side of the body or to another limb.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 Then place the patient on their back with their head slightly elevated and support their neck to keep it in alignment.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	 If the dislocation occurs while sitting down, and if it is necessary to reset it in its place, then you should sit it back into place slowly but firmly, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	 And when facing an abscess, I instructed this single physician.
si pren la cure.	 take the remedy
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	 And in the beginning of restoring, if the incision is made with a small amount of wax and warm oil that does not burn excessively or too soft.
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 It should be applied gently as long as the wound is healing.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	 Then apply the powder from the mill with plenty of water to make it moist. Put a small amount on your finger and feel how dry it is before applying it, so that you don't put too much or too little on the wound.
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	 The number of needles should be adjusted depending on the situation
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	 "So if the dislocation is caused by a break in one of the bones or two.
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	 And it holds tighter than any other place, and less so at joints.
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	 The dressings on the dislocation should be soft and moist, but not too tight or painful.
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 And the strings that hold it in place must be neither too loose nor too tight, as we have said before.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 After healing the limb, you may continue to care for it as needed.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	 And if any pains occur in the member, as long as you apply warmth to it, until the pain subsides.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 Allow the member to rest and not be confined or restricted.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 "And after extraction, sew up the wounds, and remove any remaining parts, and similar things, if necessary.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	 "And if any nerves are pinched so that they cannot come to the member due to its tightness, it is advisable that you loosen it up and let them recover slowly, until the pinched nerves are healed, then tie it off.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 "None of these things that we have said come to harm, unless otherwise directed by a physician.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	 Or if you find yourself prone on the ground with your arms by your side and your head down between them, so that no motion or shaking occurs, and you rest on your back.
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 And the dislocated shoulder is reset every three weeks or four times a week depending on the composition and consistency of its healing properties.
de la brisure de la main	 of the arm
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	 Pain in the arm and there are two fractures, it does not come back but just a few times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	 And if the hand is bruised or swollen, it should be held tightly to ensure that no blood vessels are damaged and aligned correctly.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	 Then place the hand on a flat surface, extend it out so that its fingers are spread and aligned correctly as long as they remain connected together.
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	 And then place the plaster on it, and apply pressure to keep it in place.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	 Then wrap an ice pack around it if necessary.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	 And the dislocation should be gently pressed into the belly of the patient if a bandage is used.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	 Then tie on another strip of gauze and apply it gently to the back as you would to a hand, and hold it in place if necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	 And if the hands are stretched and straight, then tie them together firmly, and place one in between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	 And it will come to none of our two, if it is cut off, then let us hold the eye, as required.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	 And holds it with a finger, and you must view if it is not a little crooked to raise the dislocation, and does not move.
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	 And it will be other two fingers if one or the other is broken, and then let us hold with both hands that are after.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	 Or tie them together in a loop, as tight as you can, or put it through one eye, if desired.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	 And seek the cure and location of an abscess, and see this as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	 from joint break
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	 The veins from the wrist are often broken, and one can see when they turn forward and backward;
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	 And the treatment if it is on the hand side of the dislocation, and another from above.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	 And the muscles stretch along their sheaths towards each other.
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	 This is when the bones break from within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 When the dislocation occurs near the root of the arm/leg bone... and if there is an injury from the side opposite to the point where it was dislocated, and on the other side there will be another injury.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	 When it's stuck in a groove or its extensions are closed up,
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 Then puts the limb back into place naturally and securely, making sure that its natural contour is restored, then applies a dressing to cover any wounds, seals it with sutures so they cannot be reopened.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	 And if there's a cut on the arm then let it heal and come back to our treatment session.
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	 The dressing is applied in one way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	 It is important to straighten the bent knee two or three times and then apply padding, then roll it from the foot up towards the root of the leg. Separate any fat tissue between the thigh and the calf, remove any excess, and wrap it tightly across
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	 After setting the bone back into place on the arm, put a splint around it and put one end of that splint against the shin bone.
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	 Then wrap some adhesive around the joint between the leg and shin to hold it in place. Start by wrapping three or four times around the splint
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	 As you go further out from the splint and less tightly bind it.
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	 Then put another three strips between the leg and shin. Go back to where you started with each strip until you've placed them all around it.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 When that is in place and the joint does not move at all, then release it gently without causing any harm to the patient.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	 And if there is a swelling that occurs as you described and we have said many times before;
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	 "and if it moves its own accord
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	 "if they cannot stay in place when the limb is moved forcefully,
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	 "as we have said, as long as it is not dislocated.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	 "and no joint may be broken when the elbow or arm are lifted,
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	 "always in restoration of a dislocation is made without striking the bone.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	 And it is necessary to reset the joint as soon as possible depending on how much or little tissue damage there may be
de la ruelle dou genoil	 Of the wound of the skin
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 It is necessary to treat wounds on the skin carefully as it often heals well but may heal with many cracks.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 And if it breaks into only one small cut or tear, and has no deep wounds, and all is well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	 "and the restoration that takes place when it is moved again will stay in place as long as the two are aligned,
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	 "and when the arm is stretched and returned to its place, if you maintain it properly, and hold steady as we have said in other dislocations, and straighten everything that has been mentioned.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "and when there is an accidental dislocation, until the limb stays put,
de la brisure de la jambe	 The break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	 "The second joint of the leg is called the malleolus, while the other one is called the fibula.
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 "When the second joint of the leg breaks like when it comes to the arm, and because that is how it heals just as with both arms equally, and its fractures are all healed together, but if one of the bones breaks completely.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	 And if the small bones break, it will happen first.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	 "If the big bone is broken and there is great pain, and you see it clearly;
et torne desoz.	 "...and it will be like that.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	 "After applying the remedy and giving it to drink, let them stay still as they were;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	 "But if you want to prevent further breakage, and there are more pieces than the remedy is strong enough.
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 "...and make it in accordance with its virtue;
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	 "When you have done all of your treatment and put on two strips that stretch the leg from one end to the other, so it heals completely from start to finish;
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	 After wrapping around the second joint of the limb and applying pressure at both ends, you then release it gently.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	 And nothing was applied to the end of the limb, and it was released, so that movement could be observed in the fracture or wound.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	 And remove any dressing on the arm to see if there is another injury.
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the treatment was successfull.
de la brisure des os dou piet	 "The bones break easily.
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	 The shoulder does not come out of joint, but the bones in it do break occasionally and with little force, unless there is some other condition present.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	 And if there is a fracture present too, you will see the bones moving against each other, as they often do in cases of swelling or injury. Then press firmly on both ends to hold them still until they stop moving.
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	 Then apply a bandage around the abdomen and press down firmly with two fingers in case of any movement inside. Hold it steady until you remove the dressing, then loosen the bandages gently while maintaining pressure on the abdomen to prevent internal bleeding.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	 And when three or four of them have been passed through if there is a delay in healing because you will find the bones broken either or not completely healed.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	 And if they have any of two breaks, if the rest stops, as we have said those two from hand.
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	 Then it applies both breaks according to the length of two fingers, and slightly more on each side. Then apply a plaster that I have mentioned, and hold tightly until the swelling is gone.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	 And if there are 2 or 3 or more breaks, hold one according to the quantity of fingers. Stretch out one finger and tightly bind a plaster on it.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	 And if there are any breaks at the bottom of the bandage, where they may be painful, hold them very tight to alleviate the pain.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	 And it is important that you do not forget any other things I have mentioned in these fractures or others we have spoken of;
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	 Also make sure to take care of the wound itself as well, if necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	 joint dislocation of the finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	 When a woman's uterus is dislocated if it is elongated first, then hold the two sides together with a cloth.
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	 Then wrap his body with cotton and put something heavy on top of him.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	 Then remove the woman and gently pull her body part by part as she is pulled back in with something heavy.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	 And when it wants to urinate if the cotton is still on and when it has urinated then she will be removed and her vagina will be cleaned.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	 If it is dislocated again then take a bowl of honey and bind her feet together with a strip of cloth, fill the bowl to the brim with honey, and throw all of it into the vagina.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	 Then gently apply the honey mixture inside as long as the vagina is empty.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	 "The body will heal itself.
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Until it is healed with cotton and left undisturbed as much as possible.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	 And when the eyes are pricked on either side of the body or a woman if it is done as we have said in the case of the elbow joint.
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 And those pricked eyes will hide from one who puts his own study and work to an end or turns away from this book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	 Because the dislocations indicate more strongly the right way of treatment.
enten le donques.	 That is all
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	 In case it is broken, take a strip of rawhide and wrap it around the break.
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	 Then you cover them up with strips and let them rest for as long as possible without further movement, until they heal completely.
de brisure avec plaie	 "The breaking of a bone with an injury.
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	 "It is advisable for those who have a fracture with an injury to be healthy now, if the wounds we mentioned testify.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 "And if the wound is healthy and there's nothing else to do but reset the dislocation right away or in another hour, hold it steady so it does not move.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	 "And the arm should be immobilized at any joint that is dislocated, so it doesn't move around anymore or cause more harm.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	 "And if the dislocation is accompanied by pain in the shoulder joint itself, you should gently support and extend your arm slightly.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	 And if the extensions are pricked by touching them with your hands, as long as it is done through an instrument made of iron that has seven or eight edges and its size depends on the extent of the wound.
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	 "And as for which is better between three or four, whichever one he has had the most experience in, that should be used.
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	 "And if it is small and light, then the limb should not be squeezed too tightly at its base, but held firmly forward instead; in other words:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	 "And please call a physician when the dislocation occurs near or at the top of an arm.
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 "And once it happens, if they become entangled with each other instead.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 And if they are very small and the bones cannot well grip it, if you hold tightly to the joint itself as long as their strength allows them.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	 "If you cannot put the limb back in place as we mentioned before and it is not feasible to remove or treat using an instrument that exists.
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	 "Then proceed with the removal of bones and any other fractures as needed.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And once the joint is held back, after a while it will again naturally straighten itself
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	 "If it is in its original position then moisten a clean cloth with black wine and gently apply that to the eye.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	 "Do not put anything more over or above the wound except what is necessary to prevent dirt and contamination.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	 "Then apply a dressing over the wound as necessary to cover it completely based on its size and ensure that no separation occurs.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	 And many times this happens with fire, causing burns or death in some cases.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 "And the pain may be more severe and longer lasting than other injuries.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	 "And if the wound is large or deep and you doubt that it will not heal without treatment, then consider taking action to prevent further injury.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 "But instead of stitches, use strong bandages and bind the wound tightly.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 "And when you see after one or two times the wound has not stopped bleeding if all that you have done is to apply healing salve and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	 "It is necessary to keep the second limb still three times a day, morning and evening until it is firm and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	 "And make sure that the limbs are held in such a manner as to gently hold back any movement.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	 "The joint will continue to move and cannot stay in place unless you want the wound with your hand, and remove all those fragments that bring on pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And a fistula comes to light, or another way of corruption, if it is appropriate that you cure according to what he does in his treatment today
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	 "If the limb is broken and presses against another bone or joint, as with the elbow or shoulder, if you do not treat immediately because of fear that it will die, but leave it as long as it can move.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	 "After putting oil on it for 10 days or until it heals completely
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 "And if it doesn't heal, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	 of those coming from wounds
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	 "We often come after the health of the bruise, especially when it is close to the joint, and we can see the shape of the member.
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	 "And due to this, the limbs cannot be moved naturally.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	 "When we have found it:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	 "If the patient is given a strict diet without any of these things, or all together, and they are cooked with strong wine or with abundant oil, or with anything else:
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	 "And the patient is held tightly in place by the neck until it heals.
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	 "Then remove them and apply another one while holding it tight until the knots are gone;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	 "If you prick one side of a joint well made,
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	 then they will swell up in all the joints.
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	 and it becomes harder to move them as they grow more rigid, and it is painful to the touch if there are many.
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 Or you shave off all hair that is long or uneven, as well as any stubble;
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	 The second arm was weak after surgery
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	 When the break in the bone has healed and mends itself after weak and delicate bones have been strengthened or supported by treatments.
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	 if one is too tightly bound, it will not loosen as intended.
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	 or because it has too few threads and cannot allow the tendons to move within the member.
ou por multitude d’arosement;	 due to excessive rubbing
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	 "Or too great a movement will prevent him from moving at all.
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	 Or due to having little blood in his body if he is weak
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	 And the remedy that you should do is make the hair grow long and even, so as to not multiply in him.
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	 and administer cold water and vinegar;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	 Then apply ice to the affected part if it causes great swelling and redness, as long as the swelling is still there.
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	 And restore its natural shape naturally.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	 "The second member after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	 After the restoration of the limb and it is removed from its place, all that remains is to return to its natural shape.
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	 if you do not believe the people who say it must be removed entirely and many people have done this in our world.
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	 And so forth it is, pains great come on, and by chance death.
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	 Wherever you go, the cuts and tortures are fresh, if they come from hot water or moist herbs, as well as the delicate things like veins, roots, and similar things.
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	 and the pleasant mallow, if it is well made, and you take a mixture of veins with fat from the liver or oil of sesame seed, and use it in place.
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	 Or you can take figs and grind them with a fine flour, and similar remedies that help soothe the sudden pain.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 "There should be no constant or prolonged touching of the dislocated member with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 "You should prevent any movement in the dislocated member for as long as possible.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	 And the torture will be smooth and gentle, as well as the incision of bones, if it is necessary to cover with the bone, gently cutting.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	 And place a cushion and study on the couch
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	 This text discusses dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	 Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place and is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	 If there's no dislocation, then you should now shift your focus to treating it as needed.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	 If you fall asleep while lying down or if it is pulled by accident when resetting
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	 Because you do not want to move your arm when it is paralyzed
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	 Many times it brings pain and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	 Always, when this occurs, if you see a vein or abscess then release it, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 Then apply heat and oil to the limb, then gently massage it, and treat with a bandage if necessary so that the treatment is applied uniformly across the limb.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	 "The physicians have treated dislocations by making them immobile.
des mandibules	 "of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	 If both arms are dislocated similarly, then the treatment methods are as follows:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	 Or if they are only a little loose from their roots, and soothes gently.
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	 When they are dislocated completely and then fall towards the floor, closing their mouths so tightly that they cannot keep them closed, causing them to open their mouths with speech
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	 "If the dislocation is minor, they can be treated with more frequent adjustments.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	 If they are entirely dislocated and complete, if you must reset it immediately without hesitation
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	 So that the surgeon holds onto the patient's jaw with one hand at the base of the dislocated jaw and gently pulls it back towards itself to realign the dislocation.
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	 And they should be free so as not to interfere
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 Instruct the patient to soften their jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	 "And they are straight when she first awakens.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	 And as they are moved gently back and forth, so that the lower jaw is aligned with the upper one if there is heat or oil.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	 "Do not touch me unless you are prepared.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	 And when they are tightly bound and the mouth is to be moistened with oil or wax in order to soften them up a bit so that they can then be gently peeled off.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	 And let the fingers remain between two cushions so that they do not move and are held steady, but gently hold them with light pressure as long as the pain is tolerable and the jaws are open.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 And then gently remove what needs to be carefully and do not force the jaw open or close as long as it is well-nibbled and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	 "And the second molars cannot be removed from one hour's worth of effort and are only converted to their place, if feverishness ends and normal sleep comes, through adventitious solutions for the belly, and through adventitious vomiting of pure cold.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	 And when you realize this, just know that these are mistakes.
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	 Many times may have died because of it, in the eighth hour.
de la forcelle	 of the pulley
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	 The pulley cannot be released from its own weight or effort to continue moving forward and backward, and it is never released once in reverse direction; instead the force is lost.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	 And the restoration is when his limbs are stretched out towards their right side.
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	 And then press on it with your palm and it will return to place.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	 Then hold the elbow tight along with the band.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	 The veins that need to be opened cannot be reopened.
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	 No more and if it dislocates no matter how gently you reset it as we have experienced.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then hold the elbow tight along with the bandage and instruct the patient to rest as much as possible.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 And if you suspect a dislocation of the shoulder, then reset it gently when its dislocated.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	 "The dislocation of the shoulder.
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	 The shoulder should not be dislocated unless in three ways;
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	 One way is to dislocate at the bottom of the arm near the elbow.
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	 And to the second part of this
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	 and from time to time, with pain.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	 and not from the back of the shoulder, or from the inside of the arm.
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	 And more often dislocations occur near the elbow, especially those with little strength because they can easily be dislocated.
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 For those who have enough strength, it only moves back and forth.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	 And by accident, there may be bruising or fracture of the shoulder blade, and it is dislocated because of that.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	 It is important that you practice this as much as possible until you are certain of it.
et adonques encomence la cure.	 And then apply the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	 And it is clear that dislocations occur when they are near the elbow and there is a difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	 And you will see that in both cases there is a pit or depression at the top of the shoulder.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	 "The arm cannot return to its normal position without any movement.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	 "If dislocated at the top and is not hidden, you will see it clearly on inspection;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 "This method of dislocation cannot be remedied when new, or if the tendons are torn.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	 "The method is to lightly massage the arm above and put on the back of the elbow, then gently loosen up the joint at the top with strength.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	 "And you should gently massage the hand, stretch it upwards, but never apply too much force;
si venra hastanment.	 "This will lead to temporary relief.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	 "And if not as described earlier, you should apply hot water when the tendons are swollen;
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	 "And gently warm and soothing, like with decoction of willow bark and mallow in hot water, or soothe it;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	 "Then, if the limb is placed on its side and not too tight nor too loose, put a mirror to see the arm clearly, then gently raise the shoulder blade.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	 "And other measures for the arm with dislocation when it does not move up,
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	 "Now if you see that the shoulder is dislocated in this way:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	 "And it should be less than the width of the bone.
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	 "Then gently raise it and hold the shoulder in place.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 "Other measures: take the arm down from over the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 "The joints are too rigid when held still for too long, causing the dislocation to occur now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	 "Or, if you see that the shoulder is dislocated in a different way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	 "Then press down on it firmly and steady as you would with the pommel of a dagger.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	 And then bind tightly with thread or ligature the wound so that it does not move.
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	 Then loosen the other end of a cord and knot it securely to return the dislocation to its proper place.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	 And if this does not work as we have described then do this remedy
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 With a pair of wide and long tweezers hold the abscess firmly in place with both hands; then make an incision as described above.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	 Then hold the abscess firmly to its place with a thumb and forefinger of one hand so that it does not move, then put the tweezers in place over the abscess.
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	 And extend one arm to the long finger of that hand and place it over the joint, then put the other arm on top of your head and stretch them out in front;
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	 The sentence translates to "The connection returns now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	 "And when it has been bound with ropes of flax and covered in powder from the mill with incense and saffron, then you should put an elbow brace on its shoulder and train the arm so that it cannot move freely.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	 And it is advisable that he gently moves his limbs as much as they are comfortable, because the healing will be faster.
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	 and then move them after seven or more days, and you should move their joints again
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	 And if they are firm but not soft, it is advisable to massage them gently.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 "If the dislocation is caused by moisture or any other reason, then you should apply a third set of restraints if it is possible.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	 And if you do everything as advised and the dislocation doesn't occur after seven days, but it is held in place and cannot be lifted up from its arm, then check whether there are any issues with the nerve at the base of the shoulder or if they are stiff or elongated.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	 And you should know that the dislocation will never occur in its place
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	 The dislocation which occurs at the wrist or hand, or behind it if it is made by force and stretched out with hands, and another healer should be consulted.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And keep still until he feels calm.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	 "After healing comes the restriction of motion in the affected member, and after that, if there are persistent movements, until it returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	 "The cost of treating a dislocation is high.
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	 The dislocation is caused by the looseness of the joint and its loosening back up
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	 And it loosens all over, front and back, and the dislocation is not easily resolved because one can clearly see and feel it.
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	 It loosens regardless of which direction.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 "When joining a dislocation with an abscess, if one looks closely.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 "The joint may become tight and not loosen the arm, touching its shoulder in any way.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	 And it is advisable to reset the joint in this way so that when you move it again, if there was pain from moving it before,
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	 and because of its looseness all over, especially when at the back,
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	 This dislocation causes great pain and is more dangerous than others.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	 The restoration can be done if it is this way: you hold its hand with two hands.
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	 "And when the arms are stretched out and hands down towards it, he is torn apart from his body, and loses balance completely.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	 And if there are dislocations directly in front of the shoulder, firmly hold both hands together at their base and tighten your grip on the root of the arm tightly until you feel it is properly aligned again.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	 If they cannot return to their place even with strong effort.
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	 And when the minister stretches his arm and strains it strongly if he does not move towards extension.
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	 Then tear off one corner of the cloth with a long and wide strip;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	 And when they tie the joint to their hand if there is no oil present to lubricate the joint, then tie it firmly until it straightens.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 And when it is at rest if he places a plaster soaked in oil gently and holds the arm, stretches it out and pulls the arm by its sleeve tightly, until the arm straightens, then loosen it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	 And if the joint is firmly attached to it, loosen it up a bit,
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	 And if you see that the joint is not tightly attached, loosen it up a bit more and let go of the link as soon as possible while keeping it firmly in place.
puis le deslie.	 After loosening it, release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	 And if the joint feels loose after releasing it and becomes movable when wet or rubbed vigorously, press down on it as much as you can.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	 Or if you put a wet cloth around the joint and let it soak for one night, then remove it, and finally apply some oil to help lubricate and ease in when bathing.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	 And if you rub the joint vigorously, loosen the cloth around it first, then remove the wet cloth, and finally enter in a bath.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Do this as many times as necessary until the joint is healed.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	 "And if you see any moistness between the fingers of your hand with burns and blisters on it, hold tight to it.
si revenra a sa disposition.	 It will return to its original position.
li dislocation de la main	 "Shoulder dislocation
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	 The hand's joints are dislocated and the movement is light (not very strong), compared to other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	 In any case, it is advisable to return the dislocated joint to its place immediately, even if only a slight movement can do this or if bleeding occurs from an artery near the vein.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	 And if you put the arm in a sling and stretch out its hand and mirror it as much as possible, so that he can see his palm's reflection while wearing gloves to show him how it should move smoothly
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	 In any case, you should check if it is correctly in place.
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 And once the arm is in the sling and stretched out and stretched,
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 And a dislocation occurs on the back of the hand, as he puts his hand over the table and looks intently at its appearance.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	 Now she comes back alright
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 If not then, if the pain from pressing on abscesses is severe and unbearable, let it be as bad as possible to endure.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	 And if he cannot suffer or stay in place after some time has passed without relief from the pain, then it is necessary to make a cut.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	 and do not worry about any discomfort as long as his hands are in the way, and cannot hold anything at all
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	 because if his nerves are damaged or he has an artery
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 then there is no other remedy but to restrain by fire cautery the case and by experience nothing else is worth it.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	 "When both hands are at rest as we have said before, then strain it and let it go loose.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "If he cannot move properly, if his veins are opened by hot blood or any other cause, then tighten as much as possible.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	 "The dislocation of both arms must be attended to separately.
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	 There should be no pain from any part of his hands on or off or in the belly
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	 except for the second, hold it steady as long as you can and then let go of both arms until he is done, and move towards where there are joints.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	 and let it go to this joint, then move it to another
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	 and hold it tight as we said, and loosen the joint, and make it movable, and bind the parts together
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And do this until it is straight, and always do so if it is crooked, and if you have done so before, keep doing it until it is steady
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 Do the same on another joint as well.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	 "The dislocation of the shoulder joint.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	 When one or both shoulders are dislocated, if there is no treatment available, as the patient may die quickly from dislocation of the shoulder joint.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	 If one of the fingers is swollen and cannot be held, or many times they lose a member (hand), this joint must be loosened
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	 And every time it moves in four parts.
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	 And if one dislocates at the back, you say "gobblize.
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	 The treatment is that you correct the dislocation as soon as it occurs from childhood.
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 There is no treatment nor healing to speak of here.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	 And that which has been heated or struck by blows or similar things, they gave the same manner of treatment with great words, and he has no benefit in all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 But I cured him according to my intent, and put ointments on his wounds in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	 I say that the swelling which comes at this time before, has neither treatment nor healing;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	 and these which come straight to the second joint, cannot be cured except by that which comes from behind, as I said.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	 and it is that the hairs should be stretched upon his back in the lower part of the body, and hold them steady so they do not move;
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	 Then you tie it to the top in a loose way, and another around it so that it holds tight against the hair of the head, and one above its ears, and one below its cheeks, and one behind each shoulder.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	 And they shall bind their wounds with linen strips among the second stripes.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 So that they are tightly bound as we have said, and their edges lie close together on the spine so that it straightens out completely when extended.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	 And if it doesn't work through this cure, then take a strip of three long arms and wrap them around the abscess, and bind with thread from its edge to its opposite edge.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	 And place another strip over the other edge of the bandage, and press firmly until it straightens out to its full length.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 And if you see that it does not work when tightening with the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	 And when you have tied the bandages to the base of one abscess with a strip of long linen and for each other limb, and put between them strips of linen or skin from the same length as that of the bandage.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	 "And hold tight to a tight grip while letting go of it when corrected.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	 "And between the two grips when one is being pulled or corrected while letting go of it to turn it.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 "And then the link is among the joints of both arms towards one elbow and another to the other elbow; between them they straighten their elbows so that it can be seen.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 "And when she is healed with a good ointment made of three ingredients in long amounts, and then the stitches, and after that the part of a tablet of three inches long to repair the ligament, as we have said, and use gentle movements so that it can be seen; while using it, do not move around too much.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	 And at the end of health there are no problems if you administer mild and fast acting medicines like those we have mentioned here.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	 And there is no issue when administering a potion and it never comes back from behind the spine or leg bones.
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	 It's important to be cautious because one may have doubts about whether
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 it could lead to death.
des dislocations de la hainche	 "Dislocation(s) of the arm
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	 Only dislocations of the wrist and shoulder come back only if there is no dislocation in other joints.
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	 The joint of the arm is dislocated into two parts.
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	 In front and back, and inside and outside.
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	 And more so in the front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	 And the knowledge of dislocations is that when a leg bone is joined with a healthy one, it becomes longer and enters into more bones than the healthy ones, and cannot double its growth by fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 "And if the shoulder joint dislocates from a blow to the arm, then that is how it will come.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	 The sign of that which comes to light, is that it often happens contrary to these things ahead.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	 And when someone has signs of this on their arm in front, they know to have their leg straighten out.
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	 Always bear in mind not to make the wound bleed and if it does happen before doing so, hold tight until it stops bleeding, and apply pressure, making sure that you don't let go unless necessary; when you are ready, then proceed with your foot.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	 The signs of that which comes from behind are that it cannot spread its joint and is unable to straighten out, while the limb is more tired than the other arm, and the pain is eased off but there's swelling around the knee.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	 The limbs of this type of dislocation should be treated immediately and the sooner it is corrected according to its positioning, if there are no other treatments available.
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	 And only then should they have a suspicion.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	 And in the case where it is fresh and there are four dislocations at once, if you quickly straighten out the joint, then rest its bones and cover it with both hands and the arms.
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	 "In case of recurrence," no other treatment is available.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	 If not in this way, then it is advisable to have the limb held firmly and stretched out with both hands, or if you can only hold one hand against the bone.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	 and other treatments stretch their arm out in such a manner that it touches the elbow joints, then apply pressure to one of the bones against the bone.
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	 and others cut off the head of the limb from this place;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 stretch up and down once as long as they are kept above ground and move downwards while holding them in that position.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	 "This manner of stretching is common, but if a dislocation occurs, like we have mentioned, it's alright.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	 If not, it is advisable to apply treatment to the limb.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	 When dislocations occur on the lower part of the body, it is advisable to hold the limb against its side bone and then apply pressure onto the base of the arm.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	 After applying a tourniquet to the arm with a large vein, and applying pressure to stop any bleeding from that area.
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	 If it returns to its place now.
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 This method of dislocation is less severe than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	 If you do not apply pressure in this manner as we have suggested, if it is necessary to bind the two hands together with a strong tie at the wrists, and across the elbows, and so also the legs, may one or both of the limbs be extended by more than others.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	 Then hang it from its top on a long branch, and lay them down upon the ground.
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 Instruct the patient to bind the arm's top tightly, and have others ministers holding it with the bandage, who are binding the wound close; for this dislocation is now properly set.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	 And when dislocations occur on the lower limb, if the bones are separated and strange to their place, he must gently straighten them separately, one at a time.
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	 Then apply ice packs, on the injured area and between the joints of the affected limb.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 And apply moistened bandages to hold it in place; and put ice packs between the joints of the affected limb to reduce swelling.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 "It returns safely.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 "If not, press here... and push it into its socket as we have described in the previous paragraph.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	 Then when a dislocation occurs at the front, it is best to straighten the affected leg immediately and according to what I have said.
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	 And apply ice packs on the injured area and between the joints of the affected limb; press against it with one hand, then stretch away from the pain with the other arm.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	 And when dislocations occur at the front and cannot be straightened immediately, do not lift it off the ground. If this is so, as I have described in the previous point, you should immobilize it by holding the affected limb still with both hands.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	 And then hold it extended as we have said before, and must press against the joint at the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	 Once his muscles stretch out his legs, they will become straight
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	 Unless he clenches the fists and stretches a tendon, which prevents it from moving.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	 Then rest for three or four hours, then relieve, and stretch as follows;
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	 And you can see that they are straight if the tendon is stretched properly, as before, and let it rest for three hours.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 Then relax, and do a thorough stretch while your body is relaxed.
de la dislocation dou genoil	 "Of a dislocated limb
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	 The veins are cleared according to three methods;
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	 This means drain and blow, and then apply heat.
et ne desalue point devant.	 Do not remove it before.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	 "And if he commands the patient to bend his leg at its joint and he does not straighten it immediately after bending, then he should be considered dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	 "And the restoration of all dislocations should be done as follows: Have him sit up straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your knee on top of it, and put his foot on yours.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	 "Then take one hand to the other, and pull between them. Then bend both knees outward.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	 "And continue to stretch your foot as the joint straightens out and it is seen that he has properly bent his knee.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	 "And hold the strap in place, and bend your leg towards the joint, and lift it high enough to touch or nearly touch both knees. Then let go.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And do not move your arms while they are healing.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And if the limb is broken but managed to stay still during treatment as described in the previous text.
de la dislocation dou talon	 of the shoulder dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	 The arms are never completely straight or bent; and they can be straightened out when necessary.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	 If the sign indicates that the hair is loose and it's on the part where it was damaged or cut off
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 The patient should gently stretch his arms while being extremely cautious only when he has finished using them.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	 And if the abscess is completely healed, you should sit on it with your right hand and hold it tight while pressing against it with your left leg.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	 Then take the pain to your right hand and hold it tightly for two more times, then stretch out above it strongly.
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	 And do this twice as we have said, avoiding and pressing against the pain;
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	 If it comes back, that's fine.
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	 Then if it returns after a while because of the wound, come again.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	 And if it cannot come back in place, then firmly hold the patient's hand on the ground between their thighs, and cover their eyes so that they do not see.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	 Then gently place your hands on the patient's chest or back, supporting their head with one hand and holding onto the collar of their shirt with the other.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	 Then firmly hold both hands gently between the legs to support the patient when they are being extracted from their position.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 Then place both hands gently on the dislocation and support the affected limb with your other hand, ensuring it will return to its original position when released.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	 And when she reaches her limit, then put on the splint and support, hold onto the foot and bend it in such a way that the knee is not too bent.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	 And let him rest for two days or three, and make his bed smooth if he is straining.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	 Then loosen the bandage on the third day at the most, and apply fresh one every four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 And if it starts to heal before that, you should continue to treat him as needed.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the bones that come loose should be held steady as they may dislocate again and cause further injury if not handled properly.
des dois	 The two of them are plural
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	 When the two are loosened as much as is necessary for work and it's a light thing to do.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	 And if the dislocation is due to any of two things that you should apply pressure on the dislocated joint directly and hold it in place tightly until it settles.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	 And when it is dislocated and does not move at all, apply firm pressure on the joint with one hand, then strain it gently with the other hand for three days.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Let him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	 "The wound and dislocation come together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	 When a wound comes with the dislocation and it seems to worsen, many times there will be that the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	 If you are not cautious in the treatment, you will not succeed and waste time, and if you are foolish and compassionate, late may be slow.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	 And at the beginning of things in an abscessed area, hold tight to prevent pain and injury.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	 If you see hope, when you reset the limb back into place immediately.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	 And when limbs are in place, if you administer treatment gently to the abscess and treat wounds as necessary.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	 With dislocation and fractures, attend for relief from pain, and do what we have said in simple ailments.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 And guard against entering into a state of fear, as I have said, for it is to your own worth and by the goodness of your creator that you are protected and sustained in this manner
