O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	 "Oh, dear friends! I have completed this book which is the beginning of medical science and the foundation for its growth, and it has come to an end with all its explanations and through my statements.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	 I had a vision that this book will be completed by another treatise which is part of the art of surgery.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	 Because the art of surgery is greatly valued in our region and is esteemed above all things, it may be that no one seeks to learn from its secrets except for the few who have studied anatomy in books.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	 Because of this there was an error and a controversy, which caused it to be closed down, and the science had ended.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	 I think you mean, "I believe that this treatise is written by someone instructing on how to treat injuries and ailments in the 12th-13th centuries.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	 And come to terms with the forms of fire treatment and other treatments for wounds along with the application of the proper instruments and their cleaning as well; this is how it's done right.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	 And for the reason why no great masters of hands are found among our people, it is the physicians who elongated their studies.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	 And he who enters into the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he counts the bones and veins and nerves and brains themselves, and their nature and their connections and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and the nerves and the brain itself, its movement and rest, its life and its limbs moving and at rest.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	 And in doing so, Ypocras understands not to do without the proper preparation and cleaning of the instruments before proceeding with them.
et meismement en l’art de main.	 And moreover in the art of healing itself.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	 In the introduction to this book we state that you must avoid doing certain things if one is not capable of understanding them and may commit an error or offend others.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	 So, it seems that many people are eager to learn about this subject but when they abandon their knowledge and sense of experimentation.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	 "I see a fool who looks at breasts or the body of a woman, and he does harm to his eyes.
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	 "Because such wounds are outside her control when she is dead between her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	 And there's another example where the base of a vein was large.
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	 "He took it with him and died three days later.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	 "And I had to go through the treatment, which included inspecting the wound and size of the artery, making sure everything was in order.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	 And there is another example where the patient had a broken leg, and then the breeze caused an injury.
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	 And these examples show the ignorance that restrains them from healing properly and not allows for rest of the wound, and he leaves it at the end.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	 "And they tell him to avoid getting wet.
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	 And it was his leg which was completely free and the eye, he went into destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	 I am calling to come here for him, and I have to come and untie his leg.
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	 And when I untie it after it has been injured and there is no pain felt by the patient.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	 But all the joints were already corrupted or damaged in some way, so they could not be healed.
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	 And as long as the corruption continued within a member it would continue to spread throughout all of them.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	 "And also note that if it happened in front of a mirror, then it causes inflammation around the area of injury.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	 "And when it is purulent and melancholic, then only a touch with iron should be used if not in that case nothing else will help to cure what has been corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	 Therefore, three fingers are necessary; in two divisions the thumb is used.
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	 this means that there was an additional danger involved here;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	 And I will show in the next chapter of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	 It is important that you remain vigilant when looking at a wound so that if it were to speak ill words about your own self, they cannot do so.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	 "Take your weapons for healing," you'll do everything gently and firmly, using the best way that may please God and be good to health.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	 "Let go of troublesome diseases and let peace reign in tranquility.
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 "And take your weapons away from what causes you to doubt and from being divided into the glory of another.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	 "There were no other witnesses among his acquaintances:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 "Do not take ill medicine that causes harm to your body.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 I have read through the third chapter of this treatise.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	 "The first chapters are of fire cauterization and the cauterization of wounds, and the chapter ends here.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	 "And there is everything related to cautery, as well as anything necessary for its practice.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	 "The second chapters are of tying and cutting, and stitching up wounds, and extractions from arrows, etc.
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	 "And are you ordering chapters and forms of the streams.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	 The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and sprains, and similar things;
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	 And the order of the three main parts which are.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	 It is also necessary that you consider the quality of the help and the degree to which it will be given.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	 I said that the quality of care and compassion is more long, subtle science and secret wisdom;
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	 And they speak more often about success, and agree on it;
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	 My words become shorter because I understand the length of them.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	 I said that care should be universally applied to all types or matter, whether they are
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	 dry skin type matters and wet skin type matters.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	 The warm and dry skins come together as one matter, and they said that care is a great help;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	 "And they said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	 That fire cautery is of no benefit to someone who has already contracted an illness caused by heat and thirst.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	 As the body becomes hot, it should not be treated with fire for a heated ailment brought on by heat alone, but rather with water to cool down.
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	 And those who say the opposite that fire cautery is great help for hot and dry ailments that come from outside, like the plague.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	 When you purchase clothing for the body and its moisture at high temperatures, you should apply cold water to cool it down
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	 And I give you this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	 Because I have tried many times and failed each time.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	 And all of that matters little for those who have already experienced it, and if they practice correctly using the treatment method in its various forms on different types of wounds, and the reasons behind illnesses, and the healing of wounds.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	 For others, we have no fear, except for cold and wet ailments.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	 And they assemble themselves and agree on the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	 And you must know
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	 The procedure is simple, and it only occurs in the member that is injured, and does not spread to other members
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	 The hot treatments bring about the healing of different parts of the body, making wounds better in different places on the body.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	 And by chance he has an accident
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 He is weak from his head and the quality of his body prevents him from doing so if there isn't enough strength
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	 And by trying experiments and through the long time of service and study that I have put in practice, there was wisdom in it.
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	 and for the length of my words I apologize, because it does not please me to reveal what is hidden or fire, and the quality of his heart, but if he speaks about diseases that torment people, as philosophers say when they demonstrate.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	 receive in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	 And note, dear reader, to have them all done as instructed
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	 And I say that the cautery is useful to all, because those who have undergone its help are spared from other treatments.
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	 and furthermore the cauteries are for necessary pains, and do not treat those that cannot be treated with other remedies.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	 And you think no more than this
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	 because the illness treated with cautery has no cure
et il le dient ensi;	 it brings pain to them
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	 But it brings no comfort unless they are used properly, as cautery is not a cure for the illness itself but instead dries the humors caused by the pain and helps to heal quickly due to its value in preserving one's complexion and appearance
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	 And sometimes it is that illness comes back once, taking with it the beauty of the skin and its health.
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	 and all the extra things are taken away by acquiring food and similar things, as if cautery is administered incorrectly or there is too much fat and moisture, if cautery for pain brings back more pain, and the same things, and no cure comes.
mais ce avient poc.	 But what happened?
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	 Because many people call upon the healers of medicine for help and that is why they come.
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	 But people do not believe that the healers of medicine are valuable after healing, but their intentions are false, and the healers call upon those who practice medicine for this reason because when we administer treatments to cure any illness they are not worth anything, until we administer our own cures and it is worth something.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	 "However, after realizing that cauterization is used in medicine, they do not follow the intentions of those who practice medicine anymore.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	 The previous one said that the healers of gold are most useful because of their worth and for the quality of its substance.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	 And they said that the healers of fire do not cause harm but are not seen because I have tried it and found it to be true in any case.
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	 The healers of gold are most useful when compared with the one who said that.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	 And whenever you touch with a tool of gold, you will not know how hot it becomes when put into the fire, and so it will be very cold.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	 if you heat it too much
si font au feu;	 in the fire
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	 and when heated enough
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	 "For this reason we use our fire cure tools in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	 Or you have ordered the first chapter to be read more slowly, so that it may be easier to find its meaning.
dou cautere olivaire	 "olive oil cautery.
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	 "The cautery of the liver is painful and cold, due to one disease called 'soda', and by the cause of many humors arising from two veins, and from ears, and through much pain in limbs and throat, and especially for all diseases that come from a chill as paralysis, stroke, and similar maladies.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	 the fire cure is that the hairs are burned away by a solvent ointment that makes the skin insensitive to pain for three days or two weeks depending on how often it's applied, relieving the itchiness and easing the soreness of the affected area.
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	 after which the affected area is treated again with an anti-itch cream.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	 and then hold it between your hands so that it is neither too hot nor too cold.
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	 after putting the base of your thumb against the base of his nose between his two eyes.
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	 and if you squeeze it too much then apply the cure which is called "olive oil", of course this is how it works.
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	 And let your left arm rest on the ground gently and gently remove it.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	 Then take your hand from there and see if you can feel the bone just a little bit
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	 If you don't feel it, then apply the cautery as I have told you to do, so long as you can feel the bone as I instructed you.
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	 After removing some of the outer layer, place a warm and soft cotton cloth over it, then put on top of it and leave for three days.
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	 After placing the cotton wool in the burrow.
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 And let it be as dry as possible.
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After treating the wound with Tetracin, until it is healed completely.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	 And they realized that if you delay treatment for a longer period of time, the infection will spread more rapidly.
et por ce si aide mues.	
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	 And they said none of these that one should apply the cautery so much that part of the bone is burnt, and then seek healing for what was burned from the bone, or both.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	 And he also said that one must apply it gently against the bone and hit as hard as possible to break away a large part of the flesh, like how women do when they shave their legs.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	 And you should hold onto the wound for a long time after applying it.
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	 After using it, one must rest and recover.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	 And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to be good for everyone, but rather only in people who have experienced fear.
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	 I think you should leave it as is.
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	 because the dislocated joint may be further injured by continued natural treatments, like how our other joints are affected.
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	 And I mean that when the dislocated shoulder joint is weak by nature, and the first step of treatment seems gentler and milder for me, then you should use it as well.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	 "The first joint has moved out of its place
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	 "When chronic pain arises and lasts for a long time, it's advisable to use creams and pills known as 'chouches', which help alleviate chronic pain.
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	 And when performing the fire cautery that we mentioned earlier, they will not move until they grow.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	 When a dislocation occurs due to a strong force and it is too cold
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	 If the fire cautery does not work as we mentioned earlier, perform another one slightly later.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	 After performing the fire cautery on a joint near to the bone as mentioned earlier, perform another one using 'vassels'.
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	 And once in while we put bandages around it.
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	 And gently hold your hand when you're near the bone so that it doesn't move.
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	 The hair on the patient will hurt more in this fire cautery than in others and I will speak to them later.
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	 And it is preferable to use more subtle cauterization than that used for the main vein.
dou cautere dou chief	 The first sentence translates to "the fire cautery.
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	 When one part of the chief comes with sudden pain and spreads to an illness near by, and dislocations are purged through multiple remedies, I have described the treatments in the section about diseases; nothing else matters.
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	 However it is preferable to use more subtle cauterization than that used for the main vein.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	 If you want to treat a dislocation by using cauterization, first make sure the abscess and wound are clean, then apply it in such a way that you can straighten out the dislocation without causing further injury.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	 Once it is properly set, if both the fire and the patient are calm for twelve hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	 Then treat and heal the dislocation in three days or less.
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	 As soon as you put it in a barrel, pour water on it until soaked through.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 After the application of ointment when it has dried
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	 And if you have any other medications that I have written about or remedies to treat the burning medicine, please do tell me.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 The fire cautery is as described.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 "Fire it up!
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	 And you call "close" because the shape is that of a cloth or it has a small appearance;
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	 And put some oil on the sore place and hold your hand steady while gently rubbing it a little bit until you feel that it has completely dried off.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	 And gently wipe away any remaining oil that may still be there and treat the wound with plenty of ointment.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	 After putting cotton on it, put some on the sore place by rubbing it a few times;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 "And when healing is complete, keep the affected area moist.
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	 "You should burn the wound with a cautery at its tip and be careful not to cut into any nearby arteries.
de emigraine	 evacuation
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	 "When treating an abscess as we have described earlier in divisions of illnesses, and don't worry too much, and remember that the cautery used for medicine should not harm you. As long as it is applied gently.
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	 "And when healing an abscess as we have described earlier in divisions of illnesses, and stretch it gently for half a day, then apply pressure once, and make sure you do not cut into the artery or the bone.
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	 "And remember to close the mouth when you get it, and if you sneeze or cough, keep your mouth closed so they do not damage the artery. Also, be careful of any pain in closing the artery, as there may be great fear and especially for those who are inexperienced.
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	 And let loose your grip
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	 But I will tell you how to cure the wound when it is burned, and show you where it hurts in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 And if the cautery does not help to relieve the pain or wounds have already festered, then cauterize it as we said and treat the wound until it is healed.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	 And if you see that the cautery we mentioned in the chapter on the artery extraction with its attendant pain is not working,
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	 It would be better to use a more effective cautery.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	 Of pain from the ears of hearing loss
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	 When the ear comes to pain from cold, and one applies remedies of solutions and other treatments that we have mentioned in this division, the pains cease, unless there is a fire therapy that is called "pins," where it forms like this.
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	 After puncturing the ear canal all the way through or puncturing both ears at once and feeling around for the root of the ear, then you should remove it with tweezers.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	 It is important to do this puncturing in each ear separately.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the wound as soon as possible
de la torture de la bouche	 Of mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	 Torture that needs to be cured by fire is not among those that move blood.
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	 And do not perform any cauterization like those that come from burning and tearing of the nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	 When curing this type of torture that moves the veins and the abdomen and the throat, but it is not worth it if you do not cauterize the third vein.
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	 The first one in the root of the ear, and the second a short way from the temple, and the third between the two veins;
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	 And place the fire on that part which is open and make a burn at the base of the ear next to some hair by the corner of the nose, another in the temple as far along as one inch.
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	 And let the fire cure as long as you may, whether it be short or long.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 This is how the cure works:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	 And there are also differences in cutting techniques we have seen before, but it is slightly more subtle and the incision should be a bit wider.
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After applying the cure as I said earlier, until he is righted.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	 When a stroke occurs and you treat it as we have said, he does not benefit immediately, and the limbs do not recover until several cures are performed.
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	 And in the two ears of the head, and in the ear that is called a "shell," as we have said earlier, and the doctor performs the cure on the mouth of the stomach.
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	 And it should be performed like what we have described before.
de litargie	 Of concern
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	 This ailment affects both men and women, causing great swelling of the head.
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	 After removing the main abscess, then perform an excision (surgical removal) of any remaining abscesses.
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	 This is how to cauterize:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	 If you have done as I said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	 If it's healthy and stable, good;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	 And if it is not healthy and unstable, perform three cauterizations.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	 Treat this as you would with the others, if you see it again and again causing harm, perform one cauterization in each place.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if two others appear on the second horns and remain healthy;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	 If it is a cautery that is called "olive," perform as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	 Of cold
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	 It is advisable to check if the head has been moved correctly or not.
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	 After removing the abscess and cleaning all the wounds around it, use a cautery to burn off any remaining tissue on top of the wound.
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	 And if it seems too painful and the face is swollen and the wounds are infected, then use a second cautery on top of the previous one.
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	 Let it grow as long as you can hold your hand steady while doing so.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	 After the treatment is complete and everything seems alright, call upon those who are called "oliveiras" as we have mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	 of the elbow
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	 The elbow joints should not be treated with fire until they are inflamed, and it is advisable first to massage the area around them and other treatments as mentioned in the previous paragraph regarding large and swollen tendons of the arm.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	 And if someone needs to be fed and cannot swallow, feed them with boiled meat.
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	 After removing the abscess from its place, use a cautery similar to what we have mentioned before and another one on top of it.
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 And the patient's eyelids should be kept open and soft, as I advised those who had paralysis of their eyes to keep them open and moist, with two drops and two cloths, and let the cautery oil be applied according to the manner in which I have described it.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	 If the tendons are inflamed, you should apply the fire treatment gently in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	 For the melancholic's ailment, apply the same cautery that we have described to those paralyzed by paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	 And when the cause of melancholy is declining with melancholy, and the body's hair becomes moist, causing it to become dizzy as if spinning around; this may occur due to the division taking place within.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	 After removing the eye patch.
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	 after making sure everything is in order as described, if you put on the new bandage
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	 and make sure both eyes are kept tightly closed to prevent any leakage.
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	 after applying the new bandage, you should remove all old bandages.
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	 and quickly apply fire to the forehead so that it does not hurt those who are being treated for burns
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	 after securing the new bandage with two layers of cloth on top, let it cool down.
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and do so to each eye patch every week with another application of ointment, as long as they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 "You shall burn through by piercing it more often than not.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	 This manner of cautery instructs the patient to let their beards grow long and even.
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 And then it applies a layer of tallow or grease in order to protect against any slippage during healing.
de l’awe des eulz	 from the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	 When the first signs of doubt and fear occur in the beginning of treatment, as soon as blood is lost or there is excessive bleeding, and if the wound worsens over time, it must be treated more often.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	 After instructing him to recline his head and perform the fire cautery on his scalp, it then applies a second layer of cautery to both temples in order to hold them steady while they heal.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	 And covers the cautery all over the veins and arteries which are exposed by shaving them close to the temples.
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	 And beware of excessive bleeding, if you see too much blood flow like this.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	 I will teach you how to extract veins and make incisions in the cautery as well, so that you may hold it steady.
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	 And no matter where the cautery or hemorrhage occurs, do not cut off circulation of the legs at all.
dou cors des larmes	 both arms
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	 When tears of old and accustomed arteries appear beneath the veins or seem to be from elsewhere
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	 And it is observed that these are frozen and milky fluids which indicate the cautery I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	 Cauterize his head, then both temples, and lastly cauterize behind each ear.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	 And if there is one more, if necessary, it should be cauterized at the very edge of the wound in small areas.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	 two arms of tears by removing the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	 When administering these remedies as we have explained, he will not benefit unless there is no bleeding from the third wound.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	 After cauterizing his head, cauterize both temples.
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	 And perform cauteries on the two branches called "clavicles" behind each ear lobe just above the ears.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	 And guard the artery so that you do not touch it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	 And this form of cautery is called "clavicle":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the paper of the oil becomes softened by disease and moisture, then apply the cautery that is called "olivary":
de coi ci est li forme:	 This form is:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	 And if you see two ulcers, treat them as described above in the text:
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 Do not let go of your hand until another part of paper is burned according to what I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	 two hairs that touch oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	 There will never be a time that the hairs of the eyebrows are shaved and prick at the eye; it is done according to two ways.
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	 This refers to cautery either by fire or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	 The fire cauterization instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	 And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so that they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	 When they are newborn and blind, apply the medicine to their eye
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	 After applying a bandage with bristles as soft as those from linen, or with feathers for the hair:
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 And then apply a fire-cautery paste made from flour and pitch on the wound area.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	 After cauterizing it once or twice, ensure that the wounds are well sealed off in their place;
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	 And then apply a bandage to cover it and pull the hairs back from the wound area.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 Once you've finished applying the paste, let it sit for 3 hours, then apply a bandage as described previously.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After performing the incision treatment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	 And after that, if the hairs and bandage soften up again with each subsequent application of the paste:
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	 And let the hairs grow long and even, if the fire cautery is applied as it should be lifted to its original state, whether long or short, and do not prick at their base.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	 The treatment of this medical cautery is to instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and even, then make a bandage in the shape of an onion leaf.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	 Then apply French soap and live vinegar, one at a time, and grind them together well;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	 And apply it quickly, if it does not cool down, then apply it in the shape you have made as a leaf of an onion, and put on top of the bandage.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	 And hold the disease only if one burns it, or both at once;
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	 Then apply oil cotton moistened with vinegar in a bandage.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	 And the dislocated shoulder is in its place and holds tight to both arms as it receives treatment from a doctor, pressing tightly against everything that feels like fire because of the pain
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	 After completing this procedure for a prolonged period of time if the patient still experiences pain then medical attention should be sought
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	 And when the burning sensation is gone if you release it and see the paper moved as though it was released either by the heat or an incision
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 If true, then good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	 Then continue with the medical treatment for another joint or if the previous one did not work and your wounds are still inflamed and you cannot move them anymore.
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then apply pressure with a bandage tightly until the affected area is numb and after treating one of the joints as described above, keep applying pressure to all of them until they are numbed up.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 This sentence translates to: "And it is better if you treat your wounds properly with great care, so that they do not become infected.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	 And when the paper becomes soft after and the hairs prick with oil, if you resume treatment for that joint properly, similarly to how you have done it before;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 After the cure as long as he remains sane
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 This is the way of death's fall
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	 And each one of these is different in size and extent, depending on how much they constrain you.
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	 Do not take the right way for those who have mastered this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	 cure for fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	 When curing a fistula as we have mentioned in previous lines of treatment, and your treatments are not effective, it is advisable to perform the cautery in this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	 Instruct the patient to put his head in a straight position
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	 and tighten your hands around his head so it does not move or cause discomfort.
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	 After placing the cloth on a hot surface, or the heated oil of the stove;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	 after burning the cautery that is over.
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	 and hold his head steady as if holding a piece of wood, tightening it if necessary.
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	 If you see that one side is hotter than the other, and if both sides are equally hot as a tent;
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	 But whenever there is doubt or fear, many die
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	 After pressing the fistula it should be opened up and treated with care
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	 And if closed again, sew up the wound carefully
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	 After applying the caustic poultice, hold your hand steady on it in order to avoid touching any other part of the body with your hands.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	 And apply the caustic poultice over fat or skin, and soften
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 At the beginning of the cautery procedure for the eye, it would do well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	 But if you suspect another lesion has occurred while still holding it in place, repeat the process a third time.
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	 After washing the poultice with vinegar and allowing it to dry, cure the abscess as long as it remains intact, passing three times if it is torn.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 "And let him rest according to what his physician advised.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And there is a manner of fistula cautery which none of them knew before.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	 "He opens the fistula, and cleanses it.
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 "After cleansing, he applies a bandage in a gentle manner as to what kind of form this is.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	 "And then puts on the amount of one bandage.
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	 "Then hold your hand tightly or firmly so that his eyelids do not move and remain steady until the base of eyelashes is reached.
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	 "And then he covers up the eye with moist cloth, or if it burns, in oil.
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	 "The fistula is left open and kept clean as possible.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 And if you prick at their base
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If not, administer a numbing agent to the area and bring the fistula back into place as soon as possible.
des crevaices en levres	 incisions
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	 There are often multiple cuts in a vein that are referred to as "hairs," and additionally at birth.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	 After cutting these veins according to what we have said in sections, and after treating them well but not excessively with a narrow cut like this one
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	 "Then he keeps it moist until it becomes dry, so to speak.
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "After the healing process is complete and fistula is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	 of the abscess's
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	 When an abscess is opened or pierced through the root of the tooth, after doing so there will be pus and discharge and it becomes inflamed and forms a fistula.
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	 And you treat him as we have described in sections, but he does not benefit from it
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	 unless you apply the cautery according to the size of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	 After piercing or opening a fistula, hold your hand steady until it grows larger than that which you see.
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and do this once more after the treatment as described in healing, as long as he is stable.
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	 If it becomes stable then that's good
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	 And if not, find the source and remove the affected part according to what is written in your medical book.
dou movement des dens	 movement of the limbs
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	 When the gums are softened by moisture and they move, and you treat them with medications which do not work, then put a cautery on the affected part.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	 After applying the cautery, if you find a vein there after some time in any manner that you cut it off with the knife.
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	 And keep applying the cautery gently until all the hairs around the base of the tooth are singed or burned off
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	 After gently holding your hand and repeating the cautery as per your will.
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	 After the patient has opened their mouth widely, they hold it for a short while to allow the cautery's heat to singe or burn off all hairs in the mouth.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	 And in that way you make the limbs stop moving if they are softened by moisture and the veins stiffen up
de la dolor des dens	 from the pain of the limbs
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	 If pain arises from coldness or chilliness, whether it is due to the cold itself or from another cause, and medical treatments are not effective at this point, then apply the cautery in these ways:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	 Apply burns or fires.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	 Cautery of fire should be applied so that it leaves a charred mark on the skin and the tip in an iron or steel blade.
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	 After wrapping cotton around it and tying a knot at the tip of a needle, and putting it into the painful tooth that stings until it's cooled off
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	 And as long as its bristles grow to the base of the tooth and you tie a knot at the tip in wet cotton that shivers, then put it into the pain-causing tooth that stings until it's cooled off.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	 The fire cautery is assembled so that you use either iron or steel as long as the bristles don't grow into the mouth of the patient.
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	 After applying the fire cautery, after which it is applied and held against the tooth and you hold your hand as long as the cautery remains cool.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 You do this because the pain will be worse if done now or tomorrow.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	 And it is recommended to place a bandage over her mouth when performing the treatment, as well.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 The form of the treatment is:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	 And perform the treatment in the way you choose and according to your ability.
et c’est li forme de la caine:	 The form of the cane is:
des scrophules	 "softness of the ear
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	 When the scalpels are of cold and moist origin, and do not absorb nutrients through medicines, after the treatment is complete let it be treated with fire to dry off, as well as covering the wounds on both sides by applying the fire from another part.
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	 Apply fire to the abscess once, or until it is completely healed in front of the abscess.
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	 The abscess will be measured and left open for three times if a treatment is applied according to its quantity, as well as the number of times it was opened.
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	 "Instruct the patient to keep their hair long and even, while...
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "...and after curing any wounds or injuries.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The shape of the skin?
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	 When the veins are pricked by moisture and especially when it comes from a cold object, then you must first cleanse the area with cleansing solutions.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 After applying fire to the base of the throat and ensuring it doesn't touch the throat itself, you must guard against touching it with anything else for a short time only.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	 After applying fire to the joint of the thumb and forefinger, also called "clavicle" as we have experienced.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "...and after curing it as described previously.
de la toust	 from the neck
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	 When all the diseases of moisture are cold and the hairs are dry, and they have no fever or sore, then apply fire to the affected areas.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	 And another cautery for the fingertips between two nails
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	 and those who are called 'clavicle' according to its shape that is in front of it.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	 And if you see one, perform the cautery by puncturing through to the cautery called 'pricks' as its shape is in front of it on the disease of the ears.
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 and those pricks at 'XXX', or wherever.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After curing it according to what is shown here, and perform the third cautery where this form exists
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	 And because they are more severe, I will make three attempts to cure them
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	 the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	 When the shoulder joint dislocates due to moisture and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movements as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	 After having shaved the hairs on his back and chest;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	 after gently removing any remaining stubble that itches your hands will be left.
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	 and the connection is dissolved if you remove the cautery whose shape is in front of it;
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	 And cauterize this hair as long as you pierce through to the chest area and will come together with all four cauteries.
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	 "And because it is done with the fire cautery as there are three needles, each cautery has three needles.
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	 "The nerve according to its subtlety and shape of the cautery needle as it has 3 types:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	 And once dislocated at this time of nerve
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	 "After placing the cautery, burn with oil.
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	 "After putting down the patient, do not let his limbs lie stretched out as long as he is comfortable.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 If dislocated, you should apply a cold compress to ease tension on the affected limb and then reapply heat as needed for a broken bone or other pain
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 The joint is reset, and it relieves moisture and soothes the muscles.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When the stomach is full of cold and moisture, it causes shivering and increases heartburns; and the usual methods for treatment are not effective, until the muscles of the abdomen are supported with its back, extending its legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	 "After doing the three needles in the hollow of his elbow for the amount of two, all the clavicular cautery and two cauteries on either side as long as the figures of the needles are at 3 angles, and there is space between each other so they do not join together when they get tired.
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 "And the cautery needle should burn equally on both sides of it, and its shape according to this form as mentioned earlier:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	 And if you apply a large cautery to the stomach in this manner
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	 If someone is afraid of the cautery, apply it gently and hold their stomach in place according to how much you applied
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 Then continue with the points called "cauteries".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the illness we had previously experienced, as long as they are healthy
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	 The liver experiences pain from fruit and moisture, especially when it is exposed to its natural environment.
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	 The wounds are treated with the same method we have mentioned in sections, and it is not beneficial if the wound is sewn up.
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	 Apply the third cautery in this manner and form and quantity to the liver, causing pain that makes the patient cry out loud.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	 And also between each cautery there should be a pause of two units;
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	 "And let them grow long on both sides, do not force your hand to touch it at all.
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	 "And only have the eyes stay steady and do not move their eyelids.
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	 "If he is unable to control it if it seizes him up, extends his legs, and gently stretches his arms.
et c’est li forme:	 "This is the end of that sentence.
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	 "And if you become entangled in the fire's fire and find yourself struggling to escape, be subtle and use your wits, and remember that you should not try to escape at all costs as it will cause great harm.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 "And if he has lost his wits because of the smoke and is becoming disoriented or can't see clearly.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	 "When you hear it being pulled at the liver, be sure to determine if it's in the vein or out of it:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	 The shoulder is dislocated with great pain, causing it to move too much.
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 And if it's in a sling, the pain subsides.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	 When this treatment is applied to the eyes, they must be covered with gauze or bandage.
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 Then seal the wound where the abscess was, and then apply the fire cure as described earlier
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	 The burn treatment should be applied until all wounds have healed and closed properly.
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	 After applying the fire cure, apply the treatment for sores as long as necessary.
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 It is not suitable that the fire cure be used on any patient who has not studied extensively in the art of medicine, and through whose hands these diseases have never been cured.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 "And when you really try it, everything seems to indicate leaving it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	 several
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	 The physician said that many fire cures should be applied separately, one at a time in this manner
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	 Take a root from a long and tall tree, make it dry, and cut it into smaller pieces that are all the same size as your two.
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	 And anoint with oil and set it on fire, and cauterize between the roots of the hair itself and the scalp (forehead), so that you burn only the hairs, but not the scalp.
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	 And cauterize between the fifth part and sixth, receding from behind a bit;
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	 And I cauterize the middle one between the esophagus and stomach, and at two spaces (intercostal), making a space for another cautery that is between these spaces;
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	 Do not press your hand too tightly here as you would when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	 And no one before mentioned that anyone uses the fire cautery similarly to shaving and putting it between the lips until it reaches the head.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And if they prick at their base
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But with this ointment it is fear or the sores die now, or a fistula comes and cannot be healed
de la mice	 of mice
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	 When curing the disease of the mice from what we have said about various treatments, and it does not work at all unless you use the third method of fire which is beneficial.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	 "If you are performing a fire blister treatment, or if there is a doubt and fear of death, perform the procedure with three cuts instead of four.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	 Do not apply your hand all over the blister at once, but rather place it on one side.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	 "Another way to perform the treatment is if you suspect that there are two dislocations in the shoulder.
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 "And gently lift the arm where it is dislocated and let loose any tension that may be holding it in place; then hold down on both shoulders as you stretch to release pressure from them.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	 "After performing the treatment on both sides until one arm is free and loose from tension, then perform it on the remaining side.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 "And if you see blisters when cauterizing with the third degree fire.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After the treatment with long tongs has been applied and it is evident that another dose of treatment will be necessary.
de ydropisie	 Of the dislocation
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 The cautery should not be applied to the eyelid because it is done in this manner called "asclytes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	 "And when you perform treatments in the manner we have described in sections, and your treatment is not helpful, then it's advisable to apply four cauterizations at once, one on each of: the stomach, the liver, the intestines, and two behind the back over the spine.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 "And make sure they are well pressed near the esophagus as well.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	 "After removing it from the affected area, do not allow the patient to continue with any other treatment after the cauterization.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	 "Surgical intervention will be required and there should be an assembly of all necessary items under God's guidance.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	 "The form of the cauterization for the abdomen can also be applied to the collarbone as we have previously mentioned.
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	 And when you put him on his side as he lies
de l’enfleure des piez	 To remove sores
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	 When the toes are swollen on one who is dropsical and painful to touch, it's advisable that you cauterize between the auricular and ulnar nerves.
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 And gently hold your hand with the cautery as you apply it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not enter me too quickly; if the bleeding is severe, then burn them according to this shape.
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	 After applying the second cauterization to both legs at the point of the sciatic nerve;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	 and have one done facing forward on the left leg and another backwards on the right leg.
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	 And let the cauterizations stay on for quite some time so that they heal properly, as it says in your text.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	 After applying all the other procedures we have mentioned.
de la menoison	 of the shoulder
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	 When stomach treatment comes from cold and moisture, so long as the heat-retaining and digestive functions of the stomach and intestines are active, it cannot be treated through curative methods;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	 "The patient should feel the stomach burning fiercely and intensely if they are undergoing a stomach fire treatment, whether that is externally applied or internally.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	 "The second part of the sentence translates to: 'And for the stomach and gallbladder fire treatment, apply it gently on all surfaces; also apply it to the fingernails.'
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	 If you see the patient with abundant moisture and pain, if one applies fire on the fingertip, or on each eyelid, then apply two fire cures to the stomach; for this treatment is beneficial when it has some effect.
de la cure des emorroydes	 The cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	 "When the hemorrhoids are deep and numerous, old, and filled with cold and damp phlegm, treated like division wounds; it is a painful treatment if done incorrectly.
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	 "The third part of the sentence translates to: 'For the spine, do it slowly over time in a zigzagging motion on both sides.'
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	 "And if you think the stomach is cold and feels numb, and see swelling in the face, then apply fire on the stomach as described earlier, or to the liver, and another to all the surfaces of the gallbladder.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 "And let the patient endure the fire for a while.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the wound as much as possible
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	 The healing process, also known as "the lul.
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	 When you apply the ointment that seems to be strong, and then wrap it around where it was applied.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	 And let your hand stay as long as the fire takes hold of the vein until there is no pain.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	 Do this once or twice, and if it happens to any other place that was also mentioned earlier, then cauterize there as well.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	 After treating the wounds, hold them steady until they are completely healed.
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	 And if you use a strong fire cure on both ears, it will have much more help.
de plaie mal curee	 A wound that is not healing properly
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	 If the wounds do not respond to treatment and are causing illness that cannot be cured through cautery, then we will discuss its nature in our next chapter, as this may require additional treatments
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 If no fistula comes out and is inflamed and infected with corrupted fluids, then try to gently squeeze it until pus pours out and the tent remains tight as possible.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	 After applying the ointment that seems to be strong and then wrapping it around where it was applied in a certain quantity of times, repeat the cure as long as blisters and sores are red and inflamed.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 "And hold tight to the nerve endings,
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	 "It entered through the fistula in the chest and abdomen. If you feel it coming, hold tight and do not move until relieved, understanding that it may be dangerous.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	 "After healing has taken place as much as possible, the wounds should be healed completely and without leaving any trace.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	 "And if the matter is not entirely resolved, it may cause further harm to the patient's body.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 And in that case, we will speak with one of our doctors about it.
de la maladie des reins	 kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	 "When pain from fruit comes and causes great swelling, do not press on or against anything except the painful area of one side and the other of the shoulder as we have mentioned before.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	 "In a heated environment, if there are three cautery sessions, they will provide greater assistance.
de la vessie	 of
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	 "If the bladder is weak and fragile from fruit juice and moisture, if urine adheres to the hairs at their base, then when performing a cautery on that part of the bladder, where they prick with a needle, both will be done with great effort and struggle, or if there are three sessions.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	 "And if you perform the cautery on his back, then he is in distress.
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	 "Or do the cauterization of the arm according to the form I mentioned.
de la marris	 From marriage
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	 "When the marrow is cold and moist, it cannot conceive and its flowers are corrupted and nearing death;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	 "And when they come, if great pain is felt.
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	 "Then you should perform three cauterization sessions for the bladder and one on his back;
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	 And if you're referring to the dislocation of the shoulder?
de la hainche	 From chastity
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	 When moisture accumulates in the joint cavity, and as a result of this, it loses its place, and the sign is that one arm is longer than the other when measured together.
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	 And if you want to cauterize the abscess in the arm cavity, cauterize the same spot on the neck as well, and ensure that when tightened, the circle is closed so that there are no gaps between them.
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	 And if you're referring to cauterizing the stomach?
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	 And if they are not present, you must perform three additional cauterizations on the greater omentum, and do so in exactly the same manner as all previous ones.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Treat it until it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	 From the pain of the limb
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	 "The pain comes in the wrist of the hand, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the muscles are treated with what we have mentioned in the previous paragraph.
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	 "It's important to cleanse the large and fatty lumps that come from pills or other similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	 "After the fire treatment
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	 "and if a fire treatment method is used, it should be as follows:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 "This involves using burning medicine to treat the cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	 "The fire cautery may be performed in various ways, one of which is:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	 "You may perform the triangular cautery on a wrist by making three incisions in that shape and performing it deeply and strongly. It is between each cautery to find the depth of one and if you do an olive cautery.
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 In the case of any dislocation due to loosening or overextension, when the joint is out of place,
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	 if you apply fire cure as described in resetting the dislocation.
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	 But do it in such a way that the circle covers all of the joint and any surrounding areas.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And this is how it's done in surgery, when the pain persists at the incision site, and cannot be controlled by just using the wrist or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	 And if the dislocation occurs in the shoulder and arm, then apply two fire cures at points where they hurt most, and also cut into the elbow area.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	 Either perform a superficial burn or cut out some surrounding tissue.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if the pain spreads to two or more points on either side of where it started, then apply fire cure at those three or four spots called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	 But when healing is slow, do as much as you can.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	 And make sure to apply the same caution as in all your previous burns that you do not let go of it until the burn has healed completely and no longer causes any harm or irritation.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 "And I myself have experienced many who underwent cauterization on their shoulder, and it let the hairs grow until the leg was completely shaved, and pierced them so, and they were burned up to that point.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After a belly incision which led to death
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 The pain was in two parts that were both cauterized separately according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	 And when performing the cautery on a vein, whether it is large or small, make sure to do so carefully between two points, and avoid puncturing them simultaneously with equal force, lest you cause damage.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	 And when performing the cautery on both arms or legs, make sure to do so in exactly the same manner as before, making sure that each burn is performed correctly.
et c’est li forme:	 It's done like this
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	 And after applying the cautery ointment as instructed earlier, apply a bandage over the burned area of the vein.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	 Once heated with fire, once cooled it remains
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	 And leave the wound open until it heals.
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After cutting an abscess as long as it is healed
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	 It says that we use this fire cure with caution due to its harshness, and we want those who do not
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	 Those using the fire cure should be cautious as it can cause suffering, and may lead to death if used improperly
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	 Cauterizing with extreme heat should be done when you have between the thumb and forefinger an inch of space to spare on one side either iron or steel for a long time, until the flesh around it becomes white in color, as this shows that the cautery is complete.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 And they should be applied evenly and together in this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	 After applying the ointment to the burned area on your hand, press down firmly onto it with your other hand.
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 After applying the hot cream which is both on fire and soot-covered to between the two circles of your hand, let it rest for an hour then wash off the heat and redness.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	 For a burn like this one with fire.
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	 And when the burns have healed enough, gently wipe your hand with a soft cloth and wash off the soot from the burn as much as possible.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	 Then let it rest for three days to prevent infection in it;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And afterwards, you would give them the best care after the treatment of wounds as long as they are healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	 And if the pain extends to your shoulder or leg, use a cloth that is warm according to what you did with the burn previously;
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 "The matter of cautery is to instruct the patient how to let their hairs grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they grow.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Break it gently and crush all together, then put into new pots
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	 "If a needle is inserted into it to pierce through the skin.
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	 "And in the second place, he should make a small incision to get at both the white and black powders separately, as much as it is necessary to take them out with your own hand.
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 "And once that is done and he has taken out both the white and black powders separately, then take all of them away, and place them with the salt if necessary.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	 "And when that is done, he should continue to administer medicines as before, and practice other cauteries on different parts of the body.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 "This treatment is for when the other medicines have not been effective; if you should cauterize the vein along with these and meanders of the heart and vessels mixed with soap, all of them combined.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 It tells of a remedy that someone had tried for the pain in the stomach and veins; he said there was no other remedy, and when it was done once, they were washed as instructed afterwards.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	 And place it in a manner that the left leg presses against the chest and shoulder, and the right leg also presses against the back of the body.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And leave it for three hours while making sure no pain is felt anymore from that point on
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 And then let them enter into a hot bath until their nerves are calmed and relaxed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 Do not use such fire cauteries after the evacuation of wounds.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	 If a vein has been cauterized due to injury, if necessary
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 It must be done in that manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take a thread soaked in oil, and place it between the finger that is closer to your thumb and the one closest to your index finger.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	 After removing the burnt flesh and applying fire until it is charred completely, then place it on the linen cloth and leave it for as long as it remains burned.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	 And repeat this process until you feel that the flesh is no longer stinging or hurting.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 The method of cauterization mentioned as 'cautere de fiens' refers to cauterizing with a heated iron tool, often used in medieval medical practices.
de la dolor dou dos	 from the two pains
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	 When pain comes to the back, whether by sprain or impact, or from excessive cold evacuation, or from exposure of cold material, none of these pains is worth cauterizing because one who has just suffered from exposure to cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	 After applying a cold compress to the area where the pain arises from, if the pain persists for three lines after that, seek medical attention.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	 And perform the cauterization as described in "pricks" (puncture).
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	 And if you see it frequently, do three or four prickles to the corresponding area depending on this way.
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	 This disease often comes in children, and the signs of its onset are that it causes paralysis when it strikes, or fear.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	 You treat it by applying a cold compress to both ends and observing the appearance of other sores.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	 When you see this and it seems to be cured after cautery for the cautery of the flesh according to that form
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 If only part of the skin is treated with the red cauterization
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you see that cautery on an area of skin for two or three lines and have pins pressed to one another's sides.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After the treatment as much as it is sane according to what we have said, and be sure not to administer any cautery in excess which may cause nerve damage.
de la dolor des jointes	 of joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	 When pain arises in joints due to moisture spreading throughout the limbs of the body, and when pain comes from piercing, they call upon "podagre" properly. And if it is a cold cause that cannot be cured by medicines, seek treatment with cauterization as follows:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	 "Fire cauterization" for the joint. If it is performed correctly like this way
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 If you prick at its base, apply the cautery over it.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	 And if the pain continues to grow and in other joints as well, which often happens, then perform a fire cautery on every single joint.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if you do better and continue to apply it more, then hold your hand steady only until the swelling is gone from that area.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 If the pain continues and on either side, apply the cautery as we have instructed in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	 If the pain lasts longer than two hours.
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	 And if there is no more pain after doing this on all joints and pulling out your hair from the hand,
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 And if the pain continues to increase or spread out over time and you perform a fire cautery on each joint and apply tight bandages and take medicine.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 "If you apply pressure and the bleeding stops, only then will you have God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	 "The dislocation has occurred.
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	 When anger arises, it causes the veins to swell and is painful, so if you want to cure it, don't make moves until then.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	 And if the belly becomes swollen because of abdominal pain, then hold off on making any movements.
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	 After getting it between your hands, command him to squeeze its tail as long as the swelling is repaired and you hold on tight. Then release one hand and check for any further swelling or injury in that area.
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 After performing the fire cautery, remove it from there.
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 While being blunt and sharp he feels pain all over his body
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	 And release both hands and allow them to heal naturally.
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	 And command him not to move his hand back until it returns on its own.
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	 And well heal the wounds of his legs, and place a poultice on top to help with swelling and pain in the thighs. Additionally, give him something to support his hands so they do not become cramped or numb due to any potential injury healing process.
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	 After applying the cautery to all your fingers and toes, you should hold them tight and keep them that way until you straighten out the joint for the first time if it happens again, continuing as long as they remain attached to the bone.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	 And gently remind yourself not to release your grip while performing the cautery.
que tu ne le brulasses;	 that you don't let go of them.
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 And make sure they do not lose their grip, or sustain further harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And ensure that when you are performing the cautery procedure, your efforts will be in vain.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	 And it should be applied gently according to the size of children and firmly with larger individuals in mind.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 After three or four days, remove the burn-like feeling from the cautery as it appears.
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	 After treating other wounds until they are healed, and hold the area to be cauterized tight for a few more days as long as the wound is well-sealed.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 "And it is advisable to keep them moist as much as possible so that they do not come out when he pulls them out of the chamber.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	 "After 40 days, when he wants to stand up again, bind his hands and feet securely with bandages.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	 "And if it becomes apparent that he is working too hard or becoming too thirsty and hungry from drinking excessive amounts of water and meat.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 "When he completes this lesson, then completely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 After the treatment is over
de la routure dou ventre	 of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	 "When openings come in other areas and are inflamed, then bind them with a second cautery according to their size. And if the third one does not work, use another.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	 "After the cure as stated before:
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 "And none of the old ones have said that one must cauterize at three points according to this shape.
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 First sew up the opening and place one line along the length of the incision; then another on the other side, cover it with cautery cloth all around
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 But first things first
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	 The first thing to do is treat any injuries or pain that may already exist in
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain occurs in any member, whether from a scratch or a wound, and the pain continues to grow longer, so that cautery is recommended, and it is called a 'point', either cauterize the area thoroughly with a point of cautery such as those used for hemorrhoids, or cauterize smaller areas according to their length and thinness and tightness and weakness and location of the torcs and pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	 'If you have the first fire cure, then it is well.'
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 'If you are sick from one fire cure and want to try another, start with a second application on the same part of the body where it was applied earlier, so that all wounds may heal.'
de meselerie	 The meselary
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 The meshes are often treated with a cautery by great help, and most especially when disease comes from the putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	 'Can you view the cauterizer? If it is a disease at the beginning and if it has been cured according to what we have said in that division, do not doubt or become weary, as you know that this wound will be healed without any difficulty provided you apply more cauterizers on its source.'
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	 'We treat the head first and the other towards the forehead at the end of each side;'
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	 'Then we apply to both ears, then behind it on the back.'
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	 'And we hold so tightly that the cauterizers burn to the bone, and as long as the sores are kept still they cannot let out any of the large humours.'
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 "The patient must apply the cautery directly to where it is supposed to go.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	 "If there are no sores present everywhere,
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	 "then you must apply the cautery with these cauteries as described, or else hold it steady while applying it to other areas such as the eyes, nose, collarbone, and groin.
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	 "Apply it to the cheeks, temples of the ears, hands, fingers, and face, respectively.
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	 "Wear a mask while applying it so that you do not burn your face.
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	 "Do not apply the cautery to the bone of the arm or leg, nor to the stomach bone, nor to the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	 "The more cauteries you use, the less you'll need help, and the greater your profit will be.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And if the hairs are pricked at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 It's important for the fire cure to be both large and small depending on the size of the body parts and joints, as you will find this in various different ways.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After curing the ear with flour and honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	 And if the swelling comes in any limb and is treated with ointments and plasters, but does not subside, then an incision must be made into the member according to its size and smallness.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	 And if the cauterization continues for a short time inside the vein?
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	 And no cauterization should be done at the hand or back of the patient, and to any member that makes the limb stiff; except for when swelling occurs.
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 And no one should attempt this if they are not experienced with limbs and the veins moving, causing harm to themselves.
de albaras	 Of arrows
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	 When the disease known as "albaras" is inflamed and the physician cannot find any relief through medicine, then cauterization with a small application should be done according to the quantity of the vein, until the swelling subsides and its color changes.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	 After applying flour paste and lentils with a mixture of onion and fig leaves, and cutting open abscesses and draining abscesses, apply the incision at the base, hold steady.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Bind it all together with bandages or strips of cloth and keep it tight until healing is complete.
li cure de chancre par cautere	 Treatment for an abscess by fire cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When a chancre appears at the beginning of it, you should arrest its growth if a fire cautery is performed around it completely.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	 And the surgeon says that you should apply fire cautery in the area around the abscess as well
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	 and I think it's not a good idea because I believe he may ulcerate or become infected, so I want to avoid any such thing.
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 And further, it is more right that if you do use fire cautery, to avoid any other type of cautery unless otherwise specified in the text, as we have mentioned before about cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	 of the arm cannot move
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	 If someone has a disease that is called "adubelati", and it appears to be worsening or due to the excess of moisture when it becomes dried out, causing sores, or because the patient's strength decreases
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	 "and you must remember:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	 "when performing cautery, do not prick the patient with any other application unless it is necessary.
aprés le laisse ensi.	 After leaving them alone.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 It will worsen.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 If you prick all the cauteries at once, if your fire is too strong:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 While applying the cautery to "adubelati" patients while holding steady their eyes until they feel the heat; keep them in that position as long as you continue cauterizing, and do it gently enough so the flow of mucus remains normal.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After the cure has been applied perfectly.
li cure dou feu par fer	 The patient is instructed to let their hairs grow long and even for the
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 Another way to describe this ailment is that it "corrodes," and nothing more than a wasting away of limbs because they lose the strength in their legs.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	 If you see such a disease that may cause cautery to fail, do not apply the cautery too lightly or too broadly, according to what is necessary for its treatment.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 After the cautery has removed all stains and there is nothing left to be cured, it will cure all corrupt things.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then leave it for three days, and keep the affected area cauterized with oil until all the burns are healed, and any remaining corruption is removed.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After applying the remedy to the burnt areas on top of the charcoal powder.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	 And if you see after three times that healthy hair does not grow, it's good.
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 If this is the case, reapply the cautery to those who are suffering from corrupted veins.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	 And that treatment never cures a disease in place of fire cautery.
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	 But every time there is a fire cure comes with greater aid, I've already mentioned the treatment of the disease in the section.
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 Take what you have mastered
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	 hairs that come to a point
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 It often happens when the points of those hairs come off that there is a disease called "closed" according to our understanding, and it's a big thing that makes you bleed.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 The cautery for this disease follows two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 It is to know the fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	 The fire cure is that you shave it and it should be made of thin iron to penetrate the base of all hairs evenly.
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	 After applying it on the hair shaft, hold your hand tightly around the hair until both ends grow equally long.
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	 And leave them as long as they continue to grow evenly without getting tangled up.
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 Then apply a poultice of sweet vinegar on it and leave it overnight, covering it with a cloth so the roots will be protected from drying out.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Prevent dislocation by keeping the joint straight as much as possible.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	 And if they are converted by fire and often happen to burn the skin and eyes, it is advisable that you apply a hot cure.
et est en teil maniere:	 And then it happens this way:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	 Take a needle of iron or steel, or a thread of wool, and pierce the flesh with it at an angle.
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	 And then stick the needle in deep enough to pierce all the way through, and put some hot oil on it. Hold your hand tightly as you pull back the edge of the needle towards the base of the vein, so that the hot oil can flow right into the vein.
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	 And let the pain subside a little after applying the hot oil for one hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 Then release it and it will remove all of its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 "After the hot iron treatment has been applied and removed as instructed, continue to apply heat on those affected areas until they heal.
li cure dou trembler	 "The patient should not tremble
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	 If anyone has a cold or burning feeling in their spine or any other part of the body, if necessary you should apply four or five fire cauteries to between each vertebra.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	 And instruct to burn or pierce through the liver's sheath.
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	 If it causes shivering and pain in the cold disease symptoms.
des pustules puans	 "The lesions are oozing
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 No pus can be found anywhere on the body except for those on the skin, which come from corrupted substances.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	 If they appear to need a cautery on a pimple's head,
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 a subtle cautery with fine needles to pierce so it is not too painful or fiery, or deep into the root of the abscess, or to the lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	 And never cauterize at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and do not harm them further but heal their wounds.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 But it is best to perform this after evacuating the abscess.
quant li artere est copee	 When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	 There are many great losses from sores on the artery that is cut into the wound coming from elsewhere, or at the incision of the abscess, or to the cautery in one's body part, and similar things.
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	 "And it causes great suffering
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	 "And whenever this occurs without any doubt, if you put your two fingers over the wound and hold them steady until they stop moving on their own.
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	 "Then apply the olive cautery and hold it onto the affected skin as long as it remains red.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	 "Then apply the cautery on one or both sides of the affected area according to how much it hurts and where the artery is located, hold the cautery steady until you no longer feel any pain.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	 "And if it happens while you are pressing your finger against the vein and the cautery tool is still hot, then apply more frequent applications of the burning cautery until all pain subsides.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	 "Do not stop doing this one after another as long as it continues to provide relief;
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	 "And make sure you do not harm the nerve or any other part of the wound.
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	 "And make sure if you accidentally cut the artery, it's impossible to stop the bleeding even more quickly than in one of these methods that we mentioned.
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	 "Either by fire or extraction as it is not treated well, or by applying force to draw out the arrow, or by using medicines that can only heal wounds,
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	 And then there will be stiffness and restraint.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	 Who will treat with gentleness of dressing or cutting things that are sharp on the body, or other similar things, he won't benefit from it at all
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	 If there is no treatment or medicine available, you must first apply your finger to the wound on the vein and then gently stretch it until both are healed.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	 And do not move your finger, but keep it moist with cold water so that it does not freeze and become stiff until both are healed.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	 Do this first thing before you start any cure or medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	 This sentence is incomplete in Old French because "de" (meaning 'of') was omitted after the word "cures
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	 We have told in the first chapter all about diseases and how to use fire cure or medicine of heat or cold and ask questions and answers and reasons for treatments.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	 And I shall proceed to this chapter in the same manner as before for it is still necessary and more easily understood.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	 "Furthermore, in this chapter there is more risk and fear than when performing the fire therapy, so it's advisable to use greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	 For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, similar things.
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	 where there is doubt and fear, many die
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 "I advise you not to make a mistake.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 "Different people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	 if it comes from such severity of their illness that they die easily due to the ferocity and great size of their malice;
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 And so one has fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	 and these I give you my sense, and say
«atendez, je sui garis»;	 "Listen, I am the way.";
et li maladie est despitouse.	 The disease is severe
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	 But please be mindful of these that come to you with this manner but make greater caution in your own actions, and do not rush unnecessarily into anything for which you are uncertain.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	 And use prognosis and indications when treating wounds to ensure recovery of health.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 This will help you achieve your goal, honor, and memory for long time.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	 Dear friends, our dear superiors require a solemn and correct interpretation, and may the Holy Spirit inspire you with its gentle guidance through your hands, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	 I have ordered this chapter to be read by the doctors as they are the ones who perform cauteries; for it is in their hands where one can find more lightly what one ought to know best.
dou chief plein d’aigue	 "Do you mean by 'dou chief plein d'aigue'?
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	 This disease comes many times in childhood when the child is shaken too hard.
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	 And no time comes from a reason repeated that it does not occur.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	 And I do not see this disease in only children and many times have seen those who had died from it.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	 So, for this reason, I think that it is worth to leave the chapter of treatment in order to move on to other chapters.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	 And when the dislocation was fresh from injury
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	 and as a result of this moisture, the bones were separated and moved around the joint
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	 and the swelling from this moisture is between the bones and the joint, and the tendons are stretched, causing a severe sprain.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	 And as long as there is this moisture
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	 or until it becomes unbearable
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	 When the moisture is greater, and the abscess is larger, if you pierce through with a cross-cut method as follows
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	 And if the moisture is severe enough to damage the joint and see swelling in the tendons of both hands that have been stretched, it may cause immediate injury
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	 If you want to reset a dislocated shoulder this way
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 After incision is complete, moisture has been removed.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	 After holding the arms and applying oil or fat, and letting it be for five minutes.
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 After applying cold compresses and ointments to the affected area, leave it to heal with dry heat as long as the limb is relaxed and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	 And another way of incision would be to cut towards the larger part of the abscess and gather in the edge.
car aucune fois est elle devant;	 where there is no doubt or fear
aucune fois derrier;	 every time behind.
aucune fois en destre;	 never on the left.
et aucune fois en senestre.	 and never towards the front.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	 When cutting into an abscess, gather in the edge while applying pressure to prevent bleeding and ensure proper alignment.
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	 And make sure you do not cut through the artery.
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	 And be cautious of the pain that may occur if an abscess bursts and blood is evacuated excessively due to moisture.
de reume	 "In order
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	 "When someone has a disease that affects the eyes or ears, and it is serious, and treatment with medicine does not help at all, except for cauterization of the vessels.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	 It is necessary to ensure that all veins are covered with bandage, as they must remain still until their wounds heal.
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	 After wiping off the top of his head with a rough cloth that the veins are exposed, then bind up the wounds tightly with one bandage.
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	 Then look at which vein is bleeding and close off both ends of it after the ears have been pierced through.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 After closing the veins off, tie one end to each of two thin strings made from catgut as tightly as possible around the wound; and whenever it reaches the bone or any other hard part.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	 "And if you see a vein and an artery connected together, then cut them apart as I just mentioned.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	 And when the veins are opened continuously for too long, it is necessary to stop this procedure.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	 And the artery will not open if it feels, so measure out three times to ensure that you have done so accurately. Then seal and stitch up the wound;
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	 And it is necessary to make a few cuts away from six or seven centimeters, depending on how much the patient may suffer and the artery's fullness.
puis regarde la plaie:	 "Look at the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 If the wound remains at the base of the finger where sutures are not in place, then apply pressure and hold it tightly until it is healed.
de emigrainne	 In other words, you are asking me for an
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	 When you sneeze or cough, the moisture in your eyes and sinuses can cause inflammation of the nasal mucosa and similar things, which is treated with remedies for colds and all that does not benefit me if arteries in the nose are cautorized as we have experienced.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	 And the method for removing them is to shave off their eyebrows and go near an artery in the temple as it beats well with its pulse, but one must be very careful not to cut through veins.
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	 And when she is healed and has removed the arrowhead, then wipe off any remaining blood from her temple, and apply a warm compress to the wound until it shows clearly that an artery has been pierced.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 Then take a small sponge soaked in water as follows:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	 Then gently scrub the area until you see clearly into an artery, then wipe it off with several cloths and clean all of them thoroughly.
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 "The dislocation occurs gradually if it moves towards its end, then gently pull the affected part in that direction as much as possible.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 "If it is not released completely, make sure to avoid any sudden movements at all times.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	 "Take three of these and use them with this third one.
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	 "If the dislocation is severe and you use two of these with a strong cotton thread tied tightly in place to prevent bleeding from the wound. Use them gently.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	 "Then pull the extra loop between the two laces in that way and tighten it as much as possible. If you see a need to, apply another cautery strip directly on the joint.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	 "And that is how it works. The patient has no feeling in their hands and they are very pale due to the burn.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	 "The cauteries help with moisture control:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	 "It is much more helpful in managing moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	 "To extract blood from an artery, make sure to apply a clean cloth and hold it tightly in place.
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 If you are bleeding heavily or if the wound is deep enough to be dangerous, and stitches have failed, continue applying pressure until it stops.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	 If you are trying to extract blood from an artery and your grip is too tight or you apply heat with cautery, use a cloth soaked in vinegar and hold it tightly against the wound until it stops bleeding.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	 If you do not have anything else available, if a cloth is too hot to touch then use an ice-cold cloth and hold it tightly against the wound until it stops bleeding.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	 The extraction of an artery is more severe when you use a sharp cautery compared to one that uses less force; however the latter should be used for longer periods as it is better at preserving its heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	 When the extremities are too tense, if he takes less heat
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	 And should have between the second ribs it must be large pieces, and then when you have touched them with a sharp object they will burn fiercely until the bone, and hold tight to the veins.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	 They should be burned between the second ribs because there is no doubt about this cautery in every way.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 This is the form of the cautery
des larmes	 of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	 When the tears of the eyes fall into veins that are above the highest point of the ear, and there is no treatment for medicine to do, you see the face turn red from pain, as if from fever.
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	 And the hands are tight and moist so that the hairs of paper are burnt, and the papers themselves are scorched, and burn with the heat of tears; if there is any mistake in this treatment
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	 The ancient one called it "a painful cure," and you should gently pull on the patient's hair that has this ailment, then three times gently tugging at its roots.
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	 And if one of the pulls is on the front downwards towards the back, and others two are to be done by gently pulling at its roots, and you must be careful not to cut into any arteries that may be underneath.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	 And continue your hand with the continuation of both mandibles, and if there is a wound or injury to three days duration;
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 And use a sponge and wipe the affected area gently to wash away the wound, then place a sterile gauze over it.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	 from the incision that is made on the temple towards the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	 "And shave all the hair that is between the two fingers to the side where it connects to the bone, then make a small incision just above the second one, and extract the arrowhead.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	 The instrument used in the first cut is called "culterelle", and it is very sharp on one side, but soft on the other. It leaves a mark like this:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And make the wound towards the ear on one side and towards the bone on the other, leaving it as smooth as possible by the time of closing.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	 "And cut off the veins that grow between the two fingers while the incision is continuous up to where it opens the wound, and then make a small incision just above the other finger.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	 "And extract the arrowhead out through the opening, and express the left side towards the arrow that was taken.
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	 "Then put a bandage of fine cotton, and tie it with strips moistened in wine and oil, and guard that the arrows are still.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And in the meantime hold the limb, and apply a great many remedies for wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	 two times of wounds
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	 When there is no joint movement at all, you see the hairs twitching and flinching, and the eyes become blurry.
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	 And the hairs stand up, and often cause pain, and are irritated.
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	 unless there is a specific reason for the dislocation happening repeatedly, then it may be necessary to treat many wounds and the patient's health may deteriorate over time, if untreated.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And then you instruct the patient to put their head back on the table, and then make one large cut in the forehead, and another one wide enough at the top of it.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	 And from the front of the temple towards the back of the temple, and make an incision into the bone.
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	 Then stretch out your hand to touch your temples as much as you can.
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	 And when the bone is uncovered if there's blood on gauze or cotton and towels, then you need to squeeze them gently.
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	 Then place a bandage soaked in wine and oil, and be careful not to tear it open.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 "When bones are broken, it is advisable to set the bone and begin treating any subsequent fractures.
En teil maniere:	 Here's a more formal translation of the same sentence into English: "In this case, one should endeavor to align or set the bone as soon as possible thereafter attend to any subsequent dislocations that may occur.
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	 In addition, perform a series of stretches and movements for flexibility.
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	 And attend to any subsequent fractures thereafter.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	 The removal of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	 One of the things we have heard is that...
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	 ...or pain or burns, or worse injuries, like stones, and similar things.
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	 Or dizziness if you fall, fever, please
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	 Any injury that occurs, such as burns or worse injuries, etc.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 When something pierces the ear in a manner that is not comfortable to the ear, or when it is inserted into the ear itself (not just touching), then place the ear on its side (lie down).
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	 If you see a stone, if it doesn't give off any oil that is yellow or green, then attend to the extraction.
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	 "And let him remove any restraints of clothing and put earplugs or wool in his ears.
et estent l’oreille au desus.	 "Let them listen carefully.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	 "This treatment is done once.
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 "And if it doesn't work, perform the incision with fine needles so that it is like this:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	 "If done properly, it will be good.
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	 "If not, perform the incision with fine needles of small circumference:
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	 "If it doesn't work for any reason, or if you can't put the wax in and remove it from your ear with a soft needle, then:
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	 "Then repeat until it works as we have said.
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	 And if you pull on the eyes in any manner at all, it causes great pain and injury.
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	 And press down on the point or whatever thing is there, causing great pain and injury
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	 And if you do not come across all these things that we have mentioned, if you try to cut into the ear with a chisel or any other sharp instrument, causing great pain and injury.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	 and the way of opening if you make an incision into the skull first, extracting two abscesses according to their size, then take it in your hand and turn it around so that the ear is facing towards the side.
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	 And if you make an incision in this way until it reaches the bottom, then straighten out and sew up according to your preference, and eat as much of it as possible.
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And until he feels better.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	 And if it swells after being drained off?
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	 If he cannot sit up due to swelling and discomfort from draining the wound gently slowly?
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 Then make an incision in the grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	 But do not worry until you think that the patient's ear is wet due to moisture.
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 After gently draining and applying a compress if necessary, if it continues in this manner that the extraction should be continued regularly.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 In the meantime, when it is convenient to make the ear numb with cotton, gently press on both sides of the earlobe first and then gently press on the inside part of the ear.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And it shall be used for either ear equally or whichever one is easier to reach.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 It should not be removed until you are ready.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	 And not to worry too much if it continues after many pieces as the hair grows longer and thinner and becomes cool.
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	 And if it swells in the ear or on another part of the body and the incision is on the other side near the ear?
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	 Do not cease to make cuts as long as they are bleeding all over.
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	 "And if you pull one joint, and the other joint is still hot from fire,
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 "Repeat this for all joints until they are completely cool, as we have said in the previous paragraph.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	 "In the extraction of a small abscess, if it is cut and similar things, cure as we have said in the previous paragraph;
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	 "but if it's large enough to feel, then an immediate extraction may be necessary;
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	 "This is the lightest thing to take out of the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	 "In the extraction of ears through the ear canal, if you use the treatment we have mentioned in the previous paragraph and treat any distillations, and the cure does not profit either; if it is convenient that you look at the ear with sunlight:
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	 If someone opens no wounds but uses very small needles, and if they don't see it, please remove the bandage from around where this is located.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 "And sometimes one has very bad earwax or a very large one.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	 And apply pressure gently to the affected ear according to how much pain it feels, and then continue applying firm pressure until the bandage is completely removed.
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 Keep doing this until you see him breathing again.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	 And if they don't respond to the bandage being applied as I said earlier in this passage;
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	 and if they don't move as we have said, then apply the distillation remedies that our predecessors have tried in cutting into veins, and you will find or treat the distilings.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 And if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear as an instrument to where it is located as how you see;
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	 And if it is of gold or silver, make them as thin as possible, to prevent distilling.
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	 And when pressing the distillation equipment with pure water, ensure that it is tightly closed so that no impurities enter.
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	 After you have strained your oil or juice and all the medicine from it, place a bandage in his ear.
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	 Then tightly apply the gauze soaked with pure water and press firmly until the oil is distilled or has completely passed into his ear.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	 And place a bandage soaked in pure water on it and let the distillation take place near or directly into his ear.
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	 And make sure it is not too cold as otherwise the medicine may not be effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	 The removal of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	 No child was born without a hole in their ear.
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	 And this means that any wound or injury to the ear is not painful at all.
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	 It also states that there will be no pain from wounds on the face and eyes.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	 The reason for this is to prevent injury from the sun on the ear when opening it.
et regarde dedens:	 And look at that as well.
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 If you see the discharge, it means there is something wrong with how the ear forms.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	 And if both ears are red and swollen from front to back, if one does not see the discharge.
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	 If the discharge is thick or dark in color and causes severe pain even with gentle pressure on it, keep doing this until the discharge stops completely.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And when they have been healed with a gentle application of fire, then place the coals in their ear
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	 "If you hear sounds coming from your ear, gently press it and hold on until the sound stops.
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 Apply a warm compress to the affected ear, preferably one that fits well and is made of cotton.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	 Do not apply any more ointment until the wound has healed or you take a warm compress and dab it with hot water and dust.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	 If you feel a lump in the ear, make sure to apply another warm compress with hot oil and wax until it subsides.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Continue applying pressure until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	 If there is another abscess or condition that requires further treatment after the wound has healed and you have applied a wet cloth to their ear and used other remedies for previous abscesses that were treated, continue with further treatments as needed.
de la char des papieres	 of paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	 When the hairs are moist and dry, it is advisable to gently stretch them with tweezers and a needle, and apply a small amount of root extract.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	 "Then put a little oil on the broken bone.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	 Then apply some petroleum jelly if you're using a needle fire cure, and after the incision is made.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	 And many times they healed without any damage to their roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	 And when they are burned with fire, the roots of those hairs do not come back at all.
de la gresle	 from the neck
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	 Many times the hairs seem to grow and thicken in appearance and substance, which is called "graying," and an assembly of moisture large on paper.
li ovraiges est telz:	 The treatment for dislocations is as follows:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	 To stop the dislocation on one side and then on the other, it's a light thing to know.
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 And after that you gently stretch one side, then the other, and hold it tight with pincers, and release it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	 If you do not cover yourself with a piece of paper when passing by someone, you will get hurt to some extent.
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 and if it is closed properly, the treatment should be as long as possible until recovery occurs.
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 And if it's small and cannot withstand any pressure, then no effort should be made to treat it as the skin on its surface will tear easily in that case.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	 And if the earlobe is detached and descending towards the inside of the ear, if you cover it with paper, stretch it gently and press from one side to another.
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	 If the incision cuts through the paper, that is not a problem.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	 And if the earlobe has been cut through and is bleeding heavily, then treat it with something clean to stop the bleeding while keeping the area as clean as possible until the ear lobe heals completely.
de la graisse des eulz	 fat of eyelids
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	 Exinach is an ointment that is spread on the paper towels, and it has many applications. It helps alleviate pain for those who are young, but not for those who grow old.
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 And because of this, their faces become soft and smooth as the cloth is rubbed into it.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you push on the left side of your chest, it will release gas from inside you
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	 The method for the procedure involves placing a bandage around the patient's head in order to prevent movement
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	 Then wrap a bandage around it and arrange the cloth in a circular manner, covering the entire area of the ointment as described.
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	 Press on both sides from opposite directions so that the ointment is applied completely in a circle.
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	 Then apply it to the affected area with a sharp stroke using a large bandage. Do not make it larger than the wound you are treating for its own sake.
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	 "And hold your breath as long as you want to stay under water.
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	 And further conditions are required for exit; namely, the shape of a small fat piece.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	 Stretch out any piece of cloth between your two hands so that it is stretched tight and then turn your hand outward towards the east.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	 And remember not to put it in water and do not use any sharp or pointed objects with it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	 And if you begin the exit when water is just barely touching your body, let it be there for as long as possible until it stops.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	 Then stretch and loosen the cloth in that way and hold tightly; then release it gently but firmly.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And if there are such burns that pierce through it and put it near so as to contaminate the moisture which is being treated.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then continue with the treatment until it stops burning.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it comes loose from the abscess while performing a poultice, then continue with the poultice pressing as tightly as possible until it stops coming loose.
des poilz des papieres	 hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	 When the hairs emerge from the paper and are entangled if they interfere with your eyes and bring about the kind of diseases that we know and softenings of the paper and the albugine, as long as it is because of the destruction of the hairs.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	 And the treatment is done as follows:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	 Either by fire cautery or by surgical intervention as dictated by the patient's condition and what the surgeon deems appropriate; or through incision and stitching if necessary
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	 It is advisable to place a bandage over the affected area with your hand before you start;
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	 If it has been burned, that's alright;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	 But if you prick the abscess completely through, it is advisable to:
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	 either tear off the excess hair or thread through the entire paper and remove it.
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	 Then shave off the excess hair in that area closely trimmed along the incision line.
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	 Then thread the paper with some thin cotton and gauze, make sure it is tight enough to cover any small remaining stitches or wounds;
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	 And if one has more paper than he can hold, then his hand will become soft.
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	 Then, begin by stretching all the fingers gently one at a time.
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	 And so, take the first finger near to its root, then bend it in one of the two angles as shown. Then straighten that finger completely.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	 Then gather the two threads into one fine thread of woolen fabric and tie it off. After tying it off, remove any excess strands from both ends to any extent you deem necessary.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	 If there is no cure then leave the stitches and threads as they are for three or four days (I assume this refers to the healing process of the wound).
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	 Then cure the wound with stitches and bindings since the paper becomes wet from the wound and sticks to it. But the stitches are more secure than they seemed at first, and this is most often terrifying;
et si a une autre maniere:	 "Or if another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 You should write the paper of a figure that is just as flat as the skin of one's back, like we have described.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	 Then hold it gently, with slight force, according to its shape.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	 If you cannot hold the strings and they are still twitching, if a needle or thread is inserted into it.
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	 And between your two hands alternate the large and small threads in sequence.
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then gently move your hand all around the surface where you have stitched, like we described. And sew up the two edges of the wound with stitches as long as it is healed;
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	 The needle comes to your incision if the abscess breaks and discharges pus.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	 Never does it happen that the paper fibers are converted.
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	 "And if you need to make an incision.
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 But the stitches in one and two are more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	 The treatment for this is as follows
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	 And it is that you fold the paper and sew it tightly as I have said, then make two cuts through the paper in a manner similar to the width of the spatula;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	 Then tie the stitches at each end so they are securely tied.
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	 Then carefully sew one together and the other on top of it, and fasten the two stitches of each part to one another.
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	 And leave it in any position until you sew on the other side and fasten securely so that nothing can move when you want to touch it.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 If he gets tired or if there is too much pressure, then treat it as long as it remains calm;
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	 And when a wound is healed, if it is released from its paper, then the hair no longer grows.
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 You will use this shape and size according to these instructions below:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	 The sutures are like you take a fine needle and put it through the silk thread carefully.
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	 Then join them together and sew one to another gently, so that the threads are long enough for a palm length;
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	 And then order in the chase of the other silk thread lightly, and sew over the stitches.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	 Then put the head into its place.
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	 And so put it in the sun if you want to heal the wounds, because these sutures are small and few, then sew a needle at both ends of the thread just above the root of the hairs and make sure not to pull on the hair itself as much as possible.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	 Until the hair is plucked from above the tail, pluck out the hair that is short or long on top and side, if there are any.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	 Continue to hold your hand as long as the hairs continue to grow uniformly across the area being shaved with paper and the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	 And if the shaving is completed and the hairs are not leaving with it, if you were to shave all over from top to bottom exactly as ordered, until the shaving is finished and the hairs do not grow further down unless they are guided by observing a mirror.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	 Unless if you shave and the hair is done, take care of your own face with lotion or ointment twice a day to keep it soft and prevent any dryness.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	 And if the hairs are thin and you accompany a long hair on both sides of your face with one that you leave, as long as it is elongated and maintained well.
de la porriture de l’oil	 Of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	 When this illness is called aleacrati or when it comes with oil, if so then there are two ways
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 one way, and another unnatural
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And in the same manner of injury, whether it is a burn or a treatment for hairs, as well as similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 The treatment is to bind the wound tightly with bandages and keep it clean as possible.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 And only use remedies that hold and stop bleeding.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	 If you do this instead, it will make the illness worse than before.
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	 But if you use gentle remedies like honey, as we have learned.
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 And the roots of aleacrati or oil are cooked and burned if not in any oils, and you cover a bandage tightly, and treat this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	 And the effect of your treatment is that you hold steadfast that it will not worsen than before in its form.
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	 "And concerning those who have already contracted this illness, it will not progress according to the form in which they were first encountered.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	 The character who comes with oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This illness is commonly referred to as "axactract," and is a natural occurrence, not due to external factors
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	 The injury occurs from a wound and a fracture, and from cauterization and similar events.
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	 and the opening of the wound is where you pierce with a needle, if it has two folds, and the fold in the vein, and it pierces through the sternum as well. If the artery is pierced too deeply, then the finger veins will come out after the injury occurs.
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 Then the artery runs through to the large spleen vein.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	 And it looks like paper again when this is convenient.
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	 If not, if you press the razor and it goes into the wound, then you tear paper, and you get multiple tears in the paper.
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	 "And make sure that when the incisions are closed, their shape resembles that of a letter which has no cross.
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	 "Then take the fold that measures its breadth and length, and join it to two pieces of thread.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Finally apply the treatment for our previous discussion on the mollifying medicines mentioned.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	 "And if the disease comes from a burn or cut, it is advisable to make a clean break with the hairs on paper and follow what has been discussed above.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	 "Then seal between the two sides of a cloth as mentioned previously.
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	 "And the work should be done according to its form as it is different in shape and appearance from any other type of wound.
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	 "And he must increase his efforts and remedies more often.
dou soudement de la papiere	 "The paper is also being mentioned here. The sentence suggests that it's
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	 When the saddle becomes stiff due to dryness of the oil and can no longer move or perform its duties properly, if you wish then cut a razor at the paper's edge, lightly across it
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	 until the blades are sharp enough to touch without being too rough or too fine, so that the horse's skin only suffers from slight discomfort and does not burn the oil.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	 And remember to make an incision in a way that matches its natural shape.
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	 And ensure all cuts are made smoothly and without any burns from the oil or grease, and remove any excess oil and grease.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	 "And place between the paper and the ink a seal of wax, and smear it with oil so that it is saturated.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After each stroke, you will need to clean your brush and other tools until they are dry.
de l’ungle de l’oil	 of the joint of the arm
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	 The sores that come from the fire treatment can be treated in two ways
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	 The first way is to be nervous and keep them steady like this: when you touch it with fire and take care of the wounds as best you can, if not done
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	 Both ways are to bring about the great sorrow and harm, and gradually over time will extinguish all light and all movement of oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	 The way of incision is to make the hairs stand upright initially, then shave them off.
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	 Hold onto the paper with your hand, and cut out the eye-lids gradually, and you will stop it.
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	 Then take an arrow, and put it through the horsehair or flax, or of bull's hide, and bind it tight.
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	 Then bend the arrow's point slightly and tie it through the fur of the horse or of flax, or bull's hide, binding it tight.
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	 No matter how many times you bend the arrow only once and through the thread as we have said.
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	 Then scrape away all the fur from where the arrow was inserted;
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	 And remember that the fur should not touch the smooth surface and break it, and the feathers should not be pierced.
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	 After making a small incision into the flesh, two pieces of lintel are placed together, and it is stitched shut as close to each other as possible.
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then apply treatment until he feels better.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	 And if the patient is not calm and cannot hold the needle still, many times it will be a remedy for this kind of injury.
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	 and in the surgery it is to be opened up if there are too many stitches, and you must see through them carefully, so as to avoid any injury;
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	 And gently remove the needle from beneath it carefully, and if you see that she is moving or agitated, so as to avoid any injury, stitch up the flesh with lintel pieces together tightly, and then seal it shut close to each other.
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	 "Continue with another chapter as before, ensuring it is complete.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "In any case, if you prick your finger and hold it down for a while, then release it slowly, as long as the finger is still straight.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	 And if the appearance of the body changes due to excessive hunger or thirst, and it begins to weep excessively but not all at once, tears will cease to flow.
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	 After that, a red sore appears from exhaustion.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	 "Of the character that was on the prison
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	 The eyes do not have any bruise once healed and cover the wounds with bandages and remove them from fire, and they seem a burn scar.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	 And the wounds if they are treated with ointment on clean hair and then apply the ointment to the eyes, covering everything that burns in any way, and sustain strength.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	 Then treat the first wound, and cover it with gauze all over until finished, and remember to keep the ointment on at the end.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	 "And if it is incised in such a manner that the force applied after this chapter shows, then hold the limb steady with small forces so it does not move until it grows.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	 "When the incision is complete and all the wound has been cleaned out, if it bleeds or leaks with corrosive liquids, apply a poultice of vinegar to stop bleeding.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	 "If nothing else is needed and the stump stops bleeding and you suspect an abscess, then apply vinegar to heal the abscess.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 "Then move on to your next chapter as soon as it is done, and continue in oil by this way.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	 "But always remember that the treatment of any wound should be mild according to natural ways.
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	 And by chance occurring, in the work of injury.
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	 Do not use your hands for any of these injuries as long as you know that it is a serious injury.
des voines des eulz	 limbs
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 The blood vessels that are covered by the oil become weaker with time and harden as they become injured
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	 The physician will examine the patient and see if there is anything else wrong with him.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	 Then go to your doctor in this manner
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 Instruct the patient to place their head on something soft and support their neck as per their intelligence, and hold both hands gently against each other in this manner.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	 Then proceed in descending order to the other veins as follows:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	 Then gently pull the two wrists apart after holding them steady for a while, until you can remove them from their place.
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	 And make sure you don't burn the skin with needles, and perform this injury in front of sunlight at noon, and try to get out quickly if you feel pain while doing it.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	 And when you have done this, if you distill it into oil with a filter that separates the impurities from the substance, you will get pure oil in two colors: red and clear.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	 If you don't have the time to collect everything in that hour, if you pour a drop of oil onto the eyes, it will ease their pain and keep them steady until they stop being sore or inflamed.
et c’est li forme des forces:	 This is its form of healing.
de la fistule de l’oil	 the abscess
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	 The "fistula" refers to a type of fistula, which are openings in the body that connect different parts and allow communication between them, such as the urinary bladder and urethra (in men) or the uterus and vagina.
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	 When you cure it with cautery or by burning medicine as I have previously said, and it is not cured easily, if it prick at its base the eye will be held steady until it grows; but when moisture enters into it it must die out completely, while keeping it open.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	 And when they see destruction, then you will witness corrosion and darkness, if the ruler of what is there formed it.
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	 And they are called 'the sharp chief', and may be done with this ruler if it is in the present form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	 And put your left hand on the corrupt bone and turn between two of them, pressing your hand a little until you see that the corruption is removed.
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	 And do it not once but repeatedly, then return to the excisive bones.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	 If the bones are soft and hollow, and the roots of the bow are also soft, then it should be applied every X days until they do not renew or become inflamed, because it does not harm, but helps that which is good.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	 If you don't have another tool, then you should bring the fistula back to its place according to this form.
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 And it is that you discover the second time with a hammer, and by applying pressure, if he hurts himself in such a way as to break through this form, or if there are three joints, then let him be restrained from using force like you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	 And put it into the fire to roast his flesh, and hold tight your hand over its oil as you press on it until it breaks through the bone and feels them with a touch that he holds his hand close against his side.
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	 And after the flesh has been roasted from its own heat as you have instructed him, and when it is not burned or hardened by the fire, if there was a material on his body.
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If this were easier to do with an abscess.
de l’issue de l’oil	 from the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	 When the eyes have been completely open and there is no bleeding or pain, then you should hold the abscess.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	 Then the patient should hold his breath and endure the pain, then apply oil, vinegar, honey, incense, and musk to soothe the wound and cleanse it, then bind up the wound with bandages and cloth.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	 The manner in which the bandages are applied should be such that you use enough soft ones and alternate between four of them, then place one over another in a way that they meet at equal distances.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	 Then hold the wound tight with a bandage made of hard material to prevent bleeding.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	 After applying the bandages and leaving them in place for some time, gently loosen them if it is necessary.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	 Then after a day or two, loosen the bandage and see if the oil has improved in appearance.
se ce non;	 This cannot occur
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the flame cautery is used, instruct the patient to keep his eyelashes and eyebrows trimmed, and let him stay calm while doing so
dou derrompement de toile uvee	 The dislocation of the shoulder
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	 When dislocations occur in the shoulder joint, first inspect it, then apply ice if there is swelling from injury.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	 If you see one needle in the root of a limb and another one further up that same limb, then apply another needle or two if there is a double thickness in the elbow area.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	 And pierce it through, leaving the first needle in place according to its position.
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	 Then pierce through the second needle and pull out part of the vein, holding it tightly, then remove the needle and put into a clean bandage in place.
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	 And leave it like that until the veins heal completely, providing comfort as needed.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And any wound is held steady by a piece of cloth as long as it is intact
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	 And if the hairs appear thin and prone to curl with slight moisture, they will become inflamed and dry, causing them to split and fall apart.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then it is removed as soon as it heals.
de la bowe de l’oil	 This phrase could mean "from the beginning of [something]" in English.
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	 This disease which is called "flesh eating" occurs when worms are found in the oil, resembling live maggots and dying at once.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	 And the manner of dressing an abscess is to apply it with heated oil or warm water, then squeeze it tightly between your hands for two parts, and move them while watching for pus coming from underneath.
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	 Then cover it with a cloth to prevent drying out, do not let the light get in, and watch for pus coming from underneath.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 And if she does not descend from above, her face will appear ashen
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	 If you put the bandage between your hands, take a subtle strip and place it on top of the eye corner.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And if she is cured in this manner, whether with honey or fenugreek and milk, then be treated for another treatment as long as it remains healthy
des aigues de l’oil	 "hot oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	 We have the resemblance of diseases in this division, and what should be done to cure it.
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 If you follow the course of health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	 You should put the bandage between your hands and tie it with a knot at the end of the day so that the oil stays in place tightly.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	 Then lay the paper of oil on your left hand side so that the hairs are even or on your right hand side they should be uneven.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	 Then take the tool in your right hand if they are even or in your left hand if they are uneven.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	 Then put the tip of the tool into the crown with care, at an angle, and then gently apply oil to the smaller ear as before. Then turn the tool called "almagda" smoothly while holding your hand tight until it stops feeling the pain from the oil.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	 It is important that the length of the "almagda" opening matches the size of the ear at its end, which is near the exit hole.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	 This tool is used to apply oil on both ears
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 The arm is being examined for the clarity of the skin color, and then it applies some sort of instrument to the area where it seems to be, after which you apply pressure in another location
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 Now he holds his breath, seeing the arrows before him and the instrument at its sheath
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	 After a short rest, it proceeds to apply the instrument in another location. When finished and applied with pressure, gently tighten your hand slowly and slowly
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 Then release the tension gradually and repeat this process several times to relieve pain.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then proceeds to extract the arrows or foreign object from the eye with oil as described and in a manner that is not painful
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 Now, for those of us who are skilled at this, let's proceed to our task with plenty of oil.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	 And if the eye cannot enter oil through its orifice because it has tough eyelids, then you should take an instrument that is called "the eyelid spreader," which is used like this.
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	 And when it is only needed, do not apply too much pressure but gently and slowly, as we have mentioned earlier.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	 And at the end of this procedure when the bandage is tightly applied to the patient's back in a dark place, where he lies down and sleeps.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	 And any sudden movements or excessive violence should be avoided and the patient's head kept still in whatever position it is comfortable.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	 After washing his hands with clean water, he wipes them dry and looks for any damage.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 And you must do this after the incision has been made or after treatment is complete, but it is important to remember that they will become inflamed later on.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	 And you must lubricate the joint before applying any sort of bandage or dressing to it.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 And when he is bandaged up tight and you notice a small wound, it is important to lubricate the area and then apply another dressing over that one.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	 And with time they become hardened in their cases.
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 In that case no one should put themselves between the patient and the fire.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	 And there was someone from Yract who told us that in some places it is not allowed to eat meat while treating people because one may succeed but another dies.
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	 And as for this new thing
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	 And these are the similar shapes of the venom, because whoever does not know how to treat them properly
et soient d’arain proprement:	 and they should be treated correctly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	 And it is the essence of this subtle science and its derivative in three degrees.
de la char sor le neis	 "Of course. Of the scar or the new one?
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	 There are no newborn or hatched chicks that come into contact with venomous snakes, as it would not cause any harm.
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 And if there is a rash which appears to be of the flesh color or if there are sores with deep wounds.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	 In those cases where the venom is painful and not healing, it would be best to apply the poison between your hands against the sun.
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	 And cover his nose and kiss the bite of these snakes, and treat them with care.
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 But as long as you continue to apply the subtle remedy of a part gently, until you know that this snake is completely healed
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	 And if there is no remedy at all to cope with it, as the wounds are treated gently and firmly.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	 or hold tightly to your arm, if you can't control it otherwise.
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	 And if you hold tightly to your arm and it burns and the cautery is very strong until all the hairs are burned off and there's no pain or movement left at all, then go easy on them gently and slowly.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	 If it is not healing as quickly as expected, the patient should expectantly wait until they are healed completely.
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	 and if you don't control it gently as expected, the patient should hold tightly to their arm until the pain subsides.
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	 And as long as there is doubt and fear, you must hold tightly to their arm until it is either held firmly in place or less.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	 "And hold the eyelids tightly shut so that they do not move as long as he keeps his nose pressed against them.
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	 And many times it happens to children when teaching them how.
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 Then the first finger that comes out through the nose is held by one hand, and the second finger that comes out through the mouth with the other hand, holding them both alternately like we do when they are small.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	 Do this as long as you squeeze it tightly enough to prevent the nose from being clogged with soot, then take out each finger, extract the wax, and smooth them down in an Egyptian style, and place them gently on his face so that they lie straight.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	 Do this for three or more times until the nostrils are free from soot.
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	 And then apply some oil to his nose once every few hours as needed, and if he has such medicine available, do so.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 "And this is how you purge the phlegm, by straining out the oils and the medicines that are within:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	 "Whether it's gold or lead, like a lamp in its light, if it burns the same way and lights so brightly;
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	 "And you see that when you put one into a flame closely, whether or not it is plain to purge the phlegm.
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	 "And this mixture of oil and water must be held tightly until all the oil has burned away.
de la char sor le neis	 "Of course. Of the scar or the new one?
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	 "There is often a disease called 'tolu' that crosses and becomes great over time as it keeps the eye steady.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	 "And for this reason, you must apply it at the beginning and continue with the fire cautery or burn ointment:
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	 "And when you hold for long enough until it is great, if the pain is severe, turn off the fire cautery and apply cool water to soothe the pain.
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	 "Do not touch it with force as that may cause injury. If you prick at the base, hold steady so they do not move until they grow.
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	 "When pricked by the base, keep it steady so they do not move until they grow.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	 When the eye is closed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 You should treat each individual case separately and take a closer look at this particular ailment.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	 "It is advisable to check if there was any injury because looking at the fresh wound may cause further harm.
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 "And when doing incisions of this type, treat them as soon as they are done.
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	 "And when the incisions are done on both sides, it is advisable to cleanse all parts as thoroughly as possible, then sew them up and bind with appropriate herbs and incense.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Sprinkle on the incision a piece of quick-drying plaster or another such substance and let it stay in place until it dries completely then treat the wound as soon as possible.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	 The manner of stitching consists of putting together the solution
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	 or with needles if you have mentioned in the description of stitching below the belly
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	 or with thread, as I told you before.
des apostemes des levres	 of the arms
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	 With the right hand placed firmly on the patient's abdomen, causing pain and bruising of various degrees
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	 until you turn the sheets, and fasten at your neck, and bring them around in one piece.
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 After removing a stone from inside, hold it steady until no movement is detected;
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then remove the leaden chains and heal any wounds as quickly as possible.
de la char des gencives	 From the neck down
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	 In the work of this chapter there are often evacuations from abscesses at the opening of veins, incisions for abscesses, treatment of wounds, extractions with arrows, and cuttings into stones, similar things; where there is doubt and fear, many die.
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	 "If you hold on to it with both hands at its base, let some of the roots or blood vessels be exposed.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	 "...and then sprinkle salt and drying powders onto the wounds...
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	 "And after incision, it often happens if the second time, and cautery is used.
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	 "If not, after the cautery...
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	 "...and these are the marks of injuries caused by it.
des sordens	 sores
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	 "No times have been seen at the root of the jawbone between the gums, which are dried up and shriveled;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	 "...and no black or yellow teeth have been seen as long as decay has come to the gums, and are falling out.
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	 "If you keep the wound between your hands and make sure it is clean, then no pus or discharge will be seen as long as nothing happens.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	 "And wash your face with blackness and whiteness, youthfulness, and other virtues, as long as they remain.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	 "When you do this at the first stroke (lit. 'first reason'), it's good.
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	 "But if after the second stroke and third time you do not have all the necessary things,
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	 "and the teeth have different shapes due to heat, which is why the toothache that has been treated by pulling out between the gums.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	 "And these forms and others should be with you present.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	 "It is advisable when treating the toothache that you treat it as much as possible, because one must not be stingy with it.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	 "because this is a substance high in which there are no excuses for the removal.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 "When the hairs are restrained from moving, if you want to prick them at their base, make sure that your hand is steady.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	 Many times does the pain arise from a bad toothache, and it's important that they are extracted or treated in time.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	 And no matter how much the pain lasts as long as the wounds remain, because we have already known that it is necessary to treat these injuries.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	 And when you are sure of the toothache and it's causing no further harm, then it is advisable to extract the tooth as soon as possible in order to preserve the gums from all sides
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	 Then it is good to loosen up your fingers at first and slowly until they are well secured, then fix the nails properly.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 And if there's a dislocation of both shoulders, between your arms, and hold tightly so that they do not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After the patient has been properly restrained from moving around in any way, and if he is not allowed to sit or stand at all, then let them lay flat on a table gently without causing any unnecessary harm.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	 And if you find it necessary to cover them with bandages, put the pieces together in a way that they are held.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	 "If he gently pulls on it, let it not break away.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 And please also remember to keep the joint as loose as possible when opening your mouth for dental treatment.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 And do good and keep part of the skin unbroken, and remove the arrow by removing the base causing more severe pain than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	 And remember that you should not do anything to break the joint as it is fragile and has never broken before, and they can only withstand a slight amount of force.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	 But never come from the root cause disease due to the roots that grew and because of the joint which broke, as we have experienced.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	 And when it is injured, if you clean the injured area with vinegar or alcohol.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	 If the joint swells and becomes swollen, then apply a mixture of vitriol (sulfuric acid) to it.
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 Do not do this if you use fire cautery.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	 The arms are covered with hair that cannot be removed except by the most powerful means you take.
et ce sont les formes:	 and these are the forms
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	 They can be large members if they cannot stand still on their own, and should be made of iron so that they hold well and are strong enough to stay in place.
de la racine des dens	 from the roots of them
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	 If you pull the root of the hair out gently with cotton moistened or if you use oil to lubricate it as much as possible so that the hairs are soft, then hold tightly the tweezers which have been treated with algicide to prevent the itching which may come from the itchy hairs.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 and be made just like a lump of coal this way is it formed.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	 And if the roots try to break through all of these veins, it is advisable that you uncover and expose the root, and use an instrument called "althalie", which means strong thread in French.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	 And so firm and large if they do not break easily, and the root can be pulled out with that force, this is good;
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	 then it will work poorly if you use too much force on the hairs as the forms may come later.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	 And if there are any such instruments that can help, what is their shape.
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	 and other limbs in front of the reason for the pain, and a tool that seems to have large tendons.
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	 And so long as the hairs cannot be broken easily and many of them are tough.
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	 And also these other things mentioned earlier are not mentioned here
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	 And the most subtle veins are to be felt with one's own hand and by instruments that suit the ailment; for there may be different kinds of instruments required based on these ailments, as it is broken or not, if you seek such things, I have told you and given you instructions how to perform them.
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	 And hold the arm securely so it does not slip away or become loose.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	 Then restore the limb using appropriate medicine and if there is an abscess in the arm which is small, then use that instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	 When the tooth appears naturally and its shape is good, and especially in women who are pregnant, if it is convenient that you make the extraction immediately without waiting, as there may be no other treatment.
adonques lou raie;	 "And if they prick at their base,
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	 "...and if they prick at the base of their sting...
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	 And when the gums get very sensitive due to the toothache, and for this reason you do not move the other teeth, if there is pain from one loose tooth like that which has a certain shape,
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	 "...like when one pierces an arrow.
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	 "...and in the same way as with a knife gently held between his fingers while he is piercing it...
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	 "...until he has pierced it completely without making a single mistake.
quant li dent lochent	 When one tooth falls out
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	 "...when the sting is broken or torn in any way, and they cannot be pressed to close unless he wants them not to sting...and then you must provide remedies that do not harm.
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	 "...if it is desirable to bind with a golden thread because gold threads become green and rotten over time, but the silver ones remain unharmed.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	 And let them grow neither too short nor too long according to the amount of space between hairs.
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	 And if you pull out one hair and the next one is too close between two healthy hairs, then place it between those hairs. If there are more, just let them grow until they reach a healthy tooth on another side.
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	 Then reapply the cover to the area you were working in and gently hold it firmly until they stop moving.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 And be sure to shave around the root of each tooth if necessary, or as directed.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	 Then tie them up and collect the hairs together, put one between each healthy tooth to prevent bleeding.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	 And then leave them tied until they stop moving and start bleeding if you tie up another hair.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 "It is to be expected and will serve as the form of the healthy bones and shape of the front arm.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	 And when the finger bends, if it is released in its place repeatedly.
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	 It is not to be bent backwards or splayed out of place repeatedly, and it should remain in its normal position unless there is a defect that prevents this.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	 "Wrap around that piece of tongue tightly.
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	 It can also occur from any other source such as the tongue or body tissues but will not if it is removed.
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	 Or by accidental injury.
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	 The wounds are such that you can open the mouth without pain and keep your head steady, as well as gently move your tongue.
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	 And as long as the tongue is in its place, and if it becomes loose or moves too much, this will cause pain immediately.
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	 And hold it steady so as not to disturb the artery underneath.
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	 Once you have done that, if it is warm or cold water, then apply a cloth soaked in linen.
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 The wounds will heal without leaving any scars.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	 If the wounds come to a head when applying vinegar-soaked linen,
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	 and if it is burned with the slow burn of the fire cure that works well, it is good to use.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 And continue with another treatment as long as necessary,
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	 until the wounds are no longer painful or infected, because this is a burn.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	 If the wounds are healing but painful and wet with moisture, if it stings when you apply vinegar, and use a very fine, subtle cloth to wipe away any excess.
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	 "And hold your breath as you perform the procedure to avoid inhalation of any smoke or fumes.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Then loosen it up and get out of there, and continue with other procedures as soon as you are safe.
des apostemes de la gorge	 "The throat abscess
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	 "There is no danger from the mouthpieces that have been removed 'godath', and properly treat the second ones; if you do as we have advised in the division, they will be safe.
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 "It is very important not to be too rough or cause any damage while using it; if you do as we have advised gently, nothing bad will happen.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	 "If the skin is red and the root is large, do not be too rough or cause any damage; instead proceed with caution.
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	 "But leave it as long as it stays put, and if you are going to remove it, or it would break off by itself;
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 "If the bleeding is minor and the root cause is subtle, if you need to prick it with a tool, but first make sure its base is held steady.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	 "When the pain is in front of the sun and you've held it steady as an arrow between your hands, press the tongue to everything it touches.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 "Or of silver or of lead subtle like a needle:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	 "Can you press the tongue to everything it touches and see the target, if one draws near and the fish is in its way, and the trap will be sprung more than necessary:
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	 "And do nothing on the cloth with it, then grasp the tool as if there is force.
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	 "And every joint may be bent and another place may follow, they are both sharp, and made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	 And if you do not have this tool, when it comes to hold, of course it is necessary.
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	 And from one side to another
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And when you pull one of the arrows, if you pull the other in the same manner thereafter, and after cutting into it gargle hot water immediately afterward, repeatedly gargling them until they grow numb or are cooked, like embers.
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And so long as he remains sane;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	 Only the two arrows ever enter his throat, if they come out in the same way that both entered.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	 And I treat a woman with an arrow lodged in her throat, knowing it is not deep;
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 She could not breathe through the passageway that was blocked, and could neither drink nor eat, and died within a short time.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 "And their eyes were swollen as if he had been weeping for two nights.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	 I have seen things, and fixed one thing at a time. Then came the day of woe, when great portions of body
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	 And then I took another step to their left and pressed their mouth and tongue.
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	 After fixing the one thing in those steps, I took a part of it away only to find that there was still some pain.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	 And I put her down from the bed and started to drink water as well as wine. Then I kept cutting into the abscess one by one.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	 And the abscesses were closing in and covering up my earlier cuts until they grew no more.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	 After I burned through the abscess, I cautorized the throat.
ensi demora sens croistre;	 And after a while of cutting.
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 And I parted from these things, but God gave it to me after.
de l’uve	 From above
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	 When the vein is removed and it has been sewn up tightly and well;
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 If it is large and rounded, it is called a vein.
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	 When she has been cut as we have described in the section and the treatment does not benefit her much, you see that the artery ends are held steady, and it is subtle if it's done correctly.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	 And those who are rounded together but do not extend very far.
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 If she is bloody or reddish or black, if it's necessary to make an incision in her.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 There is great danger in the abscess.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	 When you see her, according to the manner I have described, of her blush and length, make sure she holds the bandage in front of the sun, and press her tongue on the tool we have mentioned here.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 Then bind up his wounds, and let him rest in bed, and take the second of the two kinds that I mentioned during the incision to the second artery.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	 And it is advisable not to use any excess that exceeds natural limits;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	 because if you consume more than necessary, it will affect your voice and your speech.
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 After the incision, apply what we mentioned during the incision of the second artery, and treat it as long as necessary.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 The manner of cautery should be consistent and even.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	 And let his nose remain in its natural shape, and then press the tongue against what we mentioned during the cautery chapter, holding it steady with a gentle wet cloth, so that it is neither too thick nor too thin.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And apply this instrument, which has the shape as follows;
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	 And if you put it on his forehead, or above the ear, and apply the instrument to all of the medicine there.
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	 The hair on the head of the patient should be left long and even in order to prick at its base.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	 Then take your hand and press it against the vein, for as long as you can see a steady flow of blood without pain or itching.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	 And if you see it, take cotton and apply it against any instrument, rubbing the cotton in the wound until all the cotton is used up.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	 And once that's done, leave it to dry for four or five days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	 And if you find another way to treat the burn, and it relieves after treating with the remedy of cotton, remove any remaining cotton from the wound, wrap up the remainder in bandage material, and clean what is left from the medicine.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And when it is cold, or you have a sore throat, stay still as long as your symptoms are manageable.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	 This treatment is safer than the fire cautery alone.
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	 If the fumigation is performed this way with lavender, hyssop, and rosemary, chamomile, wormwood, and other herbs, and mix them all together or none at all, you may use it as a cure.
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	 The mixture should be well glazed with good earth, and the vessel should contain something that heats up according to this way:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	 Either gold or silver, and when you bite into the mouth of the abscess as it boils with hot water in the vessel, until the eyes are blinded.
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	 After rinsing your mouth, as long as the eyes are dry, and keep in mind that you should not perform this when beginning to open an abscess, for many things happen.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 "Do not worry about what comes after this sentence.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	 "The instrument is not present if someone approaches and puts too much pressure on the artery.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 As for the vein, do not let go of the pulse because it is a serious treatment method.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	 "If there are fish bones in the throat or nothing at all.
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	 "Therefore, when you see it, press your tongue against the instrument so that what you want to see is seen.
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	 "And if it does not open and must be swallowed, you should vomit the medicine so that it is digested in the stomach.
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	 "For example, if there is something to expel by vomiting.
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	 When the hair of the patient is wrapped around a sponge or a navel, an onion, a root of lettuce, or a straw.
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	 And then tightly wrap it in the sponge.
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	 When it comes to its place, if you hold firmly and then remove it.
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	 And when we have said this, if one holds the tool in this way,
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	 and the instrument is pushed up to the throat so that it can enter more easily into the mouth and put the throat in a high position.
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	 And you must not touch the epiglottis, which is all closed and cannot be opened by any movement of your own.
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	 And it must not be pulled out while the instrument is still inside, for otherwise you could lose or tear off part of your own flesh.
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	 If you break it apart gently, or if you pull on it with all your strength, as long as it is broken
de la sansue de la gorge	 "of the nature of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	 There was no medicine without surgery
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 And when you do not profit, then look in the mouth with the abscess towards the sun, and press your tongue against the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 And if you see this ailment appear suddenly, or even in small quantities, then hold tight and try to find out what it is
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if this doesn't work when you take a cold compress and place it in the throat sore, then you should try rubbing alcohol on it.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 If there is any other ailment that occurs here at all times.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	 Then breathe in deeply through the nose, and close your mouth, and gently swallow, and move it to its place with your hand.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 And if you feel sick as soon as you use it, then stop.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	 And if she does not feel well as we have said, then apply the abscess to the affected part with the instrument that I told you in the application of the powder.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 Do this many times because it will be necessary for treatment.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	 "The method of cauterization is that you burn it with a hot iron, and if the patient moves while being burned, cover their eyes with a cloth to prevent them from moving.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	 "After the cautery procedure, place a cloth over their nose and mouth to prevent them from smoking.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	 "Now seal it tightly with wax, so that they cannot break free if the cautery procedure is repeated many times.
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	 "And they become thirsty and lose strength, and do not drink water anymore.
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 "Until the government decides to intervene.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	 "The shape of the instrument is that it should be applied so that when you see it move, similar to tied strings entering the throat.
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	 "She is gentle to touch,
et vez ci la forme:	 and her manner
li chapistres des apostemes	 The surgeon makes an incision
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	 There are different opinions in this book, regarding incision and amputation.
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 One of the methods is to use fire cautery, and one method uses moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 The second method involves piercing the ends at the neck.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 The veins and arteries that are closest to the heart have different characteristics than those at the extremities, and these veins at the base of the neck differ in structure from those connected by joints, each having its own judgement concerning their nature.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	 If an abscess is being incised too deeply, it must be held steady until completion.
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 If the cutting is too deep and not completed, then it will be fatal to the jointure
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 "When an arm comes out of its socket," the text continues, "and it is held firm until it becomes solid and stable through pressure from both sides, as a result causing contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	 Or if the incision is done on a principal member, and you stop the cut until it is healed.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	 If the cutting goes into the base of something, then that thing will die.
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	 And it's not advisable that you prick at the base of the abscess suddenly and forcefully, for fear of breaking it off.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 It may cause significant harm in a short time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	 Ensure you gently remove the abscess and complete the incision slowly. And when there is pain or bleeding, take immediate action to stop it, such as applying pressure on the wound, elevating the affected limb, and controlling any swelling or discomfort.
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	 Ensure that you make the incision less dependent on the abscess to prevent it from opening if necessary.
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	 Ensure the incision is made at a safe distance from the hand or fingers, and not near joints, arteries, veins, or any other vital structures.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 "In these cases where one member dislocates.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 And when the arm is in a sling after injury, if you allow it to remain that way until it is healed completely as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	 "When you pierce before this, if there is no way to remove it from his body, then the sores will heal with time.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 And after a long while the wounds heal and fill him up.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And if any joint is pierced through both sides of the arm, it will make the limbs weaker and more prone to dislocation.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	 It is important that you also address any abscesses separately.
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	 And in large abscesses and wounds similar to the location of the arrowhead.
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	 If there are such abscesses or wounds that require treatment elsewhere, and if you need further assistance for this
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	 When it has become so painful that it is unbearable, consider doing what we did with the boils.
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	 And if there are such wounds that protrude into three directions, or if there are wounds whose treatment is similar to the method used for treating a boil in the third eye, and with wounds from angles.
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 And if there are such wounds that require cutting off or removal of parts, similar to the way we remove cuts and similar things.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	 "When a person has no head, if they fall onto their stomach, it is important that you lie them flat.
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	 "If the blow is severe and causes great swelling, then you must lie them flat so as not to break all of their bones at once, but rather a part.
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	 "Then remove the other eye in turn and treat it gently.
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	 "Do this repeatedly over time until all bones are treated.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 Finally, the patient's limb must be weak or frail, or they may lose strength as they grow older.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 Because the joints were not properly aligned or secured, many times they dislocated and caused significant pain and injury to the patient.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	 "Follow the instructions of this chapter closely and when you have treated your patient's eye, if there is a small scar or no scar at all.
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	 "Then gently lift the eyelid or wipe away any crust that may be present;
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	 "And he will endure great pain if he tries to separate one from the other.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	 "If you try to separate part of the joint and it slips out or becomes dislocated due to moisture, then tighten it with a thin cord or rope.
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Then treat the wound as soon as possible.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 "And whenever you encounter a sore or abscess, if you cleanse it with ice and heat, then make the incision gently as many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	 "And if the abscess persists, and he suffers pain and discomfort, then you have described various treatments in this book that might be helpful. And when applying them make sure to use linen and oil cloths as advised.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	 "And if it is severe and painful, then you should apply linen or oil cloths soaked in vinegar or fruit juice as advised.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Then remove the abscess and drain it if necessary, until he is well.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	 Then treat all abscesses universally in treatment procedures
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	 Or when we have said that the patient must be treated before cutting into the abscess, and then proceed to the doctor.
des soros	 "Of sores.
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 "Or when you encounter stones (gallstones), and the way that it is removed from bile ducts.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	 He has gout and pain as if he were soaked in water
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 If there are such things that are painful to cut into but not doubt or fear, then he is sure to do it contrary.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 "When the veins of the arm are opened up by mistake or forcefully due to moisture; and if they pierce through anything that is called 'entromissing,' where it goes after piercing, what substance does it contain?
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 "If there is moisture present when you enter the wound, then follow these steps:
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	 And when moisture comes from a vein, if you leave the hairs that contain that moisture alone because it returns often,
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	 then squeeze tight with Egyptian bandage if present.
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	 But otherwise apply the wound and leave it to rest on the other limb;
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 And how
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	 And as for the second and third joints, so long as you hold them firmly they will not move at all.
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 In treating an injury such as this one, until it is completely healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	 And if the abscess head is held tight in a certain way for a long time, so that the opening becomes narrow and small.
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	 And get your nails trimmed regularly, and clean all the wounds thoroughly, and make sure you follow through with treating any cuts that may come.
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 If one of these instructions goes against what I told you after this.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 "And if the veins are pierced, and you tie off tightly as I have advised, and cure them properly.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 "Cut through the veins when they are less strong, because it's easier to seal off since there is less blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	 And if any of the joints or stones are not wet enough, and these sutures were made from old woman's skin.
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	 The joint was so painful that it could not be moved at all.
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 And if you see a wound like this one, do not move it at all
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	 And if these veins and roots come out through the ears and nostrils, the incision should be as small as possible to prevent further damage.
et les cure si com il covient.	 The treatment will depend on the specifics of each situation.
des scrophules	 "softness of the ear
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 "Often times come to the abscess on the arm, and then go to the elbow, and the shoulder, they always come back together with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	 If a scrotum is properly tightened at its base as we have described, then it will be firm and the abscess should heal.
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 The scrotums of these sores are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 There were some people who contained moisture, and those who did not want to obey to health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	 If you see one that is well disposed towards the shaft and similar in colour to the scrotum, and does not have any part missing or defect, it should be fully functional from both ends.
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	 If you want to remove it through surgery and make a full incision into its part, ensure that all the levels of circulation are intact from both ends if you do this as we have described for removing abscesses.
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 "And slowly and gradually, make sure not to force the finger or vein, do not cause any harm either to yourself or others, keep your hands steady, don't use too much force, you must ensure that only what you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	 "If you prick a vein or artery and it doesn't stop bleeding, if there is any bruising remaining after the injury, then hold the wound tight.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 "And let that continue until both eyes are closed and relaxed, and until the pain is gone.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	 "When you're done, do it completely.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 "Then check to see if there are any small scars or wounds.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	 "If there is a large vein on the root of the wound that needs to be closed with very strong thread and held by it so that it doesn't move.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 After applying the Egyptian ointment to the affected area, follow with treatment
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 And if you squeeze all the abscess, make sure to collect and apply both plasters at once; then do not worry about whether it is from a large abscess or small.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 "It is advisable to go gently when trying to get at the root of it, and pulling slowly as we have advised.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	 Those whose hair is excessive and long enough, remove it by cutting
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	 And if the ointment has not been used for a long time or is spoiled, follow with treatment and ointments as well, to prevent further damage from occurring.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the wound has been treated properly, if the application of ointment is causing pain, as long as it remains so.
de squinance	 Squint
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	 The ancient ones spoke and talked about the treatment of the throat.
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	 But I do not know anyone in our land who teaches it, and that is their writing.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	 Those with a cleft palate should remove the lip which is called "epiglottis" from being seen;
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	 And in this case, there is no assistance available, as all the veins and arteries around the lips or in the throat are affected.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	 "When a disease is in the channel of the windpipe, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis so as to prevent choking.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	 When we want to cut the epiglottis, it is best if we make a small incision through two circles or at most four circles of width.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 And these sutures will be easy to cut through the epiglottis as it has no cartilage in that area.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	 And the major sutures are vulnerable, if it is convenient to stretch out the skin of the throat all the way through, and then cut along as far back as possible to the chin.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	 And remove the sutures if you see nothing there, and then cover over it as described above.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	 And demonstrated by cutting through the cartilage of the chin that breaks off and the failure of speech;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 Let the wound be covered with a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	 And when the hour is reached to doubt about the dislocation, apply a poultice from the afflicted limb with equal heat over the affected area.
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then administer medicines that are gentle on the skin until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	 Albucasis does not allow one to remain as long as the throat is completely closed and the patient has been killed by it or otherwise failed.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	 If a stroke occurs in the epiglottis that prevents it from being aligned correctly and causes breathing difficulties, and if it is not treated promptly:
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	 the patient is instructed to leave the wound open as long as the disease persists and it does not heal in three or four days.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 I will tell you what I know.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	 I knew that a woman put poison in her husband's drink and he drank some of the poison
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 but when she found out it was too late to cure him, she died.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	 "I discovered the wound and found that it was caused by an abscess, but I realized that no treatment could be performed without causing a blockage in her throat.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	 I hurt myself, and then I applied a cure, and continued to care for it until it was healed.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	 And she did not have her voice back after it had recovered from its damage.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 Because of that, I was afraid to remove the epiglottis
de la grosse gorge	 "from the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	 Hernia is called "epiglottic hernia," and it occurs in a variety of colors, often in women.
et est selonc II manieres:	 There are two types
naturez, et accidens;	 natural causes, and accidental causes;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 Or where there was no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	 The accidental causes are of two types: one is like tearing us apart, and the other way is like an artery tear.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	 It was painful, and it could not be surpassed by treating with small things, and seeking to make an incision throughout the entire length of the artery.
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	 "If you prick it just as much and do not pierce the vein, if someone else pricks them as well without piercing them deeply, or if they are cut through completely by themselves.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 "And keep it oiled and care for it, so that it is kept in good condition.
des nous	 In
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	 "The same manner we have mentioned earlier.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 "And it is important that you understand the distinction between 'not' and 'issue'.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	 I say that 'issue' means to be present or not absent.
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	 "Without removing the fire and preventing its spread.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	 "When there is no fire and it has been extinguished, its own essence remains as it was before the injury occurred.
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 "And similarly to what I mentioned earlier about the differences in gravity and moisture levels.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	 It is important when you come to the treatment of one that first check thoroughly for any possible tools or instruments that are called "entromissoir" after this as it comes from a surgeon, depending on its form and shape.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	 And the manner of questioning the apostrophe is that you grip it more firmly than you hold onto it at its place, and then slowly release it until all the contents are expelled, or until it reaches a certain level.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 After that, take caution as follows:
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	 If the moisture continues to burn, it will continue doing so until you have said what I advised before for other apostrophes.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	 After the apostrophe is done burning if no more moisture remains you should assume it is cured and gently pull out or scrape off any remaining parts and apply a clean cloth to where it was.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 If after all of that you still cannot remove the burn then do not attempt to scrape or pull out any more of it as doing so may cause further harm.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	 "If he moves nothing, then returns it to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	 "And if he moves a bit and does not hurt the sensitive areas with corrosive wounds, holds it steady and applies soothing remedies until he is well;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 "And if we lose one of its levels, hold tight the wound and apply the remedy that causes it to heal.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	 "And if the vein turns against us or another way when it splits and leaves two or three cuts until the wound stops bleeding, and rest the inflammation with water.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	 "Then come back to the physician who performed the procedure.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	 "Here are the shapes of the entrances for the treatment; they are in three ways:
grans et moien et petit;	 "Large and medium-sized;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	 And he has three methods
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	 great, mild, and small to pierce the abscess.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	 and they are also like needles that pierce wounds, and are of iron or silver, or yellow, and can be used to pierce blackheads.
et sont de III manieres:	 And they have three methods.
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 large, mild, and small depending on the size of the opening.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	 The shapes are like this:
grans, moiens, et petis;	 large, mild, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	 and if one abscess has three methods as well;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	 and if there are abscesses that have three openings, and they are of the same three methods.
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	 And if one of them has two heads, or one with just one head, they are three times as many.
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 They must be necessary for their place
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	 The doctor must be skilled and gentle, or else they cannot help the vein or nerves.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	 And of these incisions are made in multiples, so that if the artery is not opened properly.
et sont de III manieres:	 They are three times as many.
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	 large, small, and middle-sized, as you see them.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	 And none can be used without practice, like legs and arms, and breasts, and faces.
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 No other tool is used small, similar to those of scissors, following this form, in order to perform the operation.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	 And it never occurs at any time to those veins, arteries, or that form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	 "No matter how much these roots are straightened out as long as they seem to be straight.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 "They will grow longer and thinner, and the wounds will heal as long as you follow this form of treatment.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 "After treating the abscess with medicines as mentioned earlier, gather all of its contents and stitch it up.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	 "And let the hair grow long for its size if it is healthy, and when it becomes too thin in two places, cut through both ends of the wound.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	 "And if one of the two ends is longer than the other at both ends and in between, that line b will be cut according to this form.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 "Then stitch the flesh between the two wounds and remove any excess fat. And follow what we said about stitches and powder, and do what is necessary for treatment as long as it remains healthy.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	 If the injury is not properly treated or if no incision has been made, then it will not heal and may require medical attention to prevent infection.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 The patient should keep the remaining hair short and well-groomed while undergoing fire cautery treatment.
des apostemes des asselles	 of abscesses
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	 The abscesses are filled with pus or moisture and contain sores; as long as there is moisture present.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Whenever there is moisture present, it is advisable to treat the wounds in a specific way, as described in line b of this text.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when all the boils are on an abscess and if you apply a wet cotton swab to it, then gently remove the cotton swab, wipe off the cotton and continue treating with ointments as long as it remains clean.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	 And if the abscesses are similar to sores as described above for sores, then treat them in a way that is similar to what we have described previously.
de la routure de l’artere	 artery cutting
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	 If the artery is punctured and the vein is cut while performing fire cautery treatment, then many times an abscess will occur in the vein as well.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	 If a vein is pierced during the artery burn procedure, it may cause both arterial and venous punctures.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	 When you see two different sensations, if one is an extraction
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	 If it occurs through the vein, then bleeding may occur.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 It is foolish to try and remove the abscess, especially if it is located on the bones or joints of any other parts of the body, because it will cause great pain.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	 "It is advisable for those who have had such treatment to avoid further procedures and especially for those whose arteries are affected by long-term exposure.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	 "Or remove the stone from the artery while it is still open, so that no damage occurs when closing it again.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	 "Then pierce it in both arms and fasten the artery with two threads as shown in the removal of the two arteries from the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	 "Then hold tightly between the two threads as long as it stays in place and do not let go of its base.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	 "Apply a remedy that will keep bleeding to a minimum until they stop.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 "Cure any wounds as long as possible and wait for them to heal completely.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	 "And as for the dislocation of an arm," [the following sentence should continue with another part of the text that completes it].
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	 "And for dislocation of one arm," [the following sentence should continue with another part of the text that completes it].
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	 "And if you doubt that the arm is dislocated," [the following sentence should continue with another part of the text that completes it].
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	 "And as for closing up the dislocation," [the following sentence should continue with another part of the text that completes it].
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Then after closing up the dislocation," [the following sentence should continue with another part of the text that completes it].
des apostemes des ners	 of veins
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	 The arteries and veins become inflamed when they are injured or subjected to excessive stress, causing similar symptoms.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	 And what happens when there are dislocations and injuries?
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	 When restraints are applied but the limb is painful and not straight, it may cause pain or damage to the joints.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	 It is important for all parts and nothing more than before or behind, but the one with dislocations must not be moved by force.
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	 through trial and error.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 This refers to a method of treating conditions on the head or face using hot irons, as it says "front
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	 If abscesses are being treated and there is pus present, if one punctures in its base.
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it is large and pricks the root or the vein, then the surgeon should stitch up the wound as soon as possible, with stitches until healing occurs.
des grosses boces pendans	 "large mouths hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	 No other disease is like this one, and it is called "phlegm" because of its resemblance to phlegm. It is a subtle ailment that can cause the following symptoms:
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	 it causes coughing fits and large amounts of mucus
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 They had phlegm in their stomach that was much like the phlegm one usually sees, and there were no other differences; they were white, and had a large amount of phlegm, and felt dry, and it burned due to moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	 I examined one of them once and found it to weigh 18 ounces, while the other weighed six ounces. The incisions were made as you look at where they are moist, and their appearance is bright white and moist with a subtle root;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 If one of them was taken out quickly in front of your eyes to the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	 "The tailbone often causes severe cramps due to numbness, causing discomfort when applying a fire cure.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	 "And if you see a vein about to burst or fear the incision will be deep, if you press firmly and hold it steady as we have said, and let go after.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	 "Then hold tightly, and do not let go of the vein as long as it is working, and stop cutting when you feel that it has reached its goal.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	 "If the roots are big and it's painful near your belly, but you do make sure to cover all of it, then cauterize in a way that will not spread.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 "Then treat the wound and make sure you don't cut into any veins that are bright red and thin, as they may be carrying bad blood or pus.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	 Certainly
quant li boude ist fuer	 When boiling it causes
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	 The appearance of the boil comes from a burn or cutting of flesh, and is located in the belly and may spread to other veins, if it occurs on any other part of the body.
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 It occurs by cutting into the flesh and through bursting of boils, if it has the color of the liver, causing pain that is not too severe, and accompanied with many issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	 And if it is from the issue of the intestine then there are many issues and when you press at its two ends repeatedly, and return time after time and by chance if one is sore or enlarged near the entrance to the bowel and due to much work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	 And occurs from moisture, it is a light thing, and increases when you press on it with your hand, but not too much.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	 And occurs from an abscess if there are large and hard signs, accompanied by a certain quantity;
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And occurs from swelling at the thigh, and leaves if it is seen that its appearance is due to an artery or vein injury.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 "If necessary, let the treatment proceed.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 "Because of doubt and fear, as I have explained in previous comments about the chapter involving the doctor's work.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	 And if it is on the stomach or bowel, you should instruct him to apply his poultice immediately and keep it applied until all pain subsides.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	 Then you should place it between your hands and move it to the area where you made the incision over all of the abdomen, then apply firmly but gently on both sides of the wound.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	 Then bind it tightly with a strong thread or firmly bound with strong cord so that it does not loosen
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	 And then put the poultice tightly over the incision and tighten your fingers around it, and cover your abdomen.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	 If you remove the poultice from between your hands, if the pain persists, then put the poultice over the belly above the incision.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	 And if you remove the poultice due to dizziness, and in case of excess moisture.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	 And if you feel contrary to the vein and it bleeds significantly, then return immediately to your origin, and pick up two more fish hooks, and sew them into the place where you had made the cut that you believe you have injured.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	 Then hold the eye steady with four threads around the hooks, and if you see it move, stitch over it, and leave it as long as it bleeds, and close up the wound from there.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	 Or if you find it subtle bleeding and painful, then treat for what is needed, and check the eye as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 And extract any abscess or moisture you see, then treat the wound with what is needed, and sew up the place.
dou chancre	 Then
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	 We have said in dividing the symptoms of ulcers, and how one should overcome with medicines, and how to wash away the pain of healing.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	 "The chancre is to be treated with a cure that causes pain while being applied. The doctor said that when the chancre is in its place or if it has been moved out of place like this, and inside the urethra, and similar places, the patient must endure until the beginning.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	 "And when it is large and old, if no one else can approach it safely, then you must come closer.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	 "None of them can come near me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	 And the veins when they are open and you cannot close them as mentioned earlier, it means that you must not apply any black powder to the affected area.
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	 Then make a small incision if there is visible swelling, and then make a cut into the abscess to drain it out.
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	 "Then cleanse your wounds or abscesses completely, leaving nothing behind.
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And let the blood flow freely and press it well with your hand or any object, if you perform a phlebotomy incision on the artery or vein, unless you use heat to stop the bleeding.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After that, apply another treatment until it is healed.
de ydropisie	 Of the dislocation
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	 In the treatment of similar things and in assembling an abscess, we have mentioned two types of healing; one by medicine and another by fire.
si est eclites soulement;	 if it is only inflamed
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	 And in these two similar cases, you should apply fire to heal them.
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	 this is deadly business; tympanitis and otitis are deadlier things;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	 when treating this inflammation of the ear that is called otitis, and if you do not treat it with medicine, as long as you see that its ears are weak or have another disease than otitis, then use both solutions and similar things.
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	 If you do not touch the eye, because there is doubt
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	 And if you see the eye turn very red, and it has no other disease except for a drop of blood, and it is not too long nor too short, then do this:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 Hold the eye with your right hand and press down on its belly at the lowest part of the ribs. Then take a small sharp instrument in this shape
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And so to two parts
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	 And whenever you pierce it inside, it should not bleed excessively.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	 Then look to see if there is a drop of blood on the intestines.
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	 If you want to test its sharpness, touch it with your fingernail on three different spots
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	 And if there is a drop of blood near the liver injury spot, then you have tested its sharpness.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	 "It is because of moisture, whether it be on the right or left side, and one must ensure that there are no loose ends causing harm to the fragile joint.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	 "Then stretch out all the skin on one side and the other, and lightly touch your fingertips to the skin between them as you would when washing with water or alcohol.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 "Then stretch the skin as far as it will go on one side, and gently apply pressure to the area where it thins out; then remove the instrument that is there.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	 "And similar to using a thin silver needle, or one made of wire light enough, and in the small area it can be used.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	 "Or if you prefer one end.
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	 "And on the other side as well. And on the other hand and the third.
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 "And if you dislocate it as a result of a single blow,
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	 "But when the arm is raised and held tightly, if someone suddenly pulls it to one side, then you should now stretch out the instrument:
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	 "And when it is the first or third part of the body,
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	 "But according to how much strength and how much pain it indicates, and what its location is,
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	 "Then stretch the instrument and hold it tightly,
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	 "And gently release the other arm as soon as you see that the injury is not severe,
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 "Do not move it as much as possible for a short time.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	 "If you doubt the bite of a venomous snake and it is let go gently, if its treatment or application with fire causes pain, try to rest, stay cool in water, or keep out of direct sunlight.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 "The treatment of the desiccant medicine should be done when it is safe; cautery on the stomach and liver after extraction of poison, as I have mentioned before.
de l’estopement de la verge	 "Shutting off blood flow from a vein
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 No one is born without a pulse in the artery, or it is weak, or not present at all
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 "If necessary, cauterize with a very thin needle in this manner:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	 "After that, apply gently the plaster and bandage it tight in three or four parts. If you want to urinate but cannot hold it, do not close off its opening, urinate instead, then after.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 "However, there is no need for concern because the urine that comes out does not stay closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 "The part of which was cut off is now healed completely.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	 "Those who do not keep their ears in place are blunted, as no one can hear properly from the top of their ear because...
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 "And cannot start properly if there is a matter that prevents material from reaching the ears and it's an ear disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	 "And the way of treatment is that if the hairs are too short and uneven on both sides, it should be cut to a size like the blade of a knife so that the dislocation doesn't occur when pulling.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And be careful when removing the skin that sometimes it occurs frequently and if it happens, then the treatment is to heal the wound as soon as possible.
des pustules de la verge	 "The pustules of the foreskin
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	 "Often come in small groups near the ear, which can be an indication of a serious disease;
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	 And if there are both good and bad ones
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	 If you want to straighten out the crooked bones gently, cut off any sharp edges, and put it in hot water.
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then apply the ointment until it is healed completely.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 And if the abscess is malignant, bring pus and drain it out, if you please to apply a cautery
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	 After you have treated it, and if the abscess is still visible on some part of the skin or in the hair, then apply an ointment that is designed for treating abscesses.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 And when it is healed, but if the treatment did not work
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	 If you treat it altogether but cannot remove the abscess from its place, and there is blackness or corruption in its location and around it.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then apply the ointment of honey and flour which has been made from the husks of green peas and beans, then continue to apply other treatments until it is healed completely.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 And if there is a lunar cautery prescribed, then follow this form of application:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	 "Instructions for the fire cautery are included:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	 "In order to cure it (the sore), and in treating the corruption
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	 "If a vein is cut or punctured, and blood comes out, then you should apply pressure to the wound.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	 "When the hairs of the head are shaved around an abscess that cannot be closed or has been ruptured due to an incision made at its base, if you feel blood coming out, you should apply pressure to the wound.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	 "And when shaving around an abscess and hairs are shaved at its base to remove the scab, if you feel blood coming out, you should apply pressure to the wound.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 "Afterwards, put between two cold cloths and squeeze gently until it stops bleeding.
de la circoncision	 circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	 Circoncision is similar to other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	 We always strive for the best possible work and the most gentle approach to healing.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	 "I say that they did not circumcise their children, as they do not use circumcision in their law, and we have only what we acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	 Because I am more interested in the masters and surgeons who did perform circumcision during that time period,
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	 If they could not perform it correctly or with enough precision, then more force would be used and repeated until the desired result was achieved.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	 Or there is increased pain, and the deformity that causes the member to bend backwards.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	 And the deformity continues to worsen until it is no longer possible for the patient to straighten their leg; and he wants more.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	 "From the movement that is made with great force throughout all the length of the incision I find the beauty of the experiment, as the forces cut so well through flesh as through bone.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	 When you press your hand hard enough on the area below the elbow, it causes swelling in that part of the body.
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	 "The hair on those parts must remain long and even.
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	 "And as for the first step: if you think of a child, when they get stung, do not let them go until their hair grows long enough. Do everything necessary to comfort and care for them in every way that you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	 "Then hold the force between your hands steady and prevent them from moving or falling in any way.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	 "Take your hand to their head and gently pull it away. Hold it high as long as the dislocation remains.
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	 "Then clean up any remaining debris and tie them in two or more separate knots.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	 "Tie the second knot at the base of the sting and behind it. Then hold them tightly between both knots, gently release one after the other, then take off their clothing and tie a band around their neck to secure their head.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	 After letting the wound heal slowly and slowly, it is the muscles.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And mix a mixture of vinegar and oil to apply it gently over the wound for healing purposes
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	 The form of strength is this one:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	 If the dislocated joints are loose and flexible, and they move in a similar way to each other.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	 The error of dislocation occurs when the nerves from the incision become damaged;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	 it is important that you extend it to its fullest extent so that all the joints may be held in place.
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	 Hold tightly and consistently; if you cannot hold it tight enough, then do so.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	 If three joints are disturbed and the joint which is furthest away from the skin becomes swollen if it lets you hold as long as the joints remain steady until they heal gently.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	 "If you move your arm as if you're about to hit something or someone, do not let go of the shoulder part.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	 "For any sudden bleeding from the wounds mentioned earlier, when treating powders and if one applies excessive pressure as before.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "For those with [what is missing here?], as long as it remains sane.
dou retenement de l’urine	 Retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	 "The retention of urine if it is from a cold abscess, or a boil, or a carbuncle, or similar things as mentioned earlier.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	 "And the urine will not come out and you hold it due to the urethra opening as before.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	 "And place them on your back and extend your stomach from the part towards the buttocks as before.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	 "And when closing the vein to express the veins' pressure causes urination.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	 "And if it doesn't come out as we have said and the veins are in great pain, you must administer the treatment known as 'siringue', where that is its shape.
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	 "And if there's a small trickle of blood from an arrow wound;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 "Or the pain of one hand and half, or subtle on top.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	 "The method to stop urination is by pulling the string with two fingers and tying it tightly at the top of the urethra.
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	 "Seal off the excess string and tie it tightly at the top of the urethra. Then apply oil or butter and vinegar to it, and put a small stone on top, then press down on the bladder and stop the flow, and close the veins and artery, and empty the bladder and bowels.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	 After binding tightly the string at its end, until it reaches the root of the twig, then tie two knots on top of each other above the bough.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	 After binding the string tightly to the twig, it will be pulled towards that branch, and it stops when it reaches a visible object.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	 After binding the string tightly to the twig one by one and then in the next layer, tie it into a bundle, and pull out that bundle.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 Continue tying the string as long as there is still visible branch or twig to which it can be pulled towards.
des maladies de la vessie	 The treatment for this involves evacuating the blood when opening up a vein
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	 When sores or wounds come in the urethra, it is gathered together with compresses and medicaments; there's an instrument called 'Clepsedrum' used for this purpose.
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	 It's done when three knots are formed.
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	 On the one hand, and on the other side, as you see it.
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	 And when the string is tied tightly enough to prevent it from being pulled through with moisture intact, if there's no way to dry it out and straighten it.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	 "And when you put your medicine into the vein, make sure to put a stopper in it with moisture, and treat the one that is inside.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	 "If you apply moisture to the stentor, then push hard on the one that's inside.
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	 "If there is moisture in it and they feel pain, go to the vein now.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	 "This is how you do a delicate procedure for the vessel:
si est ci:	 "If there it is:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	 "And if it's gold or silver and higher in degree.
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	 "Or even of the highest quality, with both hands clean.
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	 "Then take a sheep's vein and put the moisture you used to clot it in between your two hands, forming a double fold of linen thread. Then tie off that moisture on fire.
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	 After dislocating the shoulder joint in its place, hold your hand tight against it with all the moisture around to keep it steady until the hairs on it have grown.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	 If you don't have a bandage, use some parchment paper and wrap it tightly around the affected area to hold still.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	 Then wrap it tightly with strong thread around the affected area in a circle like you would for stitches, and apply oil, moisture, and honey to hold it tight.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 And do what you did with the bandage, holding your hand tightly against it while the moisture runs out of the wound.
de la piere	 at its base
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	 We have mentioned in this chapter how to extract arrowheads and assemble remedies
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	 And I mentioned the differences between the first aid kit supplies and the medicines, and in which one should be preferred for size.
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	 In the vein
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	 I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	 I say that the base of the vein if it has become inflamed and is causing pain in infancy, then this indicates an imminent burst from the vein.
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	 And I firmly hold them by their base, and gently pull them repeatedly until they separate.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	 and at the bottom of these breaks it separates.
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	 And healing is gentle until they are 4 years old, and it's painful in older ones.
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	 The treatment is gentler for those who have a great stone than for those with the small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to treatment, if it is first to remove the abscess by clipping, so that all of its contents are drained out.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 "The dislocation has never occurred.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	 Then take hold of the vein by its base and bring it down gently to where you want it, if your stone is in front of the vessel and will not move at all.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	 Put your hand between his hands so they can see, and keep them soft against their thighs if he wants to avoid a decline.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	 Then kiss the cheek gently.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 If you feel a vein in your arm, immediately tie it off with a tourniquet.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	 If the needle does not hurt at all or just a slight prick in your arm, then you should loosen the tourniquet and try again with another finger.
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	 And touch its base, kiss it gently, and if you feel one in the groin, where the urethra enters.
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 After that, tie off with your other hand as close to the exit point as possible.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	 Instruct the physician to press down with his left hand over the bladder and instruct him to extend his right hand outwards towards the hip joint at the top of the thigh, and have the other arm hold the skin where you are taking a measurement.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	 After the initial instruction, the specific method follows here:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	 And between which is between the bones and the foundation, do not move at all but in response to the slightest touch of the overlying edge:
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	 and if it is on the base or edge of the foundation, then stretch gently towards its size as much as possible without causing too much damage.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	 with each press when it is either close to or on the surface, so that a force may be applied quickly:
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	 and if there are fractures, or edges or margins.
si est griés a issir;	 if it is dislocated to reset
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 and if there are torn ligaments, which cause severe pain and swelling, return treatment should be sought promptly.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	 When it has fractures or margins, make the stretch larger:
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	 "And if she jumps up while holding onto the tendons that are just like a rope around her head, make sure to hold tightly and prevent it from jumping.
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	 "or you put an instrument gently curved around the head;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	 "and if it's not held tightly enough, then loosen up a little bit while keeping the pressure steady, and don't let go of the rope when you feel the pain from the whiplash.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 "And if there is more than one joint involved, first compress the largest at the base of the bladder and then move to other smaller ones.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 "And if she becomes big, it is advisable to apply more dressing.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	 "There are two things that happen during an injury:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	 "or it may die or the urine will come out uncontrollably;
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	 "but always try to tie tight and avoid tearing or damaging the tendons while you wrap them around in sections.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	 And when you have completed your work, if there is an abscess of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, hold it, and place by its base into wax and oil or heated rose and cold, to soothe the eye.
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 Then rinse off the patient's eye with fresh water gently, without rubbing too hard on it.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "After you remove it and if the wound is clean and dry, then apply a dressing of aloe and dragon's blood to stop any bleeding.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	 And the eyes should be cleansed gently from the wound and corrosion, and frostbites in the bladder, and by doing so maintain the urine, which is usually done without mixing with urine.
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	 And when you enter into the wound and remove the stone, if it remains, if they damage the bladder or urine pores.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then remove the wound of any and all things, and aid in every way that you know, as long as it is healthy.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 And it is advisable to apply all sorts of remedies you give him; tie his lower limbs together with bandages, and gather the medicines near him.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	 His heel is small, and it is located below the knee, wrapped in a bandage, unable to urinate.
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 If you follow the treatment that I've described above, please excuse me for this delay in treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I've tried it before.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	 You should divide the angle into three equal parts, as shown here:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	 Then insert it into the vagina of the patient, if he is unable to urinate because of the bandage.
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	 Then apply the ointment gently in the vagina while keeping him from urinating for as long as necessary at the bottom.
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	 And take the ointment to your hand gradually and gradually until you have finished treating another area of his body.
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 If he urinates at all, press down on the part that is most swollen with the bandage to be applied just inside of his vagina.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	 If a bone is broken, it will cause pain to urinate, and there may be some swelling.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	 and then they will separate the wounds in a way that makes sense to them as a whole.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 As long as it is healing properly.
de la piere des femmes	 Of the last women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	 If a bone is in the head of a woman or doesn't happen at all, if it causes pain and is prevented by three things
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	 The first thing is that the woman is still virgin
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	 And the second one is finding a well-behaved woman who has not had intercourse before marriage.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	 The third one is that if they cannot find a virgin by any other means, such as by hand.
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	 And the fourth way is that the first of the woman is sharper than the first of man because it should be done with more force, and great fear arises. It is necessary to do so if you are willing to acquire a skilled mistress, without whom there will not succeed, as long as you don't take advantage;
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	 And present a skilled mistress in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of that art, and commands you to do what she commands for her interrogation.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	 And look well at how virgin this woman is.
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	 Unless he wants to deceive him or the ground, and ask for the truth.
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 And if she truly wants to convince him, then constrain his mouth or ground and recommend that he spit in her face, and want and press his hand steadily towards the hole.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	 She moves her leg from side to side as much as she can go in and out of the vein all the way down to its root.
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	 Then, apply it at the base of the thigh against a rough surface where it will feel most tender and sensitive in that area.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	 And do not move his other leg or foot over the sore place or down to its root, but rather gently apply first aid there.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	 Then, you should apply pressure on the thigh as much as it can cover the wound and keep the pressure until the sore place stops bleeding. And various methods of wounds are:
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 This means small and large, tight and loose, long and round, all kinds of pressure can be used to stop bleeding.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 "When knowing the issue (of the dislocation).
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And if you apply cold compress on the swollen area and tie it in place for one hour until it stops bleeding.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	 After consulting your previous instructions regarding the extraction of the arrow, you must proceed with the procedure even if the base is severed and veins are ruptured.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	 And if the vein is damaged during this procedure, seal the wound by applying powder to the entry and exit points of the vessel in order to prevent further bleeding.
puis cure la plaie.	 After performing the procedure, treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	 "When the heart attack occurs, as soon as possible, even if it is far away, until they are certain of death.
de hernie carnouse	 Hernia carnal
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	 The ram's horn is nothing but a vessel for moisture or milk, which contains the whey.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	 And it is called "sfac", and never properly in the cloth of the whey, unless you take care to make sure that is nothing else.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	 It is between the white sfac and the milk we have mentioned.
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	 And this cannot happen
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	 The generation of this rash will be if it contains impurities, and the matter is expanded
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	 And if it happens to be struck by moisture near the joints, and that moisture has many effects
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	 or it is accompanied by sudden decline in strength, or without redness, or blackness, or aqueous blanching and this happens more.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 These are the signs of a severe dislocation, as it is either white when we have spoken about, or it has redness around its joints, which may indicate that moisture is present throughout.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	 And if it has moisture within its own fabric as well, then the dislocation is accompanied by part of an organ, and therefore people think that there is another injury.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	 And if the moisture is between the skin of the joint and the white portion, then it feels good to the patient.
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 Whenever you see how much moisture is present, that's when it becomes clear whether there are any serious injuries or not.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	 "Once you are inside, judge what is denser.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	 "And when we cure him with fire, make sure his hairs are shaved according to our instructions and the replenishment of his body.
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	 "After washing it gently from its place on top a bit high, then wrap it with a cloth or towel to dry.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	 "Then tie the other end of its strap gently and instruct the minister to tie it around one of the two cords that come from the pulley.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	 "Take the small leather strap and gently pass it through both cords from its end until you reach a point just below the pulley. Then tie the end of the cord around in such a way that it will be white when you pull on it gently as needed.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	 "Then draw out the small cord firmly but gently until it is all drawn out. Then tie the other end and thread up.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	 "And do not scratch or prick at the veins while lying down.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	 And if you use force on it too gently, he will not heal properly.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	 After the dislocation has been treated and your shoulder is reset, if you move it in its new position too soon.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After fixing the other joints with stitches and treating them as you would other wounds, as long as it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	 And if the dislocation was caused by another illness, make sure to apply any necessary treatments for that illness.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	 After applying and removing the cast on both sides of it, you then treat it as we have described in this chapter.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	 And if the dislocation is caused by two different things acting together.
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	 When you've finished the first procedure, then apply a poultice with fresh clean oil to the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 And then apply another poultice of fresh cloth soaked in vinegar and oil, and tie it around the affected area, and cover it with two layers of bandages.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	 Then tie another set of cloth strips in the same pattern and bind them together with stitches at the back of the arms, tying one to the front part above the elbows, and the other to the back part below the elbows.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	 And tie the second set around the two angles, making a loop with the strips of cloth.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	 And do not use the fire cautery in place of a surgical one, and if you choose to perform a delicate cutaneous cautery, you must shave off any hair from the incision site, so that it is clear for inspection by the surgeon.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 If you follow this procedure strictly, prick with an incision near its center;
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	 And in all the ways that you do it, as long as you use every one of them
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	 and make sure they don't touch the vein.
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	 and it will be cured more quickly.
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	 And remember to care for the wounds, and make sure they heal properly.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 And do nothing against that rule, unless you are instructed otherwise, and follow what is said to be done first.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	 And if the treatment causes fear or great pain, do not perform it unless instructed otherwise, and remember that when you know well what we have said is to remove this, if they are causing injury or bleeding.
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	 As you open up the abscess and make the incision through its length,
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	 And if they are wide enough so that their sharp point is exposed.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	 Then apply the cotton over the joint and tie it tightly to prevent any movement of the sharp point remaining, after which you treat the wound as long as it is clean.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	 And the clean cloth does not expose any of its sharp points inside the wound, as long as you use a bandage or instrument designed to treat it appropriately.
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 And let the wound heal completely after 6 weeks or more if necessary, and when it is healed as expected, then you can remove the bandage
de l’aposteme des coions	 Of the veins
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	 And in cases where this procedure causes more fear, I think it's best to leave them.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 "I will tell you about the work of this chapter, its healing measures, incisions, and extractions.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	 "They come in different shapes, some small others large,
et c’est par mout de cas.	 And it is through such cases that they are treated.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	 "It's by applying hot and cold things, which is expanded for some, or striking with blows.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	 "And the hue of the abscess depends on the shape of its surroundings,
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	 "And it does not bring about any pain, and the abscess will die.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 "And through this, the abscess is often frightened and troubled, and its color changes, and it never comes back unless there are arteries or veins to return.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	 "When this is through no artery, if the patient's shoulder is pressed with both hands,
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 And do not move
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	 This vein closure is achieved through the correct positioning of both arms, and properly aligning them with each other.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 And you must hold the eyes steady while cutting it, and remove the scissors from above, and deliver them away from all parts of the vein.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	 If the veins are cut with these characters necessary, if it is convenient to take out the vein and the scissors
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 If there are any vessels close by that may be cut if the vein is severed, then you must remove all of them and return to the correct position.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	 "Si li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier" translates to "If the formation of the vein is at or behind.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis" translates to "And when your wounds are healed...
de l’aposteme des coions	 Of the veins
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	 This is similar to a vein opening with the help of a vein holder, with the relaxation of the fingers, and the eyes must stay steady when doing so.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 And the treatment of this disease should be as described above with great caution and all our efforts to inform you about it, just like what they did before.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	 It is important to let the hair grow long and even on the affected area, then tie it back with string at your fingertips, all along the veins that are visible at the edge of the wound, and make sure they extend well.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	 Then apply a sharp point to cut through the tough tissue deeply on all sides until you reach an artery, as we have described in the extraction of arteries near the temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	 Then put on a needle with two threads if you have one, and bind it to the first point where it has come out of, then tie it tightly to the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	 Then apply a tight bandage along its length according to how long you can reach, and squeeze any protruding blood vessels tightly.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	 After curing the wound as you would with others, if none of them have come to an end,
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	 because then there is no harm done and the veins will grow as they should, if you want to draw them out all at once.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 If none of them are cut without injury and cannot be helped or moved.
de la routure dou syfac	 "The dislocation has occurred.
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	 The muscles of this branch if it is by the section that comes out or extends in the part of the groin, because the intestines descend from that opening to one of the veins.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	 And this route is either by cutting it or extending it, and these two methods lead to different outcomes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	 Or hitting, kicking, beating, or lifting the head back with pain.
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	 And signs when it is by cutting off, if it has little and little, gradually lengthening, and never suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 And it is the buttocks which itch until they reach their front part, because the anus presses on them
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	 "The signs indicate that the dislocation is due to stretching or pulling of the ligaments connecting the joint with one of its bones and can cause sudden pain as it tries to expand within the abdominal wall near the angle.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	 "In no case is it accompanied by bleeding from the intestine and is held in place until swelling causes great pain to occur near the angle.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	 And for these treatments of iron, because it is convenient to escape them
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	 The manner of the operation is that you command or advise the patient to ram his finger into their anus during healing, if he can endure it.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	 And you hold onto your colon between your hands and gently squeeze the buttocks.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	 Then cleanse them thoroughly and shave all the hair of their anus to its length.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	 Then cut away all the loose flesh of their abdomen in accordance with what you have learned to treat a wound, so that it may heal completely.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	 Then wash the skin of their anus as thoroughly as you can, until no filth remains on any part.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	 Then anoint both your fingers with what you learned from the anus skin, between the white part which is above the buttocks' flesh and between the second skin, and apart where it ends behind the anus, and between the second skin.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	 and hold tightly to the arm against your chest, with both hands high in front of you
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	 instruct the minister to extend his arm above and remove any item that is attached to it behind
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	 and if you feel any pain or discomfort in your belly button when removing it, do not remove anything else if they tell you to
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	 then take a needle or strong thread made of X fibers, and sew it into the back part of where you removed the button, which is after closing the skin sutures.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	 After removing the buttons, take care to sew up any holes that appear with threads of at least four strands.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	 then tie them together in a cross shape and stitch up the skin sutures from both ends with very strong thread of at least four strands.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	 After pulling out the dislocated shoulder joint and stitching it back together in two parts if possible, so that no veins can enter or exit through these openings.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	 And gently straighten the joint as you do with the second one, after which you leave it to heal from the inside.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	 After everything else is done, proceed to round off how it should look like.
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	 Then cut the part that was injured from the flesh of the joint as close to itself as possible, and then remove it if you have not corrected it or repositioned it properly.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 And after all of this, apply a bandage soaked in oil and put the joint back together if you have not corrected or repositioned it properly.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	 "And no one has been burned since we said so after incision due to doubt of improvement in healing.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	 Because this happens often, leave it as is until healing is complete;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	 If the patient complains of pain, use a hot compress and place it on where we have told you to hold onto until healing is complete.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After treating another wound perfectly well
de hernie carnouse	 Hernia carnal
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	 In this vein there is no one who can make a treatment using iron or fire.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	 The previous one said that it was done in the same way as tearing off a bandage, after cutting through them gently.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	 After doing this to him, treat the abscess that was caused by it, while holding his hand steady.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And after treating it like we have done before, so long as they are firm and steady.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	 No fracture occurs when you follow what I said, and open the wounds gently.
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	 And do not remove any internal organs unless it is necessary, and if you must, quickly repair all damage.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	 If the pain becomes too much in this part, whether it be from a wound or syphilis, so long as they are still within.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	 The swelling of the sack is resolved like that which we have described before, it will be firm and steady.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	 "And its treatment is by cautery as we have mentioned earlier.
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	 "It can never be treated with fire in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	 "And it is that the arrow strikes between your hands and you hold down its lower part firmly with three fingers.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	 "And then extract the sinew that is under the skin and let it go loose but hold its lower part with the other finger.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	 "And press on the abdomen and count the two fingers that are visible through the sinew to the upper part of the thumb, then count one and another.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	 "Then extract the thumb and do not touch with sinew or extend any other part, as I told you in the treatment of the intestines' sinew.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 "And then treat it by cautery like wounds are treated.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you prick at the hairs if there is a wound to heal completely as long as it exists
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	 The heat cure is painful and there's no appearance in the process, and the sores are treated with care in this way, and more people get better.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	 Of the relaxation of the hair on the arms
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	 Many times it occurs on the limbs of the bones, as they are softened by moisture, and is clear to see.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	 And it worsens when you try to cure it by gently stroking the affected area with a soft cloth.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	 Then put on two plasters, and try to see clearly by removing the softened cloth from time to time.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	 And between the plasters hold tight as for other wounds until it is healed and ceases pain.
dou chastrement	 In anguish
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	 Diseases which are mentioned in our law I hope you understand that I cannot speak about them here.
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	 And no need for two ways
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	 One way is that you look at it and ask it questions when asked, and in doing so provide its cure.
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 And the other, for whom we have sometimes seen worse because of their actions and those of a dog and sheep and others alike.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	 These methods are performed in two ways
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 By pulling or pushing.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	 In the method we do by traction, let us be gentle with warm water as long as they remain soft and pliable until;
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 Then rinse under cold running water while holding them gently in your hand so that you no longer feel the heat.
Du chastrement de taille:	 The process of cutting.
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	 It is important to shave the area well, and press them into your hand firmly as you hold them steady, then bind them in place with adhesive tape around each corner, so that when they are completely dry.
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	 And leave any remaining bits of stubble and the fine ones which are near to the roots;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	 And this manner of torture is done with the same effect as that which is done by pulling out, because in pulling out nothing is removed from the bone through which it moves to get out.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 Then treat the wound as much as possible.
des hermofrodites	 disfigurements
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	 Hermofredie is done in two ways
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 One way of doing it is to shave between the second and third fingers as closely as possible like how a woman's body hair would be shaped if she had any, except never cutting her urethra
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 The other way is when it appears as women, with two breasts instead of testicles
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	 And the cure for the pain and inflammation is to apply cold compresses as well as other treatments.
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 The second way involves using alcohol wipes on the skin of the finger where it entered, but there is no treatment for that
de la tentigene	 The tongue
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	 The splinter is lodged in such a place that it's too close to see;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 "And no woman has as much strength with one hand, this is a cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	 It's important to remove any excess fluid from the bandage using your hand or another object, and apply it gently.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And do not let them bleed too much so that bleeding does not occur further, and the other treatment until it is healed.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 And another herb that is in the mouth of the mare, and its application, and by chance it will occur, according to which they called it "cow disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If it is convenient for you to apply this treatment as we have suggested earlier, then please proceed with the incision until everything is in order.
de erratique	 Itch
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	 Erraticity is when a woman's nature is not perceived as it should be, or if she becomes upset.
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	 And by nature at birth, or illness that comes upon her, it is so.
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	 Or through a sudden shock, or by a subtle blow, it is caused by the mare, the chest, and so on, wherever.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	 "And prevent conception,
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 "and to know about it through the experience of life.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If his testicles are swollen and painful, if he is in need of treatment for two days or more.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	 "If you are a skilled surgeon, and you perform surgery with great precision; then hold steady your hands and eyes:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	 "with both your fingers together, holding his head on your lap, extending his legs;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	 "Then the skilled surgeon will cut into them as quickly and carefully as possible, until he has made an incision that reaches both ends of each vein;
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 "Then he will sew it up with thread and oil, placing the stitches on each side of the incision; and then place him back onto his chest, so that no one can see or understand.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 And it is difficult to breathe, if you cover your nose with a soft cloth like a blindfold.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	 "If their veins are too small, if they break during the process;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	 "then give them medicines to staunch the bleeding and stop the flow of blood as quickly as possible,
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	 "Apply a plaster of quicklime if it cannot stay put.
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	 "And so make the bandage tight with linen cloth.
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Then apply other remedies as much as you can for how long it is sane to stay put.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 And when the abscess comes to a head, if it is convenient to cover according to this manner, then you should increase your strength and exertion.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 Because the incision that is in the arm must not be touched
des emorroides	 hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	 "In wounds that are not easily treatable, and when old ones become difficult to treat.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 "And we have already mentioned in the division of similar things, signs, and I will say that which is due treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 "The hemorrhoids should be tightened when they are swollen in the morning and do not feel when pressed, unless it is cured with fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those who have hemorrhoids at the mouth cannot be felt, those are unable to heal.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	 "It is advisable to put the patient in a cold place first, and then apply warm compresses and poultices, and powder for restraining wounds if there are any, especially those of dragons and smoke, and similar things.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	 "Then put the patient in lukewarm water first, then into very cold water.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 And he makes himself a poultice of sumac and sour orange peels and green apples and similar things, and then applies some oatmeal mixed with honey to his back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if they are itchy, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	 If not, he puts poultice on the back and holds them steady so they don't bleed.
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 Then he applies liniment made from the juice of banana or ginger mixed with wine to the sore spot.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And when the abscess heals and is no longer painfull
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	 and those that are called 'albathirs' are red and resemble the head of an ox in shape, if it is convenient to cover with something like what I have described.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then he applies a poultice until it heals.
des apostemes de la marris	 "The cuts made by this procedure are made from steel.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 "These are the same ways that abscesses heal, whether they're deep or superficial, fistulae, hemorrhoids, and cuts made into stones, as well as other illnesses I mentioned in my previous statement.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	 It is convenient that I do in this treatise the operation of making an incision when it comes to the marriage, which only cuts deep into the abscess.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 "And when you see the swelling of fire, look for where the arteries are and begin to cool it down gently, and if it turns red, you should stop seeing.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	 "But do not hold your breath as long as the pain persists.
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	 "Then put one hand over each vein and cover your nose to prevent it from getting into your eyes.
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	 "And spread out his limbs, put both hands over his groin and tie them well with a cloth;
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	 "Then stretch him onto his right side and apply a strip of cloth over the mouth to prevent choking.
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	 "When you see the instrument being applied, make sure to check how deep it goes into his mouth so that if it doesn't stop moving after being used, and he isn't strangled.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	 And when it comes to dislocations, if the limbs are stretched out, then they cannot move freely.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 To align the instrument and straighten it properly
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	 And when one takes hold of the abscess with a curved needle, if that is done skillfully, they can easily open.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	 And when the bowstring is tied and one wants to remove it from a moist wound with oil that has been dried out or olive oil, they should:
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	 Put the bandage firmly against the wound from above and secure it with clean, dry gauze that is tightly pressed or burned to remove any excess moisture.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then apply a compress after every two hours as needed until the bleeding stops.
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	 Do not remove the bandage and wound with cold compresses or roots from the liver unless they are burned to a crisp.
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 Reinsert
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 "And if the wound is healed but you still feel heat, then be sure to apply a cool compress as we have suggested in our previous instructions.
de l’enfantement	 "Instruction for infants.
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	 The physician first examines the body to understand its natural shape and signs. He also looks at how she is pressing her back
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	 unless he has had a previous operation
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	 when the child's body shape is according to its natural form, and also according to his head, as well as the second line in general.
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	 And when you see these signs, it's best to gently press on her belly so that he defecates quickly.
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	 because when he descends upon his head and is accompanied by the second line with him, and from there it purges out its impurities through a good purification.
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 And that which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	 Because it comes on no part of the body, and over the buttocks or joints, and hands, or at his belly, or else, and is converted by chance to its base, and by other bad things.
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 "If you treat her gently with care and respect in all these matters, I will show you everything that must be done to help her.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	 "If a man's head is hurt from an accident and he becomes very young in age or has weaknesses of the mind if it happens to be on his back when they are sitting, then women hold him.
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	 "And the oil in his veins or any other grease is burned off and a vein is torn between its two small parts due to this.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	 "And if it becomes inflamed until the moisture that has been flowing in runs out completely;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	 "And the belly of the woman until it becomes inflamed and if it does not become inflamed then the female should massage her with oil to soften the veins or arteries;
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	 "Then they put her down gently on a bed and nurse her for as long as she lives.
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 "Now attend.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	 And if they are separated, gently pull them apart slowly and gradually
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	 If they cannot enter together, let the woman sit on a pillow or lift her feet.
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	 Then put them down gently and support the woman while she sits down so that she does not fall from sitting up.
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 And if the hands cannot enter together and are separated by a gap in front of which there is nothing to support them, then hold the baby tightly while supporting their hands so they do not fall apart.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 "The child has suffered a dislocation at its ankle.
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	 When his feet come together again and you wish to lift him up
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	 And then gently lift him up slowly until he is sitting upright.
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 Then straighten his legs and extend them slowly and gradually.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	 If he wants to stand up or sit down quickly, support him while keeping in mind the conditions of his condition.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 If you push, you must endure
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	 "And if it is not well positioned as we have mentioned, repeat the action gently and gradually aligning with natural body position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	 "When it is light.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	 And if it does not come as we have experienced and says: "Push harder," and pulls the skin taut, and strains the muscles, and breaks everything in half.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	 And applies to the woman's body tightly and burns it until it is white as snow from the roots of her eyelashes.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	 And when she is moist, he makes a mirror collar, puts it on, and leaves it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 Then makes her lie still, then tightens the eyelids and nose, and lightly pries open the belly, as she now feels a sudden urge.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	 The child has dislocated its arm/shoulder
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	 When he feels it coming in this way, he puts his hands on her head gently and gently.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	 Then closes the eyes tightly, pulls back the eyelid skin, and lies down flat.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	 And place his hands gently and gently, then let him hold them tight against the belly, and the doctor will feel for any signs of sores as long as they remain visible.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	 And if he closes his eyes, and if you touch his foot or toes and feel for any signs of sores, then place your hands back down.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	 And let the child gently and gently;
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 Instruct the woman to remain still as long as he closes his eyes.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	 The child has dislocated one arm out of joint
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	 I advise removing the hand
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	 And if you can't hold it still, and if she moves her arm, then
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	 If she doesn't move them properly when you try to straighten the leg, then
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	 Then instruct the midwife with whom you are acquainted.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	 And if she does not move in time to lift her arm and lower it, then try to straighten out the limb by force.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 And when you say "here comes the first sentence to translate", it means that this line should be translated next:
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	 The child was separated from its mother's side and held with both hands stretched out
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	 It is advisable for him to gently move his hand back and forth slowly.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	 And when the eye begins to bleed due to inflammation or injury as we have said before, then he should gently move it back and forth slowly.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	 And when you have done that, if the patient lies prone on a bed or couch, tell him to gently move his eyes slowly while lying flat.
et la fai esternuer.	 Finish it off by telling them to finish gently and calmly.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	 Of the above method for everything else
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	 When he comes here in this manner for the second time, if one of his joints is still loose or tender despite that, as long as moisture is seen.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	 And if he feels pressure on his face and neck when the bandage is tightened even though it should not be, he will move away.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	 After having put it on securely as you can, command her to take care of herself once:
adonques si istra legierement.	 If gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	 of the dislocation
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	 Wounds that heal many times and never in three or two days;
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	 And it is not a thing to be extracted unless necessary.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	 Unless they are an extraction of choice and do not live by themselves.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	 I understand that there may be many, and they will be treated with the same remedy as you apply it to the vein.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 And never come naturally like all under us unless we have said so;
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	 If they are very painful, as the cure that is used and done in a subtle way, gently but quickly do what she does;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 And ensure that it is useful to be done with good treatment.
de plusors enfans	 more children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	 No dislocation shall happen when the marriage is made on the first day or second day or third day or fourth day or fifth day or sixth day or seventh day, but if it happens to be on the fifteenth day and beyond then there shall be a dislocation.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 If that occurs as described here.
de l’enfant mort	 of a dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	 When you treat a woman who has just given birth or is pregnant, as I mentioned in the previous part of this chapter, and it doesn't work anymore, then you are required to perform an extraction with forceps.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	 If you determine that the woman is healthy and has no accidents or history of death,
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	 if the woman sits with her back straight, and her arms bent down and legs lifted.
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	 And apply two sheets to cover her belly if she is lying in bed if not treated for the removal of the placenta.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	 After spitting out a mouthful of the driest and coarsest oil with garlic, salt, and pepper, take your hands from these oils and seasonings.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	 After gently rubbing in the lighter oil, take it out and rub with the coarse oil until both are even. Then press on your forehead as you would to wake yourself up.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	 If the sores are on his eyelids or nose, forehead, cheeks, mustache, temples, or near the eyes, and they itch to scratch, take your finger nails and gently touch them.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	 And it is advisable that he scratch the sore with his right hand and put the corner of his handkerchief between his left two fingers, gently rubbing the sore until it becomes white.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 And this is how you do it
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	 Then try another remedy, or the third one if they work better.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 Then gently move it from side to side, pressing and holding as you do.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	 If one part becomes detached or slips from its place, hold the other side firm and treat the separated part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 If it doesn't work at all or if you find that one of them is higher than the other, continue using this remedy until you are sure it has been completely done.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	 If one hand comes in front of the other and cannot be pulled back by the thumb, as long as you hold it tightly.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 Then put on the joint where there is a sprain or an injury to your thumb and continue with the other hand after that.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	 "And if the dislocated child is large and it comes out in one piece, or if there's a serious injury, make sure you apply pressure between your fingers and press down on the shoulder.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	 "Or use an instrument called 'almidach', which is used to apply pressure when there's bleeding, or after surgery.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	 "And if the child naturally loses its grip in one piece, then...
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	 "...then tie the arm to something strong and press down on it forcefully if there's bleeding or an injury.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	 "If that doesn't work then try cutting off circulation by applying pressure directly above the heart to stop the bleeding.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 "...if it is around the belly or the chest, then press as hard as you can until the bleeding stops.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	 And if they prick at their base lightly, then it will be an irritation to the mouth of the mare
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	 And if it is dislocated in the belly or thigh, then make sure you pull it out with both hands.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	 Keep the belly or thigh dry so that moisture does not worsen it.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	 And if the other member is dislocated and its arm cannot support it from falling to one side, then tie a piece of cloth over the mouth so that it does not fall.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	 Then go on to step two or three depending on severity.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	 And the mouth of the patient is held with something soft so that it does not move if necessary to keep it moist and wet.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 It nourishes them gently, soothingly moist and wet.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	 And the swelling is held down by its chest wall, and it should lie flat if you have advised to do so.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 "And if it is not held steady by anything at all, let it stay still.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	 Once you have done this, treat the patient as we instructed in our previous instructions.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 And when the bleeding stops, if there is any restraint left on it, and the patient is treated with other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	 And a woman was in her belly when she had given birth, then she gave another to that one, and refused others.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	 After the patient was taken away on the stretcher, he began to breathe heavily
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	 I called for help and thought about it quickly but could not hold back the pain.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	 I put on a strong adhesive bandage, wrapped around an arm, then after a few moments, some others came
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	 I wiped my mouth, as there was nothing inside it.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	 If I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	 I wanted to remove the pain, but while holding his hands open as much as possible;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	 And when she had removed it gently and with a little bit of bone from above.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 But I do not remember this chapter saying that when the master is about to remove a foreign object, he should give help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	 "Bring the arm back to its place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	 After this comes the shape of pressure, where you lose the books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	 And when it has lost its second lien, it is then separated.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	 Anywhere, whether they are more subtle or restrictive, do whatever you please.
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	 And if the mouth is of a fine kind and straight, it must be trimmed so that there are no long branches or excess flesh around.
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	 And if the limbs are of a certain firmness from this kind of fur that is firm on one side and the other, half palm or more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 And if you pull them out by the mouth as in opening up their ears, they will come out.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	 Another form to its more subtle and lighter kind may be made of the fur or skin around it according to how fine the tendons are.
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	 And if you pull out two joints, like this, from half palm long and two palms wide.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	 And when you open up the instrument in front of her to see it, if she is holding on tightly and lying down, then pull out two joints so they are together as a bundle from half palm long and both palms wide. Tie its tail between her thighs and stretch your legs over, and then pull out the two joints and tie them together at the instrument's head;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 Upon taking your instrument, if you have done so in the manner that we have seen, until she sees it as we see
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	 The instrument is sharp and numerous.
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	 And when you look at the instrument closely, it becomes sharper and higher for its quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	 If you did not use this instrument when it was necessary, then there would be no escape from the necessity.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	 When the second line is set in place if you command to the patient that he retract his eyelid and then gently close it, hold your hands at the mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 If she moves like this, it's good
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	 If not, prick gently and make sure that you don't hurt her eyelid or nose.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	 All these herbs, or none of them should be cooked or heated in any way.
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	 "Then, hold a rope or someone to pull gently on the other end of it as you speak into their mouth, and keep your tongue from touching the lips.
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 And then straighten it out when we have said so.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	 If she lets go of her tongue prematurely
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	 And after this treatment has been done, do not let go unless the patient moves their arm to wash it with oil or wipe off sweat, and then bathe it in water.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	 And when they have lost their hair completely, if the first and second hairs continue to grow steadily, as long as the pores of the skin do not open.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	 But it is better to move gently towards both sides and front, and then stop.
si venra et se desaerdra.	 And if they come loose
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	 And the lips of the mouth should be kept close as we have said that the treatment will straighten it out and steam the herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	 "And if she does not obey what we have said, then guard her with your strength.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	 "And when it is in the mouth of the wife, you should tie its four corners with thread.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	 "If she says yes and returns [or 'is willing'], then come forward to marry her.
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 "However, if she is pregnant or has a bad smell in the stomach and head, and is bleeding from an injury.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	 "If it suits to use fumigation for [unclear], then do so:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	 "None of the ancients have tried fumigations with dry figs and raisins.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	 The form of the instrument when you are to fumigate the woman is such that it holds tightly the flowers and the second part, if this one is like this.
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	 "And it is like seeing a snake, you should put your hand over the fire to touch its head gently in its nature and hold widely held by the fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 "And if fumigations are done on charcoal, let it burn until it is finished, then start another one.
de percier lou fondement	 To find or examine thoroughly
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	 The first child was born with a defect where it cannot move at all.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	 When giving the patient an enema to clean their anus, make sure they do not move around too much and gently guide them so that it does not touch.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then, apply a poultice made of wine and oil to the wound until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	 And if you doubt that he will not move, tie a rope around him and let go of his hands, so that he does not try to move as long as the eyes are closed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	 And no matter how many times this happens in an abscess or incision.
si covient coper celui soudement:	 When opening a vein suddenly
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	 If you are going to cauterize it, if like we have said about the fire of the arrow.
de la fistule dou fondement	 of the fistula from the bottom
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	 Fistulas that occur due to the base are draining, and those from the outside of it come out too quickly or in multiples.
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	 And when these fistulas are young and tender, then you must operate gently with a small incision or probe, and no matter how many times they occur.
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 "When a wound is extracted, there may be bleeding or pus; therefore it must be treated carefully.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	 If the fistulas pierce the vein and cause the loss of blood from the site.
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	 And they pass through the connection between the thigh bone and the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	 And if it is located at its base, do not worry;
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 If you prick the base or bottom of the fistula, use a thin needle made from iron or steel to insert it when there is no tortuousness.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	 If there is tortuousness, if you prick with a fine needle or horsehair until the tension or hair feels to your touch.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	 And if it is not torn, and bleeding does not occur, as we have stated.
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	 "I can't find anything to translate next.
si te haste dou curer.	 If you have a fever, please seek medical attention.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	 And when the fistula is present in the vein or channel of urine, if it jumps to urine and cannot be cured by medicine alone.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	 When the skin is perforated through the incision, if it is pierced at its base
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	 If there was no bleeding and the pain disappeared immediately, if it is because of injury, then do not bleed excessively, as this may cause further damage.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 And in these fistulas that persist there is no cure to be found, and the matter worsens as they continue to grow.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	 In those that do not heal and are persistent there is hope for healing through surgery if you have experienced this, as we know the pain between your hands and its base.
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	 And let his legs grow down to his crotch, and bring his crotch close to his belly.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 "Take shelter under an awning or tent if you encounter a difficult path, as long as you are patient until it is passed.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	 "If the hairs at their base are pricked, make sure to hold your fingers steady as they do not move until they grow.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	 "Or if you sense that there is a difference between the surgeon's hand and the knife, make sure to be cautious as you hold it.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 "If not done properly, [it] cannot heal.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	 "Sometimes it can be difficult to do well at all, but that's the point;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	 "And if you make it so, [it] can be healed with a subtle cauterization according to the size of the fistula.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	 "And when you have done all that in the fistula, as long as it stays put at its base;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	 And do this twice or three times until you ensure that these hairs are evenly trimmed to resemble a quill of an arrow.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 And then apply the poultice ointment while holding tightly onto these hairs until they bleed, and also extract the arrowhead as soon as it breaks through.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 "If he is sane, it will do.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	 Otherwise, nothing can be done.
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	 and hold it between your teeth, and do not bite down on anything that is firmly in place, and put an extensive covering of thread or cloth over the fistula to cover it up.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	 if you are starting a fistula and want to stop it before it reaches the outside, then apply the cautery after it has stopped growing into the cloth.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	 And deliver the tent as well.
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 And make sure that these hairs are evenly trimmed to resemble a quill of an arrow, and they will no longer be visible.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	 "And if there's a vein that isn't visible or the painkiller is applied incorrectly.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	 The fire cautery consists of two parts
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	 to know how to treat burns that are attached and those with moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	 Then apply treatment for blisters or bruises until the burn has completely healed and remove any remaining charred skin.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 Then treat burns caused by scorching heat with cool compresses and apply dry dressings.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	 When restored, he will remain straight
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	 If the fistula comes out of its proper place and is held down by both cords, it will cease to cause any trouble or concern.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	 If you suspect a dislocation and there is no relief of discomfort or injury through the first method, apply one of the following methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	 If you use fire cautery as advised or try other treatments like first aid measures or repositioning.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	 Do not apply excessive pressure that could damage the base of the skin, gently ease off any tension and allow the skin to heal naturally.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	 "And then the treatment begins.
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	 "Or if you use a bandage and apply it to the base of her head, covering it gently or using some other instrument pointed out.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	 "And then apply pressure firmly over the wound as much as possible;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	 "Then try to restore the wound and stop the fistula in its base.
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If it is less severe, do not worry too much;
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	 "And no time will pass until the fistula heals in this manner.
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 "When you apply a bandage to the fistula and it is firmly pressed against its base, if one uses a bandage covered in this manner as described.
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	 And when puncturing in this way, and to pierce the fistula all along it until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	 "If the fistula is located at its base, and you touch it with a finger or another part of your hand, then pull out that same finger.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	 "And tie the right arm to the left leg, and hold them together with a cord or string.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	 "And keep them tied up all the time as long as the hairs grow evenly between two sides.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 "Then heal the wound while it is open and clean.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	 If the fistula does not break off completely, if you pierce it in all ways as described, do not worry
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when doing so, make sure to treat the wound properly afterwards to ensure it remains healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	 "This fistula from a soft spongy substance that has been made into a lump or a mass.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 "And the other side is not like this one in any way because it cannot be tied up as well or in the same manner.
des emorroydes	 hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	 "The eyes may be different ways:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	 "Or they may be sunken into the base like grains of lead and in little and big amounts as well as more or less, with the base and the top of it.
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	 "Those who are freed if they have little moisture, or touch the base of a vein, or prick an abscess, and turn blue in their corners;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	 "The treatment for those who have freed the foundation: instruct them to let their hairs grow long and even, as they do not move when cut;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	 "If you feel pain or tightness in your veins: prick the roots of your hairs to release tension.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	 "And if their hairs cannot hold due to moisture: if they prick near the elbow, or on the hand, or from any part of the body.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	 "And extract those hairs and powder them with ashes that are used in the fire cautery;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	 "Or burn them if you do the same procedure as described by the medical treatise.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	 "The joints of the limbs are unable to move if they encounter a sharp object while trying to straighten themselves.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	 "If the hairs cannot be parted and the fingers are firmly pressed down on their base, then it is a light treatment.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 "And if you use them to cut or tie laces, and treat it like we said before, until it is healed, and do not make a cut by force.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	 "If you should repair the wound in this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	 "Take the finger and hold it in a loop around another needle, then take the thread from there to make a knot on top of one end, and turn both ends under the other needle. If you have enough thread, tie them securely.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	 "Securely tie the threads together. Then pull out the needle and make sure all of them are tied tightly.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	 Then apply oil or grease to the base of it, and press down on it, and command the patient that when they rest
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then let it stay until it is dry, and once it is healed if the wounds are treated properly, as long as it is sound
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	 "Dry thoroughly before using any material or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	 Often there is bleeding from the bowels due to internal constriction; and when illness is old and treatment does not work
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	 If you wish to reset at the joint's end where there may be friction or rubbing against something hard that would cause moisture;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	 Then treat it until it is sound, as necessary.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	 And if the reset does not hold, if you continue to force it too hard while holding something else firmly on your hand, until it is sound and dry.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat it until it is sound.
dou fremit	 The first sentence of the medieval medical treatise
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	 A flea is a small creature that often makes its home on the skin, and will certainly bite.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 And whenever they break, it causes death by stabbing through all over the body, in every place where there is a hand that holds.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	 And the treatment should involve taking a cord of sinew from an ox's leg, or a tough vine, and putting it around the wound as tight as you can make it turn.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 After tightening the cord tightly around the wound and holding it in place for as long as you can, then cut off your hand with a sharp knife to release the flesh from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	 And if so, take a cure from iron or thorn according to this method and gently rub it against the flea; be cautious and keep rubbing until
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	 Do not forget that both hands must hold tightly at this point, and press firmly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	 And if you see a fire doctor present, follow his instructions as they come.
de la forme dou clistere	 of the fire cautery
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	 Do not ever apply silver or iron, or from head to toe, or make a full incision without reason or cause.
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	 And never do anything with these means small ones, for those who are accustomed to them
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	 And when treating infants who are weak and in great pain, the treatment is also painful.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	 The form of fire cautery for small and large wounds should be as follows:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	 and when the veins are bound together as you see it or cut through them in any direction.
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	 And if one of the ribs is broken off, and then the other
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	 And if either of the ribs is cut off completely or pierced through with a needle, and you pierce all the small veins and put them into the belly of a calf or sheep, and sew up any opening in one rib, then close it as best you can, but leave an opening on the other side.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	 And when the medicines are done, if the thread is held tightly by a strong needle, then you seal it with glue.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 This is how the circle forms.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	 And if the medicines are neither too hot nor too cold, and you anoint them with oil or any other substance, then bind them lightly.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	 Here is the translation: "Then he places his two hands together as tightly as possible, and gently pulls on the hair of each leg, until it is pulled taut, after which he ties a knot.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 "If he stays awake for an entire night, that will be even more beneficial.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And with a bellyache disorder and the medicine hastens to heal if the pain is severe enough.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	 "Or if the dislocation occurs at or near a joint, whether it's on the arm or leg, but is done with as little force as necessary for an infant.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 "And this is how to perform a subtle dislocation that holds onto the skin only:
des plaies	 wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	 "In previous chapters, I have discussed the treatment of wounds.
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	 "We will discuss the treatments for hands and feet in a moment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	 "Wounds vary depending on how they are made, and depending on the type of wound or injury that has been sustained.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	 "The wounds are treated by cutting into the heel, and the toes and fingers, or the arm or leg, depending on what is needed.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	 "The incision should be made along the line of the ribs if it is on the chest or stomach, or at the top of the shoulder blade, or near the belly button, and similar parts.
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 "I will tell you how to treat that kind of wound, and explain the simple treatments for wounds on the shoulders because they are common.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	 "I tell you that if a simple wound comes from the chest or shoulder and doesn't bleed immediately, then hold tight to the base of it while applying pressure over the affected area until the bleeding stops.
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	 "If you're trying to treat a wound on the forehead and it comes from a nearby part of the body, then apply pressure over that area.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 "Also make sure they have plenty of wine and large pieces of meat.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	 And if it is not healed quickly, whether from injury or disease, then no wine should be drunk nor any other drink taken.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	 And after the wound has been cauterized and the abscess opened, only apply a poultice of oil or wine.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	 If there is no abscess to be opened, if the wound has been thoroughly cleansed with its own pus and it's not being infected by air or powder, I will say a little bit later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the arrows have been removed, so that any wounds may heal quickly and completely.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	 "If the wound is large like a sword cut and similar things, and the veins cannot be tied together with stitches, if they are bound by glue or stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	 If the wound is discovered in bone, quick and easy to remove with just a bit of care if necessary.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 After healing the wound with medicine, restore strength in the flesh and command the patient to eat large portions of meat, as tested and proven useful for such cases; and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	 And if you burn or frostbite, it won't hurt to the bone, unless the frostbite is total, and the patient will recover in time.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	 And if there is an artery or vein injured without cutting into it, and the patient cannot stop bleeding with medical means alone, then you must cut off what bleeds.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 If not done properly, the cautery can cause harm.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	 And if the wounds are small and simple, then light treatment is enough.
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	 Make sure you remove any powder that may remain after cleansing it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	 The method of removing the powder is as follows:
pren encens une partie;	 Take a part of incense.
sanc de dragon II parties;	 Cut off two parts from Dragon II.
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	 Hold the wound tightly for as long as it can be held steady and joined to all its parts.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	 And then let go gently, if she doesn't fall
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 Because the medicine is not strong enough
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	 And once alone this has been done when there is no oil or fire the wound has not healed
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	 And if it moves the wound, especially when this powder comes in contact with it
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	 But mixed with any digestible ointments or ground wheat and honey that are equal amounts, until the wound is healed.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then continue other treatments as needed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	 Then if the splinter of bone comes with the wound and is small, it can be extracted with tweezers.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 And I will tell you after the fractures are healed.
de la plaie dou col	 from the wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	 If there is no difference between the joint and the other bone, but if the joint part has been cut
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	 If there is no other injury that needs treatment and nothing else to restrain it, then let the cure go on without anything restraining.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	 "Do not apply any ointment to the wound, as its cold nature prevents heat circulation and continues with the heart, which is the largest member;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 "If you have such medicine available in the form of an oily ointment and some cold water, apply it gently to soothe wounds as mentioned before;
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And if the wound is large with many bandages, then the treatment until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	 "If the wound is superficial and bleeds easily at the point of injury;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	 "And if the artery appears torn or damaged, and bleeding occurs, then you must make a tourniquet;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	 "And if the trachea is torn or damaged and breathing becomes restricted, keep it held while moving to prevent choking;
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	 "Then hold the tourniquet until medical help arrives and leave no gaps in treatment to prevent loss of life;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	 "The wound is pressed upon the bone if it pierces.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	 "If there is bone-piercing, the wound should be cauterized immediately to prevent further bleeding and damage.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 "The wound is fresh if powder upon the powder I have spoken.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	 "And if there are fistula or abscesses, as I said earlier in my treatise.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	 "The wound from the lance or from a blow.
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	 "If it's a lance or a dagger wound and the wound is full-length, you should look for the arrow/dagger to help in healing.
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	 "If the wound is mortal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	 "If the wound is not full-length and fresh throughout its entirety, do not apply powder immediately but wait until you have made preparations for powdering to prevent damage and save the limb.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	 "But if it's a contusion attractive, and you hold it steady two times before letting go.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	 "And if it swells with pus from moisture, and you apply a compress to the wound three or four times, depending on how many blisters have formed.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	 "If there is no spasm, do not tremble in any part of your body from pain.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 "And when you see the bone is saved, know that the wound has been treated properly.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 "Treat all other wounds as well while healing occurs.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	 "If it cannot heal and worsens, then there is an abscess forming.
si la cure si com on doit.	 "The treatment as you know how to do.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	 "If the wound is from a spear or arrow, and it's not too deep or on the back, then you can treat as you would normally do.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	 "It swells with pus, burn.
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	 "And if it is small and powdery, and when it gets stuck in the bone, and has caused pain or injury to others, seek help.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	 "If they are not severe enough, if you leave them open for healing, and if the extractions should be performed gently;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 "And other injuries on other parts of the body will occur just like we have mentioned.
dou derrompement dou ventre	 Doubled hip displacement
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	 "The abdominal muscles are large and strong, but tender;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	 "There is no entry into the intestines through any means other than the anus.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	 "The stitching is more painful than a small injury compared to a large one. Because of that we take great pains not to tear the intestines in tearing and ripping.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	 "Because the intestine swells so much that it feels like you are eating fruit, if they enter more deeply, and because of this we must be careful with the small injury, for example we will not sew up the intestine to its place instead of other parts.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	 The second sentence to translate
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	 The abdominal and thoracic cavities are joined in the process of joining the abdominal organs and other skin wounds are common to both types of wounds.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 And all those are more clean with a belly closure and I will say one word and declare it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	 When the wound is small, and no intestine tissue is damaged, and there are no problems with removing it, one of two ways can be taken:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 Either through the incision made by the wound itself as we have described, or because the intestine is swollen from cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	 And when it's cold, try one of these two ways:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	 Moisten a sponge or drip hot water onto the sole of your foot only, or heat it with steam and cold compresses and warm up the intestine as long as it remains swollen.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 "And every time it has happened, there is swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	 And when you see the inflammation departing if moist and wet intestines are burned, because from that point onwards it is extremely painful.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	 And if it cannot be opened even slightly due to the injury in its tool used for cutting off the excess flesh;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	 The first treatment is that it should not be shaved, because otherwise there would be a great necessity and it would happen.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	 It's the instruments for cutting
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 If he strikes at the breast and misses it, then it is like this.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 And when a wound becomes larger and the intestines swell if you remove them according to their natural shape in their own way, then it is better.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	 When the wound is wide and in the lower part of the belly, if it is desired to apply the treatment on its back, put his legs higher than his head.
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	 And if the dislocation is in the lower belly area, it puts pressure on both sides and moves inward towards one of them so that the higher part comes above the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 It is important to treat dislocations with great care and urgency.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	 Small wounds should be bandaged first, then have someone else hold your hand so that it does not move and bind the sides together.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	 This is the common way to suture wounds, and if you are using a needle or more, depending on the size of the wound, leave some space at the base of the wound, then put in a stitch that has a strong thread.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	 Pierce through the layers of skin with two needles that are attached to each other, making sure you pierce only one side at a time and bind together all four sides.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	 "Pierce a vein with two needles of the second kind, and then fasten together the two ends of the wound, and then leave one end open. Then pierce another hole...
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	 "When you have pierced the vein with the first needle, do not stop doing so until all of the wound is closed.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	 "The needles may be small or large, as the smaller ones penetrate right through to the bone and larger ones cannot enter.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	 "It is important that they are fine.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	 "Do not pull the needles out too soon from the skin or bone to avoid them penetrating and tearing the wound before closing it.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	 "Then remove the needles from the hole and cover them with cloth or bandage to hold them in place while the wound is healing.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	 And this manner of tattooing is more convenient in small wounds, because it pierces a needle or II.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	 The second method is common and is that you join the two shoulder blades together with a needle or thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	 And when you have joined these two shoulder blades together and you want to pierce the place where you started, do it in this way so that you can easily pass through.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	 And between these two stitches use a smaller needle.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 This method sews shut and causes one wound in the belly that was three inches long and was a full palm's worth of fat, and it was an internal injury four palms long, and there was an incision in the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I removed his intestine then it took him 14 hours to recover, and he was cured afterwards
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	 And they knew that he would die, but it was a miracle.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	 "And do not touch any part of it, because there is no cure for it, nor are there any medicines.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 "And twice a day apply some honey water until the wound is healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	 "Here are two other ways of suturing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	 "Take the needle and sew around where it was broken.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	 "If it has been pierced through both sides of the bone, if you pierce or pass near another point on the other side.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 "The thought behind this stitching is that you stitch in the same way as they do for fur coats, and leave a space on one side so it can be pulled all the way through.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	 "The second way of stitching is to join them as if you are joining two natural pieces together. You pull one end over the other and stitch it.
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	 "Pierce gently or carefully around its circumference, leaving some of it untouched.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	 "Then twist the arrowhead and pierce through to the densest part where the flesh meets bone, leaving some of it untouched.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	 "After piercing through to the densest part where flesh meets bone in one of the others, pierce the other side as well.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 "And that is how you dress and repair it more commonly.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	 "When you pass through this passage, no one can confirm or deny what must be done to the belly. It may be stitched with two arrows.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	 "One should remove one arrowhead from one side and the other from the other, in a manner similar to how tailors mend clothes.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 "And when you sew through the belly, it should be stitched more tightly than any other part of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	 The wounds are of a similar nature to those of other injuries.
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	 And it is that when you touch the fresh wound to its full extent, if you remove the flesh and skin too.
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	 Then sprinkle with a clean cloth while holding it steady to remove any remaining flesh that may still be present as long as the wound is covered.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	 And wash them well and thoroughly the wounds themselves and the mirrors.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then treat the wound as you would other injuries while it is healing.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 And if you do not have any medicine, then apply the same methods as above, continuing to cleanse and change bandages twice until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	 But in this case you do not have any other medicine available at all for these simple wounds;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	 And if you suspect that the pain is affecting both the principal joints, it may be wise to gently apply heat or ice and move them slowly.
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	 And if the pain or injury worsens over time, and frequent vomiting occurs, especially if it is from alcohol poisoning, and more specifically if it comes to the intestines.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 And when dealing with the large intestine, it's even easier to treat than treating the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The small intestine is called the "young one" and cannot heal once it has been ruptured, and it's because of its proximity to the veins that this occurs, as well as by the subtlety of all the bowels, and approaching her nature near the heart.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	 If a vein in the arm is ruptured and reset back into place as quickly as possible, while it's fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	 And if it is very swollen and turning black or blue, you should try to lie the limb that has turned black, as this can lead to veins and arteries becoming damaged.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 "Between the lesion and the healthy tissue, place the dislocated parts on a sterile pad to prevent further infection while aligning them for extraction.
de la routure dou boueil	 from rupture to bruising
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	 "When the intestines are torn and there is a small wound, if it cannot be restored by applying pressure alone, as this often happens when stabbed in the abdomen.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	 "The wound was on the right side of the stomach and it became a fistula, and there was drainage from it.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 "I followed the treatment until he recovered completely and regained strength.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	 "And when I saw him better, I doubted whether his intestines would heal properly.
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	 "But he was not harmed but improved in disposition and appetite for food and drink.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	 "When there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be treated as follows:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	 "Firstly, tie off the great veins of the wound and when he pricks his lips to tie them up so that they do not move;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	 "Then it cauterizes the wound and holds it in place until no more bleeding occurs then applies another clamp after that manner so as long as there is any chance of bleeding.
et cout la plaie.	 "And then they sew up the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	 "When it occurs in the intestine there is no inconvenience and it can be sewn up with a thin thread that goes from the intestine to another best way.
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	 "Take the chief of this intestine thread and tie it to another thin thread which can be removed if necessary then tie off the thin thread in an opening and sew up the intestine and close it.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	 This way of dressing bones is not used as often as following the instructions for healing.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 When the wound is deep and wide, especially when it's in one of the major intestinal veins, unless there is no chance for recovery, then subtlety must be used to treat it.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	 a fistula
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 wounds or abscesses when they are inflamed if it is called a fistula and especially when it is opened and broken open
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	 A fistula is formed when the body's duct becomes strict and painful, without causing pain or swelling of a gland.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	 It can occur once clearly, then again heavily.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	 It can happen once clearly, and another time more noticeably.
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	 In the discussion of wounds in general, any wound that is not healing and has no cause for it, only one out of seven known causes can be at fault.
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	 It is to know through a small incision or probe.
ou por sa malice;	 unless
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	 unless there is great pain, he will not leave the treatment as it stands.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	 or if there is too much swelling.
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	 and the patient's condition is poor in quality.
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	 or if their medication is not strong enough for treatment.
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	 or if the patient has a case of plague-like corruption.
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	 unless there is weakness in the body's ability to digest and absorb nutrients, which affects health.
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	 or if they have wounds or sores.
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 I've listed all the causes and symptoms here in this division of treatments for ailments such as this.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	 "It is advisable for you to know how this fistula treatment procedure works.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	 Fistulas occurring in both arms are sores that can occur anywhere on the body.
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	 because they have fistulas arising in large veins, arteries, nerves, or even the heart, or any of the organs mentioned, or at random anywhere on the body.
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 And if any of the joints come loose from its proper place, then it will cause harm to the limb.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	 All the fistulas that are made this way are of healing nature and do not have forbearance only labor but ignorance as well
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	 And if there is no fistula that does not come from what I have mentioned and you do treatment and see the course, then the fistula will be straight if it wants to
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	 And if the fistula is tortuous, when searching for a subtle course, because the path twists and turns severely.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	 And if the fistula has many twists and turns so that you cannot search for it properly with attempts, if you use one of the paths, because moisture from one path to another is bad, and makes mistakes.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	 Then ask the fistula where it is and nerves as firmly in front of you, and ask for great pain that he feels at the touch of your hand, and from which place does he feel it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	 and when you truly know where it is located, whether it's a joint, a nerve, an artery or a vein, or in any of the others I mentioned earlier, if the cause according to what I said holds true, then make sure to follow through and carry out all the procedures that are necessary.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	 And as long as the fistula is well positioned and properly healed, if you follow through with the procedures I mentioned earlier, then continue to apply ointments gently around it, covering all of its circumference evenly.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And as long as they are healthy, you should keep applying ointment on the affected areas.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 And if it is not healed as mentioned earlier and the fistula itself becomes corrupted or damaged due to burning, then you should proceed with cautery as advised previously.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	 "Arms or legs cannot move freely or remain still at first, as we have said.
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	 "The eyes become swollen and the veins corrupt if blood loss continues until there is no more fresh blood. Then the treatment must be started as soon as possible.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	 "If not cured immediately and do not receive immediate attention, things will worsen:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	 "As soon as you realize it has gone deep and all the corruption is present, then restore balance.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 "If cured immediately, everything will be alright.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	 "In that case, if the corruption is too much at first, you should not seek immediate help:
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	 "If there are no other options left to try then only wait for nature.
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	 "If the corruption is small and you are able to tie it down with bandages or if there are no other options available then do not leave loose ends: bind everything together tightly.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 And when the moisture makes it move contrary to its purpose, and there is no harm or fear, if patience and moisture are present, and deliver the body parts.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	 And if you do not remove the ointment after an hour, and leave it on while the wound is still moist, until the bones are less porous, then when they become more delicate.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	 And if it is a large bone, such as the leg or arm, and you only remove the infection while not touching any other part of the bone, then heal the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	 And if it is just a small piece that has become infected with pus, and it comes to the tip of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	 If you wish to drain all the infection, and then treat until it is dry.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 And if there is a fistula in his leg that you are treating for example and helping with this chapter.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	 There was a young man of about 20 years old who had an injury in his leg due to which it swelled up and became inflamed.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	 But he tried to pull it out over and over again but the abscesses broke open and started flowing pus and became inflamed due to swelling.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	 They tried to cure him for 2 more years and could not find any way to treat his hand so that it stopped swelling.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 His cheeks became red from the injury and he had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 I bought a tent in one of these trips, and then questioned the patients about their feet, and found that some of them came into contact with each other at all points on the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	 I tried very hard but could not get to one of the abscesses as it was so deep and rotten that it would spread infection if cut open.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	 I sought a remedy to heal my corrupted bone, but I took care not to allow any further corruption.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	 And having applied remedies soaked in soothing liquid for too long, it did not help.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	 And then I tried again and saw the bone clearly, found it still corrupted in its way, and the sore, but could not heal it.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	 But I couldn't help when I applied pressure to the bone and felt its whole surface, then applied more remedies.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 And it healed and became sound again, but there was no more to be done for the cure because of the small wound which could not suffer pain, and by fear of death that I had from him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 For the evacuation of blood was sudden but complete, and it arose from the bone an arrow, and there was no injury or pain to speak of in all its parts, nor did the wound arise
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	 And if it is broken in any way as follows:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	 Stretch out the arm of the man towards the head when opening it up, but command him not to extend his hand above.
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	 And make the other arm larger than the smaller one on top of it, stretch out its elbow and bring up the shoulder if you draw down the shoulder blade to align them both with the body.
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	 And then put on or apply a cloth soaked in oil over the arm so as to cover it,
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 and may you see and feel the contamination, and also another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	 And if the arm is corrupted already, it will not open up, and corruption may spread in many places or parts, if you find a whole one.
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	 then put on the other part of it with oil to cover the corruption and let the length of the corrupted area grow if you've said so.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	 "And if the dislocation is in a joint, if the joint becomes corrupted, or if an injury occurs to another part of the body.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	 "Or when there is no other reason for it except two joints being out of place;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	 "Or when the dislocation occurs from the elbow or shoulder joint, if it's coming from one finger or hand, but in any case you must check that there is no other reason for the dislocation.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	 "And it happens in all ways as I mentioned, except your hand or arm can't cause any harm to you;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	 "And the bones are often affected when the joint is corroded due to a lack of lubrication and the misalignment of the joints, as well as their size and shape, roughness and subtlety, large and small, hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	 "And because you must ensure that each treatment has similar effects to the previous one;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	 "And show you the instrument that will help you more accurately according to your understanding of this art and witness its use in treating diseases.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 "If you consider it appropriate for the instrument that helps you more.
dou feu	 Of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	 "The dislocation can occur due to internal pressure or external force.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	 "And when you have healed the dislocation by treatment of disease and it still remains or is caused by malice which is more severe than a member's defect.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	 "The signs that it may occur are when the limbs become black or seem to be on fire and after the burning they begin to corrode each other and spread throughout the body.
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 "If you have been stung by venomous creatures such as scorpions and water snakes, the corrosion is most severe at two points, if one of them stings, then it cannot move to come out to your hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	 And if it comes to the hand when opening the joint, or with any friction, so that the inflammation does not subside in time.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	 and if it comes on the arm, when applying pressure.
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	 And if it passes through the wrist, then death is certain and there is no remedy for that except repentance from one's own faults.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	 and until the patient knows exactly when or how
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	 inflammation occurs at the first joint if pressure is applied on the second joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	 and if it comes or goes through everywhere, if friction happens all over the body.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	 And if it ascends to the leg when applying pressure on the ankle joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	 and if it descends from the heel, there is no remedy other than stopping the pain that will lead to death.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	 And the way of friction or swelling is to bind one limb and stretch another, so that there are certain measures for each limb separately, and others for both limbs together.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 "Then you should shave your head or side of the body if it touches the healthy area and causes another injury to the shoulder.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	 "And when you apply fire therapy, if you burn the healthy skin or put on any powders restraining them;
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 "Then apply your medicine as soon as it is done and bind the member with an unstitched bandage until it heals;
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	 "And you will be told when to go home on sick day:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	 "The fire scar appeared at the second wound and was very painful until it healed completely;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	 "And when the wounds were healed, if you needed to cover them again, it would be painful.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	 "After that, when the second wound reopened and it was painful, it came to me and I put on healing things after cleaning up the wounds. And they couldn't stop until both were healed.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	 And it is my wish to touch him gently with my hand, and I do not want that what I have expected will come true.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	 And I also wish to remove his hands quickly, so he does not worsen the situation because they are weak.
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	 He recovered from it and returned to himself, and he held on tightly with his hands, and was saved.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	 And I did not have any hope that this would ever come true because he had already succeeded in doing it before.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	 No time has come to release him from his captivity and leave him alone for as long as he does great damage.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	 Then they ran away and left their clothes scattered around, leaving only a vestige of clothing behind them;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	 The skin that is on top of it is as smooth and delicate as a dove's feathers, they do not run to the bone or the nerves, such sicknesses are called "healthy" but are also called "foul";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	 "If it is so long that it touches the bone, call a fistula.
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	 "And if you squeeze too hard with one hand and very gently with the other, as though it were a bandage.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 It will not cure itself from its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	 If it is too tight and the corruption is still present, then cut off what is causing it.
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	 Look at its size and the bow that causes it to be painful; if it is an Egyptian remedy then do this.
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	 Take it and oil it gently, put a bandage soaked in hot water on it until the remedy turns red, then apply it thick as honey.
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	 Then take what you need and do it quickly and gently, and close the wound, hold tight.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	 "And let the medicine rest for two hours before straining.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	 "Do this procedure many times until both ends are frayed or loose.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	 "And do not apply any fire cautery when the medicine is present and you are holding it tightly, or if you press fire to its base. Hold the eyes steady until they grow.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	 "And the eyes will not feel pain when you apply fire cautery or hold it tightly. If there is any burning sensation from the fire or if there's a little bit of dizziness, don't worry.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	 "Or you can apply fire cautery with honey and wine mixed together. Honey has the property of soothing and cleaning, while the wine adds strength.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	 "When you have done that and it is clear to the patient that their eyes are well frayed, if there's any burning sensation when applying fire cautery or pain while doing so, use rose oil and wine as a remedy.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	 Or you may apply heat to any of the aforementioned parts or organs without specifying which ones.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	 and the eye, which cannot be opened if it is applied with heat for too long, may swell or become blind.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	 If the wound is too large that only a small part of it can be treated or if the heat causes swelling which makes further treatment difficult, then the patient should seek medical help immediately.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	 When an abscess is in front, do not allow entry of any sharp objects.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	 And if you cannot treat it like you have seen or if the abscess is in this manner that it reaches the base of the wound, because when an abscess is in front and does not allow entry to sharp objects and you cannot treat it as you would normally do.
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	 "The bow may not be loosened at all,
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	 and take consolidants to help heal the wound, and bind up any loose threads.
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	 And then apply force to tighten the first wound as much as possible, and follow up with another dressing according to how much of each wound needs attention.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	 And for the other wound that is on the shoulder, he should apply force to tighten it and check what comes out of it, whether pus or not, enough, too little, digestable, indigestable.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	 And if the patient feels pain or not, and how strong is its pain, and whether they have a fever or not, pay attention to the nature of the wound as it heals, so you can see that healing progresses.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 And then it will apply the morning or noon, when you remove the bandage if there is another burn and reapply the dressing
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	 "And if it happens to get inflamed after a long journey, they may not heal properly.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 And after many strokes, if your health worsens, because the condition approaches its end.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	 It also applies when it has happened before in the patient's wounds and when they do the opposite.
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	 After every meal after a long time, saliva accumulates in his mouth so that he cannot eat.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	 And the eyes become tired of tearing and are prone to swelling if there are many dry medicines in circulation or substances that cause dryness.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	 The inflammation ends when the wounds are treated with oil and butter applied directly to them, but using too many oily substances can make the wounds worse.
puis le confit et en use;	 After that you should moisturize it further.
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	 And when the wounds have finally healed or if you take care of them and apply honey and aloe vera and incense, and grind it with powder as a base for the fire.
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	 Then after a while he becomes pale, the skin of his chest begins to swell, and no one can bear it any longer, and he roots out his own heart which is also like flour and cornmeal.
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	 And in the application of simple or complex remedies:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	 they break them up, and mix with powder, add to it the honey that I have mentioned, and apply it.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	 And the treatment is continuous, and no longer treated by this method alone after corruption has set in, causing pressure on the bones, or hard members.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 if the cure of the fistula, as we have mentioned here before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	 of the arm
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	 The bandage is a band that does not bind the joint of the hand, or the finger, but by accident it may be found in others two.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	 And when it is healed and they are no longer restrained if an anchor comes, and it becomes a burden on the roots of the joint, and by accident spreads all over.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 "And comes to dislocations occurring at joints, as long as it brings great pain and is the limbs doubled up, and the color goes white.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 When you treat it as we have described in the division and the treatment does not provide relief, then consider that you apply heat to the joint, and afterwards cauterize the wound after.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	 The cauterization must be done with a healthy arm and clean hands.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	 And press the eyes tightly shut, and place a bandage over them to protect from injury.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the wounds as much as possible.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	 And if there is a problem in healing because of old scarring or previous injuries to the joint,
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And as you see both corrupted areas that are visible at this time, and then treat them until they heal.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	 If it is broken or torn, and there's a lot of pain involved, if possible first aid the joint to prevent further damage,
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	 After shaving the patient's arm carefully and making sure all the hair is gone except for a small amount on the chest area, warn that removing this remaining hair will cause severe pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 And if it happens, do not touch anything near there.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	 "The pain caused by the infection is severe.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 "The two joints that are dislocated frequently are often painful and sometimes cause damage to the bones; there may not be any swelling or bleeding in the roots of the joints.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	 There should be no movement or dislocation of the two joints involved in this surgery, otherwise it will occur.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	 The size of that which is harsh should be light, in a manner like so:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 Shave the root of a broad area.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	 There should be no movement or dislocation in that joint, as it is painful to cure.
si te tien dou coper.	 If you forget the cure.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "For those who have it or cause it due to injury, if you do this correctly from the root of the issue then treat it as long as its healing
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	 "The others come together due to birth wounds or injuries or by the extraction of fire and similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	 When practicing this remedy, if one feels severe pain, then it must be applied according to its natural shape;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	 And hold tightly with two hands or ropes moistened with oil so they do not slip.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 Or you can hold tightly between two thin slices of bread soaked in water until it is soft enough to want, as needed.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	 "If the wounds come apart from one another with the hand then treat that one correctly as needed.
des vils	 of harm
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	 The veins are large and full of melancholy substances that come from the heart;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 And more often in the legs of those who walk and work and bear, compared to others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	 It is important to avoid purging once every day, but instead have a bowel movement daily.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	 The treatment for fever is done in two ways
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	 One way is to apply a cold compress and bleed the black spot.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 The other way is to tie off the vein and remove it entirely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	 The cutting for fever occurs in this manner;
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	 first heat up the leg as hot as possible without being too painful, then tie off below where it is thin and remove below at the point of the vein.
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	 Then tie the hand to the injured limb in one of three positions: large, then loose and straighten it with your other hand as much as possible.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	 And then bind it tightly, commanding him to apply a black cloth immediately.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 Begin evacuation and healing when the wounds are clean, and stop applying the salve on the wound.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	 The treatment is as follows:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	 Raise the leg of the patient if there is excessive hair, and immerse it in hot water until it turns red, and burn off any wounds.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	 And if you do not have a bandage, place a long strip of cloth tightly around the base of the arm near or at the shoulder joint.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	 "Press the flesh at once, and shave off all the hair as much as it will bear until one feels.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	 "It becomes red and black, and when it enters or strikes with the same force of a fair strand of hair;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	 "Then remove it from the flesh as much as you can pull with your hair, and then tie it onto an arrow to shoot it off.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	 "Then shave the flesh with an arrowhead until it is free, and then lightly tie another arrow to shoot it off.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	 "Then tie a second one on, or more if you are skilled at it, and then lightly tie the arrow to your bowstring, and prepare another for shooting.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	 "Then extract each arrow in turn until all of them are free, and then tie it off.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	 And if you prick with a very sharp needle at any of the arteries, the vein and the bone, it will cause great pain and damage.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	 And remember that if she does happen to prick it, then even though you try to pull out the needle and remove her hand from there, severe pain will follow.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	 And when treating it fully, if you mix sour wine and oil on the wound's clean surface.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The treatment should continue as long as possible.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	 And if the veins are tied and twisted together in a bundle as described, but it is not straight, then you should gently untangle them but do not cut through them.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 The vein will be treated according to what we have previously stated here.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	 If the vein is bound and not broken, even if you cannot separate it from the flesh, do not cut through to the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 And it is a big bird, but if it were subtle, if it touched the vein, but large as we have said, and that's how it looks.
de la voinne civile	 Civil vein.
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	 This vein is only found in legs or warm parts of the body where there are no plants nor trees, and on earth it has no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 And in another place it has the poison that comes from the skin, if it comes into contact with the heart or throat, between the skin and flesh
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 The signs of the commencement of this vein are that it comes in a very large inflammation to one leg, then tears away its skin and begins to rise up from inside like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	 When dislocations occur, it is advisable to insert a piece of lead the size of an I into the vein and leave it there for about two hours.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	 And if it is too long, if you cut off a part of it and remove the remaining part without cutting into its root as much as possible.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	 "When you hold them down, if they enter through an artery or vein, then pain and sickness come upon you.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	 "The treatment should be done slowly and gradually with a keen eye, leaving no scar or wound behind;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	 "And there shall be no vein when it has been treated with water or fire, and the hairs that prick at its base are held steady so they do not move until they grow.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 "And if the matter is dense and unbearable to bear, then apply a light remedy in the beginning that may cause no harm, and later on apply stronger remedies as prescribed by an expert.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	 "And there shall be no joint movement when the hand is raised and it enters into the incision of the flesh, or that incision itself, and then you will feel pain.
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 "Cure him as soon as possible.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 Between the shoulder blades
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	 This illness is called "fever disease" in our land because it often occurs when the body and flesh come together along with the blood flowing up through the torso upwards downwards, causing pain to all members of the body equally as long as they remain connected or separate.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	 it is accompanied by discharge of various fluids such as semen and mucus from the eyes, ears, nose and stomach;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	 And doubts arise about its cause as when it passes through the torso, and reaches up to the head, and comes down with oil, by chance returning, and destroying the oil;
et ceu avient maintes fois.	 This occurs many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	 When you cure it and bind it, if you cannot hold it when it moves;
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	 If you set it loose and tightly bind its ends with a strong cord then tie it up and let go, so that it moves forward in the path, and do not cut it if it is burned by fire as long as it lives.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	 "And if they are longer than normal, it is when they touch oil," as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	 And if you see them coming or near the oil, then pull away sharply and try to get out of there.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 And use a remedy for the foul odors from the body's humors to relieve the bad smells that are coming out of it.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 "The pain arises from sudden movement
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	 This disease is called "Wakirir" in our land and is a pain that comes on any member, and moves from one member to another.
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 I know what you want me to do.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	 I called on a female doctor and she discovered some bruises in my forearm;
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	 And later he saw swelling just above the shoulder, more than nothing, and like when oil was poured on it.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	 "The pain departed from the upper part of his body, and spread to both shoulders, as it reached towards the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 "Then he said that she was tearing into it with great force, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	 I grew worried about her because I had never heard of such a disease occurring in this manner before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	 "I wanted to move the pain elsewhere, but I couldn't stop it from moving as I saw it in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	 "And I thought that was because the woman had a broken arm and exposed bones, which seemed to impose constraints on her.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 "They did not think in this way according to these people who are skilled and have many broken arms and exposed bones.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	 "And when you saw this illness and the pain that it caused, as she opened her eyes as we had said, if lying down or sitting up was equally painful, then covering yourself completely and not allowing any part of your body to be exposed would make things easier.
et cauterize le leu;	 "Injure the arm.
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 If you do not see it at your eyes if the cure is applied to the wounds, and if pills of fatness, and pills of sharpness, and similar things.
des saiettes	 arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	 Arrows can come from different places depending on their location or type of injury.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	 The dislocations are caused by joints that have great points or small points, long points, or rounded points.
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	 And those who have two angles and those who have ears, and those who have parts.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	 and the one who dislocates in any member no matter how it occurs in different ways
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 or to the principal members: the heart, liver, lungs, stomach, intestines, veins, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	 If it occurs in any member of these organs, the sign of death will tell you later on, I'll tell you after.
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	 if it is advisable for you to extract that arrow because the patient will die from multiple conditions.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 And when there is no good sign to see, neither the arrow nor the wound heals properly if it is treated, and cure the wound
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	 And when there is a sign of blood coming out and piercing the bone, and when it comes to the eye, which causes blindness, swelling, redness of the eyes, inflammation, and pain in the mind, vomiting.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	 And for any other reason such as nosebleeds or ear bleeds.
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	 And by any accident affecting speech and voice.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	 And when there is a moist wound resembling pus, and it also burns with heat.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 If you see the sign that shows you need to treat it immediately, but if there is no good sign and it doesn't heal itself.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	 The sign of a fever when it occurs or in the chest is that it is near to the sternum and feels similar to being pinched in a difficult place.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	 And through the seventh wound he must cease.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 There is a sense of doubt that they will die.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	 The sign of the eighth is that when a pimple pops or breaks open and pus comes out from it, the throat swells up, the mouth becomes numb, and the eyelids quiver with cold;
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	 And if the abscess is within the cover of the breast, it is best to leave the small wounds alone;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	 and there will be great pain and fear.
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	 And they move their limbs apart.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	 And if the pimple pops from or into the stomach by chance then there is no food digestion;
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	 And if a fistula occurs in the belly or womb, and it cannot be closed with surgery alone, then extraction of the fistula must also occur
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	 And if the abscess is within the bladder, it urinates and burns fiercely; great pain follows.
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	 The wound has become mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	 The other member, including the arm and chest, neck and shoulder, elbow and spine of the upper body, forearm and foot, leg and similar parts are generally more flexible than others.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	 When the fistula is in a nerve or artery and it is not closed, then I will tell you that I am in great pain because of this reason; what else should be done?
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	 He came to his senses with an abscess in the root of his nose;
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 I attempted to drain from another part of the fat behind the ear, and was cured with ease
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	 And he treated another abscess that was in the fat behind the ear of the paper of the same type as before, and it was cured, and there is no need to touch anything else, except for the tip towards the forehead, and it became the abscess great from one Turkish arc, which is at all ears.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 The joint was healthy, and no harm came to it.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	 He had a sore throat; he had a hoarse voice.
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 I treated the bristles gently and thoroughly until they were healed, and my patient was cured.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	 He had a sore throat that was either in his mouth or belly, and I thought he was dying;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	 And then it turned out to be nothing but a cold, so no treatment could cure him.
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 I treated the sore throat by washing and rubbing it, but there was no harm done.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	 If you had a sore throat in your chest or back, then the wound would be deep-seated;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 And if the sore throat was too severe to bear, it wouldn't stop its natural course and could not be cured by any of his natural remedies.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	 And a second man whose ear was pierced through his face, he was treated for the wound
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	 and suffered great pain
et mout d’autres semblans.	 and other similar things
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	 And when a arrow pierced the king's eye, which was open and fell to the right side
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	 The arrow remained in the eye.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 I asked for help after she was burned on the third day.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 If the wound is very deep
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	 And I gently tried her but couldn't see clearly;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 And he felt pain and numbness in his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	 I thought it was from the arrow piercing. I placed a plaster over his left ear flap and digestive tract to prevent infection;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 The arrow became infected.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	 Hold steady your hands, and redress the wound if it's severe, and delay tearing off long hairs as they grow until you feel a stone.
et il le me dist.	 And then he did so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	 I applied the corrosive ointment with steady hands until it was gone, and tried to remove a scab that had started on his forehead.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	 Then I opened the wound with the corrosive ointment as long as it was clear to me that a scab had formed.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	 And for three months I treated the wound with bandages and compresses on one side and another, but it couldn't heal.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 Until finally the wound began to heal with properly applied bandages and compresses according to its shape at the end of this chapter, until I found that it was healing.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	 And the nosebleed cannot be stopped
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 I tried everything but it did not stop the bleeding and wounds were healed completely
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	 You have told the quality of removing arrows if you put your treatment in place as I do not say no because all books cannot be removed;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 But the master physician is very skilled at this thing and in place and failing, true he will succeed or fail, but never harm you, with the extraction of things that are strange.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	 I say that wounds should not be removed from limbs unless in these ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	 or through the front or they enter into another way;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 That way is to cut off all veins and arteries in it, and if you get through the front but not entering into another way, that way no longer works now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	 "And if she does not move now even after letting her hair grow long and evenly.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	 "And if she has a dislocation in the bone, it cannot move even after letting her hair grow.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 "And if she does not move and cannot move even when the skin around it is stretched gently over time.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	 "And if her dislocation is in the skull or neck, and she has severe internal injuries as I mentioned earlier with the abscess.
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 "Do not harm her in any way, but let her be calm after slight movements because the dislocation is severe and that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 "The wound is not to be closed until the bone alone, and it does not want to move around at all, unless there are no injuries in the area of the injury.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	 "And if she has a dislocated shoulder that cannot move no matter how the healer instructs her, as I mentioned earlier.
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Treat the injury as soon as possible.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	 And if you can't see it after treating the wound with water, apply pressure to it.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	 If you cannot see it even with available equipment.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	 And if the wound is large and there are no nerves or veins to see it through.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	 And if it is in the wound that you see and hear, but not when you try to pull or squeeze it out.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 Carefully make sure you do not break off any part of it, as you gently extract it.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	 "If you do not hold on to it once it is separated from its base, then let it go because the pain will be severe.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	 And if the treatment that we mentioned in this chapter is contrary to what your doctor has advised,
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	 "And teach him to remove the stitches gently from around his nerve and vein, or quickly, firmly, or carefully.
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 "And apply the cautery in a manner that matches how it looked when he pricked his abscess, as this is often more helpful than just removing it immediately.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	 "The abscess that comes from another place or nothing at all; if his clothes are loose in the area where it was seen or felt.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	 "Hold them tight while they can take hold and then remove as much of it as possible:
si saut fuer maintenant.	 "Now if you do not.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	 And if it is held in the bone, if you strongly turn your hand towards it as much as possible while it enters into the bone and extends the bone, then break it
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	 "And if it will not come out immediately, let her continue the extraction as long as she tries.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	 "And when the abscess comes off and peels away in large pieces,
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	 And if you administer a splint, ensure it's placed correctly between the gap of the instrument.
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 Then straighten out the syringe and ensure it is properly inserted for easier extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 And if it's stuck inside, ensure you apply firm pressure to the wound or vein until it passes; then treat the wound as needed.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	 The needle must be inserted into the vein, not the belly or stomach, not in the bladder, and it should go straight through.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	 Do not puncture the artery or nerve, extract from there, and close the wound properly.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 The cure must be complete.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	 They are shaped like tendons from which the veins extend to their heads.
Et en sont mout de manieres:	 And in various ways as follows
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	 Large, medium, and small depending on the size of the syringe.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The shape at its base is similar to that of an arrow's point, when trying to pierce the vein by the tip of the needle.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	 The shape of the veins for piercing and for sealing it as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	 common veins in both arms.
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	 Needles which are too small or too big will cause trouble; it is important to know that
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	 After removing them from the ears are taken away
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	 The second arteries that are in the second temples
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	 Second veins that are in the second eyelids
et li voine que est emmi le front;	 The vein on the forehead
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	 The veins at the base of the nose
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	 The two sinuses that are below;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	 Second veins in the upper part of the mouth;
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 The second veins at the end of the tongue
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	 Veins that are commonly known as the carotid artery.
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	 The one is in the head and both are located at the side of the face, and they are commonly known as carotid arteries;
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	 The other one is in the neck and composed of the head and upper arm, commonly known as vertebral artery.
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 "The base of the shoulder is either left or right as it should be," and the patient says, "the bottom of my belly.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	 The jugular vein runs between the ear and the arm.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	 In the leg there are three veins.
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	 One of these is at the base of the thumb on the right side, and the second one runs from the shoulder to the elbow on the opposite side.
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	 The vein that is called "innominate" which runs in the groove of the other arm.
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 In the other leg there are three veins, just like those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	 The veins that run behind the ears to the front of the head and the neck region, and the one that runs down the arm are called "ancient" veins.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	 "And you are to cut away from the shoulder blade, and force out the dislocated joint or limb from a tight covering of flesh.
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	 "You are to straighten the dislocated joint by holding it in place with one hand while applying pressure from behind on the other side of its base.
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	 "When you find both hands free or when they are no longer entangled in each other's grip, then...
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	 "Take the needle and apply it to the vein near the arm bone. Slowly move your hand up along the vein until you reach the wrist joint, then gently release both hands and release the bandage.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 "Straighten and tie it securely as long as it remains straight.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 And I have already mentioned the incision and cautery in the first letter.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	 The veins of the two temples are to be evacuated gradually, steadily, and constantly, and at the corners of the eyes.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	 And also the two veins that are there as I mentioned earlier should be evacuated gradually but still steadily.
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	 and it is to pull out the arrows so they cannot see clearly.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	 And then remove both eyelids separately.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	 Then gently remove the vein from above your thumb index, and then cut off the arrowhead, and gently pull out the vein from above, and the corner of it. If you have done so for the other two eyelids as well, do the same for this one according to your necessity.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	 Then put back both eyelids together after an hour, and then apply a bandage.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 And then the glue forms it, and leaves it to be as good as new.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 "And we have seen this many times before in their care and treatment, or commencement of a book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	 "The veins on the forehead are equivalent to those in the skull for older wounds and hemorrhages.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	 "Its quality is that it can extract the arrow as it turns, as long as the vein is intact;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 "Then take an instrument called a 'fosseur', which has this shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	 "Put the point into the vein and firmly onto your hand or another surface, then release the arrow according to the amount of force you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 "Then remove from the arrow the point and hold the vein as long as it is steady and no longer than an inch;
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	 "Always ensure that the flame burns too low;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	 And after the vein is opened
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	 The veins in the two arms are being used for healing purposes, and to cauterize wounds, and to treat ulcers, and in the extraction of arrows.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	 The qualities of their veins are such that they break at the slightest touch or movement, as we have seen.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 Then the vein is cut short with fire, so that it burns for a long time, because there is no cure.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	 And if the flames are subtle, they will break.
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	 Then seal off the wound thoroughly, like you always do, and then apply pressure to it.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	 The vein in the nose is valuable for healing purposes, and to cauterize wounds, and treat ulcers.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	 The quality of health is that the veins are closed until they are pricked by the needle at their base, and then held steady while the flame is applied to them gently over time between the two fingernails, so as not to open right away, and will start to corrode now.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	 Do not apply it too frequently, as you should follow the doctor's prescription and let it heal overnight because it is easily restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 This is how to use fire:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	 The health of the two joints helps in relieving pain and initiating healing, and is good for many diseases, prevents aging, and causes corrosion, and sores.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	 The quality of health is that the veins are closed until both sides are pricked at their base simultaneously as we have mentioned.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	 "And may the master's hand be on that small vein so as to make it bleed quickly and tightly, unless otherwise instructed by a physician.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	 "Then perform the same procedure on another vein, tie it off securely, and gently release all veins simultaneously, ensuring that the veins do not become tangled.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 "And leave him as instructed in the morning for the wound to heal properly.
de la sainie des leivres	 of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	 The bile ducts from the liver are important for digestion and can cause severe damage if ruptured
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	 "And you will see if he is able to present his arm to you and hold it as I instructed him.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	 "Then stretch the arm out completely and observe both of them, one on each side. You will notice that one is on the right and the other is on the left, they are black in color because their veins have become narrow.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 "If you cannot see both of them or if you are unsure which one is the larger and which one is on the opposite side, then do only the ones that are closer to each other because this is a safer method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 The bile from the gallbladder is important for digestion as well and can cause severe damage when ruptured.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	 "The patient should cleanse their veins and ears after the extraction of a cephalic vein, at the incision in the neck, and ailments of the ear, and ailments of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	 "And be careful to cleanse your hands before exposing them to the sun, gently touching your lips and checking for any black veins;
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 "Cleanse both sides simultaneously but do not apply too much pressure because they are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	 The veins that can be cleaned commonly use two methods;
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	 or burning with a large flame, or gently touching them as you would call 'anise;'
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 The large and subtle ones are based on the width and depth of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	 The cautery method of making cuts is known as a flame cure. It produces wide wounds if done improperly.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	 And better to open veins with a clear sign of major damage inside, or containing large and troublesome ones;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 And this is how it flares up like wildfire
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	 And it is more subtle when cutting into veins that are slightly inflamed or have small, hidden abscesses.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	 The illness of the gallbladder, which is one of these veins, if aid those ailments that are associated with the throat, and or colic, and or peritonitis, and or abdomen.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 It is advised to ensure a healthy diet, and avoid the artery that carries it.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	 If he copes with the artery, then the harm will come to an end if you comply as I've said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 It shouldn't prick at the flame, but gently as necessary.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	 And if the gallbladder doesn't open clearly, then it is advised to extract and change another.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	 Or you want no pain from it, or you leave it alone with a vein opening the arm
elle apert manifestement;	 It will open clearly.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 And put on fire blisters if they burn
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	 If you see a break in the vein, as soon as possible please take off your arm.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	 Then bind up the wound and put on fire blisters if they burn
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	 Do not cut into the artery as soon as you see it is bleeding; that's an artery.
eschui la donques.	 Until then
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	 If you see a trickle of blood that is high like the urine of a child and it is red and subtle, then that's not from an artery.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	 Hurry to this, and put on a dressing as soon as possible, and gently bandage the wound frequently,
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	 And leave it uncovered, leaving them untouched, so they do not move.
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And if they prick at their base...
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	 And if it punctures the artery...
et estainche li sans.	 The patient will lose consciousness and potentially die as a result of blood loss.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	 Take a strip of flesh, and sew it on tightly to the other side with strong stitches.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	 If they stop bleeding, good.
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	 Then, if it doesn't stop the bleeding as mentioned before, there will be wounds that bleed heavily.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 And when they are inflamed and have spread to different parts of the body due to small wounds in a way that makes them unable to hold the bleeding still with their hands.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	 The vein health is important in this case as it treats the wounds from both sides of the body due to its composition of the base and the top side veins, as mentioned before.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	 "The patient should rest their arm on a cushion because the joint is dislocated and if they try to straighten it too quickly or forcefully, it may cause further damage.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	 "The joint can dislocate repeatedly if it is not held in place with sufficient firmness, and it's advisable to use a splint or support for the arm.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 "This supports the arm properly.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	 If there is a vein between the two incisions, it should be left untouched.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	 "If the patient has a headache or severe pain in their head area,
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 "When cauterizing with olive oil or mint oil is advisable because these are the most gentle of all oils as they do not cause harm to the nerve.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	 "In any case, it is advisable to use a gentler method and avoid causing injury in the first attempt. If this fails,
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 "And as for an ankle sprain, first of all it needs to stay still so that swelling doesn't occur.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	 The quality of health depends on your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	 The first thing you need to know is how to heal properly. To do this, make sure you stay healthy and prevent future illnesses.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	 And if the sprain occurs in one of the three joints listed above...
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	 it is located at the top, thigh, or ankle.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	 and healing should begin as soon as possible after the swelling appears;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 The first one or second joint should be treated within two to three hours, whichever comes first.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	 The sprain that is most likely to cause illness has no specific cure but will heal within hours and without a doubt.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 And you shall not cause children to come to me earlier than twelve years of age, nor suffer those who are fourteen to be sent away until they have completed seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	 "No one shall live more than sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	 And if any of them seek healing after having made incisions that penetrate the bowels, and they do not have any bowels left inside their bodies because of this, it is necessary to remove these members which are principal ones.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	 Do not let anyone who has become too lean from flesh seek healing if they have done so much that their bodies are left with nothing inside them.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	 And if any of them seek healing after colic passion, vomiting, and defecation, and excessive eating from women, and rape, and watching, and waiting, and what else is virtuous, or through the use of arms or legs.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	 Then you must be subtle in your methods, whether it is from meats and drinks, or medicines, if you have a lack of them.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	 "And between any two bodies there is no separation unless a certain force exists, which holds the veins together, as we have mentioned.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	 And it holds the joint in place, and prevents loosening, and maintains its form.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	 And the ligaments are strengthened and joints reinforced so that they may withstand higher pressure or more than once, then it loosens them with gentle force only.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	 Then loosen the joint with gentle hands, until the veins swell and the pain subsides.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 Then massage the joint with a little oil gently, then hold your hand steady against that vein until it straightens or it is injured.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	 Because it feels like the joint is tied with threads as tight as a sinew, if there are such things that make the veins tremble and shake, so when you put flame to it, it retreats from flame, unable to release itself, and this occurs.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 And if it happens to the vein, if there is a very small wound, then you should cover up these wounds
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	 If it happens on the first stroke of the vein, that's good.
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	 But if it happens again a short time after, then its effects will not last long.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	 If the hair is short and sparse, leave it unshaven on one side or two sides, but do not shave both sides of the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	 Through this treatment, we will come to abscesses.
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	 Do not touch or apply any sort of pain again once the wound has healed
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	 And if it happens frequently, or the pain is subtle and you doubt that it will heal as quickly as seen here, then be careful with every small movement, for fear of causing more damage to all sides.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	 And the wound is inflamed, so let it become infected.
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 Because this happens frequently when a small wound occurs.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	 If you see the wound getting worse and no improvement is seen in the healing process, apply a small amount of olive oil to it because it heals the body's wounds, reducing inflammation around the area.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	 And ensure that you apply the olive oil in all wounds to help stop bleeding from them.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	 This treatment is repeated and painful when it's applied to a wound.
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 If the application is too gentle or too rough.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	 And if it comes across large veins that often happen when the vein is small and causes much pain so if you feel it, and apply the wound with wet and cold cloths, and hold for one hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	 After dislocating the shoulder joint and if it hurts immediately afterwards without any redness or swelling, do not move it.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 If you see nothing broken but a bruise that resolves itself calmly and quickly, leave it alone.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	 And many times there is bleeding from the incision of an abscess;
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	 If you hold it tightly with your hand while applying pressure with your other hand, and if there is still pain after that, go to the hospital.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	 Do not do anything we have advised you against doing because of an artery cutting,
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 But continue to try and straighten it out through additional treatments until the patient is well
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	 And treat every wound according to its size and the depth of the wound.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	 Because if there is no bleeding, let it stay that color as long as it stays red.
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	 And if you let go of a small thing
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	 If it is too hot, leave it to cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	 And for someone who has had previous extractions of abscesses and knows how to extract them properly, it will make the extraction larger wounds with more bleeding;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	 And for someone who is weak, do the opposite. Do not cut in and out repeatedly, but rather make a single incision to minimize pain.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 This manner of healing saves from repeated abscesses and discomfort in the nerves, and is much better than doing it long and wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	 And for someone whose neck needs surgery, do not perform the incision quickly but rather gradually with warm pomegranate juice.
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 If the skin is fresh and needs suturing three times or more, if it has a cold complexion, do not apply sutures with mild pain but rather gradually with warm pomegranate syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, or scented honey syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 "And if they touch the skin after a sore has healed, it is advisable to apply hot compresses and a soothing syrup.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	 "And if the vein is inflamed and sore another time, it's advisable to apply gently as often as possible until its virtue continues.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	 "And if the vein is inflamed and sore after the first one, it's advisable to apply gently for seven hours after the first one or every hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	 And who is to heal from another place if he must heal the second wound or the third one.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	 "His heart has become so inflamed that it is almost unbearable.
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	 "If necessary, stretch the area as much as possible to alleviate the pain.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	 "Then check all the necessary conditions for healing and put your hands on it when it is healed so that death does not come from weakness.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	 "And do not worry if you see blisters the second time, and make sure to close the wounds properly by pressing firmly into place.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	 "If it is swollen, extend one arm gently as this would be better.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	 "But leave it like that the second time.
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 "Or you can prick it with a flame until the vein becomes frozen and then press gently to release it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	 And when there is blood evacuation from a vein incision and opening an abscess, do not touch it with your finger or hand; hold the eye steady until it heals.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	 And you must treat the second wound twice if it is on one hand or another arm or any other part of the body.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	 The arm that was injured will heal more quickly because its structure is stronger compared to the arm that was not injured.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	 And if the wound is covered with hot oil or grease, as long as it burns.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	 And after a short while when the vein is open well, then wash thoroughly with clean water
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	 And if the large veins are present, and you hold them gently near to the hand joint as much as possible without touching it directly, until you have enough hot oil or grease applied.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	 And so this is done if the hand does not burn in the hot oil or grease, for then you add more until it is burned.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 And the treatment of this vein is better than all others, as there will be no harm or injury.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	 The healing process for the hand ailment is like this one:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	 "Hold tight to your arm while applying gentle heat until the vein is open, if you can.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	 "After cleansing with water and soap all over, do not scrub too vigorously if nothing is wrong.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 "Do not scratch too vigorously as the nerves are very sensitive and may be damaged easily; then apply gentle heat to it while keeping your hand steady until the wound heals.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	 "And when you have treated the sore as much as possible, and if it is on the vein and firmly pressed down, and so long as it stays like that.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	 "If you have caught in your hand the sickness of the mouse, do everything just as I told you before.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 "The sickness of the mouse is good for all diseases that are on the body, such as those from marriage and childbirth, and problems with the hair, and problems with the veins, and stones, and old legs, and similar ailments.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	 "Qualify the pain from the injury with gentle heat, hold your arm tightly while applying it to the vein as tight as you can, and gently rub over any sutures.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	 "The veins on the shoulder should be rubbed with gentle pressure until they are completely healed.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 "Cleans gently wherever and whenever necessary.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	 "After cleansing with water and soap over the wounds, rinse thoroughly as needed with gentle rubbing.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	 "And if they prick at their base.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	 And if you cannot remove it yourself, then apply a healthy dressing to the wound again, and leave it in place for some time longer.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	 "The first time holds the eye steady, as for the second when it occurs after a short while due to swelling,
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 "Do not doubt your mind if what we have said is correct and continue doing the same as before.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	 The joint dislocation of the shoulder is in or near the armpit area, and its healing process causes great pain as it occurs
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	 "The quality of his illness is that the veins between or outside the elbow cannot open otherwise than by tearing because otherwise they would not allow the vein to open.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	 "If it opens in all ways as you said and when pressed, then:
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 "You must hold tight lest the veins become loose and will not be held any more.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	 "If you do not apply this treatment, if the vein does not open or at all of these points and toward another small point, then your harm will come.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	 And tie as tightly as you can to your wound, then seal it with cotton and hold tight.
ele est maintenant sanee.	 It is now sealed.
des sainies de ventouse	 veins
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	 The wounds are made of thorns or straw, or of reeds.
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	 And the extraction can be performed in two ways
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	 Or by cutting and pulling at the wound, or by piercing it.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	 And this extraction that is done via piercing can be performed in two ways
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	 Or by heat alone, or with fire.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	 And the extraction that is done via piercing and through the extraction of a wound can be performed in 12 steps from beginning to end.
et li autres est emmi le col;	 The others are called "the others" and their location varies depending on where they happen.
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	 And the two others in two corners of the chest.
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	 The extraction from the mouth.
et li ventouse des II espaules;	 "The patient is instructed to leave spaces between the letters.
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	 "To instruct them (the doctors) to leave spaces between phrases or clauses.
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	 "Instructing them to leave space between their two arms, perhaps indicating a specific location for physical examination?
et les ventouses des II jambes;	 "Instruction to leave space between the patient's legs during an exam or medical procedure.
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	 "To instruct them (the doctors) to leave space between their two heels, possibly indicating a specific location for examination?
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	 "Instructing them to leave space between the sutures (stitches) and the skin flaps, which are sparse in this part of the body, so as not to obstruct blood flow during dressing change.
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 "They must ensure that the incision is left open and free from infection, in any illness or disease caused by excess fluids, as long as the wound remains dry.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	 "They must treat the patient promptly if any illness arises or appears at the beginning of the month or at its end, and should make sure to do so with diligence.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	 "And if they push forcefully,
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	 "And if they press with great force
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	 and those who pierce an abscess in their mouth, causing bleeding.
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 "And if they bite or singe themselves with fire
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	 And when we observe these signs, and most importantly during the first three hours of daybreak, we command to apply the cautery after that time.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	 The physician's aid is necessary to prevent the spread of infection among those who have been burned and do not want it to happen after the evacuation of all wounds.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	 And such a washing should be done after the physician has attended to the burns of the head and is not necessary for those with pale complexions or who have chills, as it brings great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 And so they should be watched closely to ensure they do not catch cold and those with other cold diseases
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	 "And those who are aware of this should be careful, for otherwise it is necessary to move the bandage a little further down due to the risk of injury.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	 "The dislocation of the upper arm is from its socket and the base joint, which makes it unstable due to friction between them. It affects the muscles around it as well.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 "The dislocation should be gently pulled out because if held too tightly then it can cause injury to surrounding organs such as the stomach or heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	 "The dislocation of the upper arm can cause pain from its socket and around it. It may lead to misalignment and loosening.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 "It is advised that the surgeon instructs the patient not to clench their fist and maintain a gentle grip on the artery so as not to cause any harm.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	 "Dislocations of this type are known as dislocations to the mouth. They can cause damage to the teeth and gums.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	 And they are lost from the second level down.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	 Dislocations occur due to an injury or filling of space
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	 The dislocations of the arms were just as severe as those of the legs, because it caused pain in these large limbs;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 Instruct the patient to not forcefully rub them too much, as they may cause damage and tear their veins;
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	 The dislocation of the shoulder is severe from its base, and causes damage to veins, and it's important that the dislocation be large enough and flexible so she can do her treatment properly;
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	 And eventually if she was subtle, it would break.
et i fai grans plaies.	 It could cause large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	 The leg dislocations were severe because they caused pain throughout the body, and were among the most painful injuries of the body, including the heart, bladder, and flower veins.
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	 "And after long use they weaken the legs more and bring on pain in greater degrees.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	 "The manner to put on the bandage is that you tie it tightly when first applied and then secure it firmly, and move it gently, without ceasing what you are doing until you have tied off the artery and pulled out the arrow.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	 "Then he takes away the bandages, and in the treatment of wounds because they have such pain, and make sores.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	 "If it is only necessary to do so once, but you should do large and deep wounds;
et suce legierement.	 "And make a small incision.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	 "If he is very swollen, if it's necessary to do so twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	 "The first time with a small incision into the large vein.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	 And if he is injured for the third time
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	 And when we want to pull out two sutures slowly and slowly, but only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	 And if there are many wounds, they often come back;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	 And if the cautery is painful and lasts for a long time until all the wounds are closed, then it is advisable to use a soothing lotion or ointment.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	 If it's evening, with violet oil, or almond oil, or sesame seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 Or if you are in the morning, with mustard oil, or lavender oil, or chamomile oil, and others like it;
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	 And if one wants to extinguish the fire and its smoke, then apply oil of lavender or any other aromatic oils.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 And if one has a tender and large rash that does not want oil to be applied but must wash after the steam from roses or cold water, or dew of morel mushrooms, or dew of cucumbers, or dew of porcelain, etc.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	 And those who have much moisture should first remove any irritants such as dust or mold spores and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	 And those with excessive swelling may use wine vinegar, or hot water, or a chamomile infusion, or others like it.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	 "Do not rub the body while it is wet with water, but after bathing wait one hour or two.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 "Do not sleep immediately after the operation, and should avoid being restless until they are healed and have recovered.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	 "And beware of those who are sick with colic, as their stomach becomes too agitated and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	 "If it is convenient for them to eat cold things, like greens, lentils, and leeks, as well as other things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 "And let the patient avoid raw fish, fried bread crusts, and wet meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	 "And those with a cold complexion should drink honey syrup and musty wine, which is between bitter and new, as well as eat little, avoid fish, and avoid small fish, shellfish, and pork;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	 "And the one who will vomit should drink more than they eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	 "And it is necessary to perform this operation with utmost care, either immediately after the dislocation or afterward, in order to align and stabilize the affected limb.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 "It should be done gently but only if they are fully open.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	 "The veins that are to be cut open are those placed in the groin and neck. And after making an incision into these parts of the body, no part should make an incision into another member.
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	 "In order to treat a swelling in a limb, as when we place veins on the abdomen and buttocks in order to treat the member.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	 "And when there is pain from an abscess or stone, if it is through its nature attractive to remove the abscess or stone, or if the base of the member must be extracted.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	 And if you hold down his jaw when he has put the rope around his nose, and these two openings are tightened up very quickly.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 And never do the two openings come together, and not once plain of fire, as it may cause great pain, or if there are any herbs present,
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	 The form of the sutures applied with fire should be as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	 And he must have a large and half palm's width, so as to hit the point of an arrow, or from rain, being careful not to strike the limb with it.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	 And he must have a groove in which to put the snare, and it should be large and small according to the diseases and ailments of those who take them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 As for the young animals' snares, they are different from snares made from silk, and from those made from fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	 And you must put this bandage around the limb
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	 Apply the tourniquet made of cotton or linen tightly around the limb's circumference below where it is applied the bandage securely if you find that the tourniquet does not burn the skin.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	 Then apply it to the limb and make sure that at where we have said so, if you see, if its use goes bad, and otherwise remove the tourniquet.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 And remember to loosen it gently when before using, and tighten it afterwards so you are prepared.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	 The tourniquet when administered to treat the bleeding of many wounds is tight all around with no place for circulation and no limb alignment, only being applied to the limb temporarily.
et c’est li forme:	 It's that form
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	 Without tourniquets are applied when it is not possible to apply a tourniquet around the limb for its size or because of any other reason.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	 "And when you have removed the chaff from the harvest as mentioned earlier...
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	 "...and you will realize that those who are healthy and gentle in their treatment will succeed.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	 "...and put them gently on the ground, as long as they are domestic animals with no weapons inside...
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	 "...then wash and clean your hand thoroughly before treating the limb, whether it is bleeding or not, then wrap it with a bandage...
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 "...when they are clean and dry, you should apply the dressing to secure them in place as much as possible...
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	 "...If not, if it is loose or too wet, do this instead and then remove the dressing.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	 "...but if they are too dry after cleaning and wrapping with cold gauze, do this instead...
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	 "And if he is repeatedly dislocated due to bruising or contusions, as long as the dislocation continues.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	 "Or if you have already treated a sprain to its full extent and it is healed now.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 "And also note that in addition to the above, there may be further dislocations caused by other factors such as injuries.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	 "And if dislocations do not stop occurring even after treatment of the fractured bone or needle insertion as long as the pain continues and they are felt. Then hold them in place further while treating with soothing remedies.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 "And when you realize they are dislocated frequently due to bruising or contusions, or the bone has weakened over time and is about to break again, then.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	 "The book begins with an introduction to fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	 "Chapters on injuries are essential in the field of medicine and healing.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	 "Seek advice from this chapter and do not trust any old books or letters that have been written.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	 "Because of this issue there is a lack of information regarding it in our lands.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	 "I have studied and researched it from ancient books as well as my own experiences.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 "In this chapter I have described and explained how they are performed, as well as clearly showing the forms that should be used in these two preceding chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	 "It is advisable that those who begin this book should first understand its purpose and learn the skills of the author before embarking on it.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	 "I say that when a fracture or dislocation occurs from any cause, if you are able to apply healing remedies on one side and the other, no matter how small the injury is, whether it is superficial or deep wounds.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	 "Or when they remain too tight or too loose.
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	 "Or if they are too cold and frozen, know how to warm them quickly with fire or heat, without letting the meat become tainted by smoke from the fire, so that no one should eat it until you have completely healed.
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 The hair on the head of the patient should grow long and even,
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	 "When the dislocated shoulder begins to heal, if there is meat that moves violently or has viscosity, then cut it with a sharp knife and remove it immediately.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	 "The head of the shoulder becomes dislocated.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	 And if you pierce the veins or arteries and cause bleeding, do not move them as they would naturally.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	 However, it does not treat the dislocation by itself; you must reset and hold the limb in place until it is firmly set as before.
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 And there is no more injury, so make sure to avoid large veins if possible as we have mentioned earlier.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	 "Dislocations can occur in different ways and locations.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	 "I will tell you about all the different types of dislocations in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	 "There is one where it came out and another by straining, similar to how long you hold your breath when writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	 "If there is a dislocation with an injury or a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	 It also means that you should clean and properly maintain your tools to ensure they are in good condition for the next use.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	 And if you break a bone as it moves out of place and is very painful to fix, do it right away with force.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	 "And when it does not have twisting or pain at that time, then there is no break;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 "But he can still experience twisting or a small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	 "If it is not convenient for you to move your hand now, but take hold of the remedies that come afterward, and then gently restrain them.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	 "And when the fracture is near the shoulder joint, and it separates the two parts of the arm, then it's advisable now to have the surgeon perform the operation;
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	 "And when the doctor has left no joint between them while performing the surgery,
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	 "then he moves it gently and smoothly, so that the restoration of this is easier than the restorations in those who have injuries.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 "Then he holds it, as appropriate after surgery;
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	 "And if there are fractures in the bone, then he holds it with both hands or one hand and a little finger of the other hand, or two cords, or one cord and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	 And place the member in accordance with its natural position, if when the two broken parts of the member are rejoined by means you've just mentioned then hold tight to the wounds as much as you can, and remember that through your efforts no further harm will come.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 And firmly fix the two dislocated bones in their correct positions.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	 And hold it firmly with your hand if you believe that it is securely put back into place.
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	 If the dislocation is very firm and you do not hold it too tightly or press with excessive force as those who cause it through their forceful act of wrenching and tightening on the limb, if we have experienced this many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	 And when the limbs are at their place again, if there is no more movement or injury, do not worry, relax and calm down, do not twist it in any way.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 And make sure the limbs are as secure as you believe they will feel no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	 When there is no pain at all, it's best to put into place something that will prevent any more pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	 And keep in mind to do this carefully, making sure there is no movement as it returns to its original place.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 And the dislocated limb will be assessed by me based on what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	 The limbs that are broken can vary in size and shape, large or small.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	 Because it has only two arms and legs like many others:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	 And you should gently roll the limb to assess its position.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	 If they are heavy, like arms and legs.
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	 If you roll it with something hard and heavy, as the broad ones bind all of the limb together tightly, restricting movement in any way.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	 Then you roll it with light things to assess its position accurately.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	 And soothe the pain slowly and slowly as you gently stroke it with care.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	 Then move on to the next part of the fracture and gently hold it lightly, not too hard nor too softly as we have mentioned earlier.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 And place it between the two splints or bandages as tightly as possible until there is no longer any numbness in your fingers.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	 If you feel numb or pins and needles, put something soft against the affected area to relieve it and leave nothing on.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 Then hold your fingers straight and as firmly as you can reach, or use something soft like a cloth to cover the nails, or palm of your hand, and adjust its shape according to this form.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	 "It is necessary for a patient to make sure that any cut or incision made near joints are larger than those away from them.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	 "And the size of the cuts should be proportional to the size of the part being operated on, whether it's a small or large joint.
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	 "After holding the eyes steady during the first cut or incision made in one area, continue doing so for any subsequent cuts that are close to it.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	 "In other words, the closer the cuts are together, the more tightly they should be held. Conversely, if there is a space between cuts or incisions, hold them less tightly.
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	 "The thread should not be too thin, nor too thick, and of the right size.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 "If the thread is too thick and causes the stitches to be uneven or twisted, it's a mistake that must be corrected by using thinner threads, as otherwise the cut will not be straight if it was done too lightly.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	 "And if the hairs are pricked at their base after the cautery, they will stay still unless they grow.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	 When a patient has an abscess with wind and the veins rupture, I'll tell you the treatment afterwards.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	 And should one choose to extract arrows from the limbs, they must be broken at their first joint.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	 When limbs are large, it is not convenient to keep the fingers still for more than three or seven seconds according to one's strength.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	 And when performing acupressure techniques to restore broken bones, dislocations, and twists:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 And when you take flour and place it between two rollers with some oil, and knead until the dough is neither too thin nor too thick, then use this method to restore fractures in different ways, including both women and children, as it is gentle yet firm enough.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	 Another way of restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	 Take barley, lentils, rice, dates, figs, and mucilage, mix them together with X.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	 Mirror and aloe, mixed as follows:
alechil VIIII З.;	 And the fire cautery
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	 And sprinkle powder over them with equal care
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	 The skin on the patient's face is hot; so use this ointment because it has good composition and heals broken bones quickly, preventing further harm
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	 Another way to treat it with torsion.
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	 Prick at the base and pull gently, as you would do with an X.
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	 Look carefully and touch lightly, as if doing so with something of VIIII Z.
acaice VI З.;	 This ointment has six Z.
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 This ointment is also good for the arm and leg wounds, and applies well with powder or water, and the physician.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	 Another way to treat joints and heal broken bones is to apply an ointment.
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Take a new oil, mix it with the ointment you have, and spread this on your face.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 "The patient must lie still while performing the procedure to avoid pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	 Another way to treat a broken bone is by setting it back together again.
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	 You take fresh straw and earth, mix them together, and plaster over the broken place.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 "Another way to heal bone fractures is by using a bandage soaked in honey; apply it to the injured area.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	 Take a mixture of hemlock, chamomile flowers, violet petals, wheat flour, some water to make it stiff and cohesive.
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 And mix with wine, and seal the members together, or smear it on with a moist ginger paste, or with hot oil, and apply as needed.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 "Another way of healing other than the first one, when the wound is more severe on the bone.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	 Take hemlock roots, flax seeds, barley, millet, and chamomile flowers, of all in equal parts;
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 And mix it with salt water or honey, or wine depending on the member's condition and rest period;
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	 "In the book of this chapter it is mentioned that when a limb becomes broken through restoration attempts using wax and oil, nothing else should be used in addition to that; as long as the flesh does not become too soft or too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	 "It seems strange that one should put on the broken limb to restore it, with something dry and hot like myrrh and aloe and incense-like things; as we have mentioned.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	 Another way to treat the injury and pain is by setting it back together again.
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	 The translation of this sentence is as follows: "The fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	 After a short while, and pay attention that the hairs don't feel any pain, nor do they move their eyes.
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	 Don't hold it with both hands.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	 And if there is pain in the left eye or itching that feels like a burning sensation, do not hold it tightly, release it and cleanse it now.
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	 And gently wipe with fresh moisture, rinse thoroughly, and then release the eye as much as the itching stops, until the pain subsides.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	 Then leave it to rest for an hour, and then dry with clean linen, wet with water or oil depending on the patient's preference, and tie them securely until you are certain they cannot move.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	 "And when inflammation sets in the limb, and pain follows soon thereafter, gently reheat it with a bit of warmth, without holding too tight.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Gently as much as is reasonable.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	 "And if you see that the artery and vein are ruptured, and there is great pain and swelling, then I have healed all of this, and you should massage it gently to loosen it up, as long as you did what was first suggested.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	 If nothing of what we have said comes to the limb within three or four or five days then release it.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	 And leave him for no more than 20 days as long as the blisters are not bursting and drawing close to the edge.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	 unless you hold it too tight so that it swells its meat like I said before.
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	 And if the joint seems to be swelling more than is best for it alone, just let them come and go without further restraint.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	 Whenever you loosen it after each removal, be sure to apply a little heat every time you loosen it and let each day go by.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	 In this sentence, "tortement" should be translated as "in great pain.
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 It is bad and if it happens often, there's nothing else I can do but help alleviate the pain with care and treat properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	 There are many ways to break
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	 The main reasons for ruptures are various and unknown.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	 Because it has ruptures that are caused by impacts with a sharp object, and the bones may be fractured if they hit directly where the bone is fragile.
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 And for this reason, people try to avoid this way of breaking bones.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	 Or the bone is hit with such force that it is called a complete break;
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	 And there are wounds of both large and small breaks.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	 And if it has an impact inside the wound, or from behind, or with force on the back of the shoulder blade, or others similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	 And if there is dislocation present, which leads to tearing at the place where it was done on the bone, or inside the bone, and this will cause an injury large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	 If a wound is healed in such a subtle way that it cannot be distinguished from the bone and breaks little, then it's called a hairline fracture;
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	 "And if the wound is made by stabbing with a sharp object or piercing, or from any other cause that enters through an opening in the bone. When it becomes inflamed due to heat from the cautery.
si entre li piere dedens.	 when between bones.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	 and if they have or are very young children who wet themselves excessively.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	 and as to all these ways of fractures, the bones will be broken easily when exposed.
et je em parlerai en son leu.	 I shall speak about it later.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	 "We know all ways of fractures through withdrawal and interrogation, as well as through the use of force.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	 "The hairline is caused by when someone discovers the tumor and presses hard on it if there's a black fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	 "In the treatment of the fracture, be careful around any sharp object and see if there's no bad accident; if you vomit or lose consciousness or have pain in your arms or legs, etc., these conditions may indicate doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	 "If you don't see any accidents around sharp objects and expect to be fine as long as the treatment continues.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	 And when you reach the first one to you, it is in front of your thirteenth month that you must stop
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	 And if you hold it there before your seventh month, then its appearance will be ruined and many accidents may occur as we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	 And if the bones break due to a blow or fall that breaks off a piece of bone, you must hold it steady until
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	 and you must try to find the arrowhead, explore it in all ways that you know how to do, with the shape of the wound clearly visible, so that you can see where it entered from, whether from an organ or muscle.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	 "Keep the wound bandaged until the abscess is healed and you have ensured that no further infections occur.
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	 After removing the dressing, begin to apply the ointment according to one of two ways described in this passage.
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 One way is to gently apply it directly onto the narrow strip before you go on to the rest of the wound; and that looks like this.
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	 And then there was a greater problem than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	 The second way is by using a variety of different sized bandages, some narrow and others broad, with points for insertion into the wound.
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	 Gently applying it without allowing too much to drip off; in other words, don't let all your ointment drain out.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	 And if the ointment feels rough and hard, then you should gently apply it in small sections over time without pressing too hard against the wound, as it must have some space around its point so that nothing touches outside of the wound.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	 And it is advisable to have more than one bone in the place of the arm
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	 This is how you do this step.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	 The quality of piercing through the arm is that you pull out the arrow and tie it to your hand until the bone is pierced.
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	 Then remove the arrow to another part for a while after, and continue what you were doing until it is complete. And do this more subtly than before, gently, just like we have said, as long as you pull out the bone with your hand or from any of the strings you have tied up, carefully.
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	 Keep in mind that you should not prick at the center nor at the sheath.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	 And when you have pierced the bone and tied it, if it is convenient that you reset the arrow which is ready to be used as another instrument for piercing but it should be more gentle and subtle than the other one.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	 "If he moves his limbs too much
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 "After treating the wounds and applying ointments as we have advised.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	 And another way is when there are dislocations, which happen more frequently.
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	 "And the worst of all, it's unbearable.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	 "First it is advisable to cut off a part of the bone where there are cracks open so that when you discover this part, if you apply the Lenticular stimulus as mentioned above, then which should be its form.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	 And if he has a dislocation on one side and another on the other shoulder.
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	 "Then firmly press into it gently if you are trying to align the joint completely and do not let go of the thread that is attached.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 "It will be straight if the limb is properly aligned, because it is painful to straighten it and to feel fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	 The first sentence in English reads: "And if the arm is dislocated from its socket...
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	 If you encounter very sharp razors and after more subtle ones, continue doing so until it's done properly.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	 Also pay attention to any other small hair breaks or hairline fissures, you should treat them according to their location.
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	 And this is something to be noted by one who has learned this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	 And when the swelling is discovered, if you wish to compress it with oil, as per its quantity and severity of the wound, and set on top of the wound.
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	 Then apply another bandage made of linen or wool soaked in wine and oil, and place it over the first bandage.
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	 And do it more gently than before so as not to harm the swelling, and then administer another bandage tightly enough that only when the wound is healed.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	 And let it rest for one or two days as the abscess heals, then remove it and administer medicine like garlic, flour of figs, and incense powder, and alcohol, and similar things.
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	 And from those things, powder is applied to the wound, and an ointment is administered for pain relief.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	 And you must ensure that the wound is clean and that it does not leak any more blood, nor allow reassembly in case of tearing or injury to the surrounding tissues.
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 Because when applying a caustic substance, there may be necrosis around the wound.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	 "Unless there is an injury to a joint, it will not dislocate.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	 And if it is not healed by the medicines applied, then you should apply honey mixed with three parts of oil and wrap it in gauze.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then use the methods of treatment that are suitable for healing as much as possible.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	 And if it has been broken by two or more fractures in the bone itself, then only one of them is necessary because they are both.
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	 "And this dislocation is unstable unless it's fixed or moved into position.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	 "If one of the two parties is broken, then you should cut off or remove it, and have the wound treated separately while leaving the other intact as per its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 "And gently apply pressure to prevent pain in the area.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	 And when the break is in the upper part of his neck and cannot come to rest there if you gently place your hand on the base of the skull a short distance away
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	 "If there are two breaks, then you should try other things as well and hurry up to restore the first one if possible.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 "If it happens after the ninth or tenth application when the abscesses are drained but the dislocation still occurs, then you should cut off and remove the injured part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	 "Or if there is another break somewhere else,
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	 And let them grow as long as they fill up the pores of the skin, but do not let them get so thick
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And there was no relief for the pain as long as the joints were held firmly in place
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	 But it seems to me that this is well, and it's advisable to mix them with a mixture of flour and mill powder.
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 Then let the tent remain in place as long as its firmness lasts, and continue the tightening procedure.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	 And never let them penetrate with the exception of the tent, and if any one should pierce it through, and hold firmly onto the wick, and spread the ashes among.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	 or do as I say
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	 And when it is time to vomit and you feel a contraction in your throat or chest, whether due to overeating or from swallowing something hot; hold tight the lips together
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	 And fasten it tightly with a bandage and powder of pitch and incense mixture along with flour and mill powder, then hold it securely in place without causing any more harm.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	 And the blisters are small and burst in many pieces if the application is done well, then apply the bandage and wound treatment mixture, and continue with the binding procedure until it has healed completely.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if he has no pain or inflammation, as long as the treatment continues and they are numb from the injury
de la routure de la mandibule	 From the passage provided earlier
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	 When the mandible is dislocated and there are no wounds to heal, only cracking occurs at its base; if one tries gently to force it back into place
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	 It is advisable that you bite your lower lip with your other index finger.
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	 If the fissure is in your left jaw, bite with your right index finger; if it's on the other side of your mouth, use your left index finger and gently hold onto it while you use the opposite hand to push down.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	 And if there is severe dislocation in the jaw bone, it is recommended that you administer a dose of two parts as often as needed until the dislocation returns to place.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	 And if movements occur from the wound or stitches of gold, silver, or silk thread, then place a second dressing over it.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	 And place a large and well-made dressing, or a piece of leather long and wide in relation to the jaw, covering it firmly as you eat, commanding your tongue not to rest upon it, and drink light beverages only.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	 And if you see that the shape changes when the disease is worse or better, then reset to where it changed.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	 And apply plaster with a mixture of flour and alum after you have applied the cautery cream.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	 And apply a light plaster and let the dressings stay firm, and the position of the wound does not change.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	 Repeat this process three times.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	 "When dislocations are experienced many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	 And if there is a break and injury in the bone itself, remove one part of the bone after healing has occurred.
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	 If you have subtle symptoms that are common to this issue
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	 "And if the wound is severe enough, it may require expanding the flame according to need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "After all the pieces have been taken out and there is no longer bleeding from it, if the wound is large, then add some more dressings according to need in order to start treatment immediately.
de la forcele	 In the morning
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	 The fracture will often occur on the shoulder and breaks in three ways
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	 or it is broken but healed into two parts, with some less severe injuries that require more treatment.
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	 "And if there is a fracture with an injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	 And in case the dislocation occurs together with a wound, you should apply pressure so that it does not break loose.
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	 and towards other parts
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	 Then apply the dislocation to both sides if it is in the correct position, without any doubt or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	 And if necessary, to stretch further and apply pressure on the shoulder blade with a cloth rolled around it or a rope, making sure not to damage it severely;
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 Then apply gentle pressure and hold the dislocation with your hand as you reset it if necessary.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	 And if you don't tie the head of the arm to prevent it from moving forward as much as possible, then hold its shoulder blades inward, and bend its elbow downward so that it can move around freely in all directions but not backward
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	 And then apply the dislocation to both sides, and if there is bleeding, stop.
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	 Then carefully bind the wound with light strips of cloth without tearing off any part of it if you have one.
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	 "Or you use force on this instrument.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	 And hold the bone tightly and firmly, so that it does not slip or move as you wish to control its movement according to the size of the limb and strength of the body.
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	 And if you see it dislocate, and if the joints are wide or small depending on the path of the wound that you made when treating bones;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 When you are resetting the shoulder blade, if you see that the wound is large or small depending on how deep it was made when treating the bones;
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	 And if he feels hot and drips oil onto the surface of his eyes or on himself and into them, it is important that he immediately stops this.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	 Dislocation of the bone is when there are pains and swelling around it, you put a mixture of flour and sand into the wound along with some water, and you lightly bind it so that you may have to redo it if necessary.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	 And he placed a very thick bandage on his forehead.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	 Then he put an extremely thin bandage three fingers wide and long, covering the entire wound so that both edges of the bandage would remain inside.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	 He placed the bandage over his nose and cheeks, securing it with a cloth strip on each side.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	 And tightly wrapped the bandage around his head and face so it couldn't move or slip off as long as he held onto the forehead strap.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	 He placed a small pillow under his head so it would raise up when he was lying down to help the shoulder.
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	 If the dislocation occurs due to force on his shoulder, or if he lies with his arms crossed and this results in a bad accident, it is certain that such damage will occur.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	 After rinsing out the abscess with water, hold it steady and let it drain until it is healed.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 It was restored by the 28th day at the latest, but no sooner than that
de la brisure de l’espaule	 dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	 When a shoulder breaks or dislocates severely, it cannot be moved by any touch.
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	 If the injury is in line with the shape of a fracture and follows its natural course through all ways you know it.
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	 After rinsing out the abscess with water mixed with flour and mild soap, gently squeeze them tightly to drain off any remaining fluid.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	 Then squeeze a wider and more subtle electrode, one inch further up the shoulder, and then check for any remaining electrodes in the area.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	 "Secure it firmly with great force," he commands. "If it does not stay in its place, examine the joint.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	 "Whenever he moves," if it is held in place, and the eye ball moves from its socket, bind it to his chest with a bandage.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	 The shoulder was dislocated around X times or about X5.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 "And when the dislocation is completed," if he is able to move and sits up, as it should not be held tightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	 And put a small piece of the bone in first and remove it when healed, as we have described for the dislocation of the arm's base.
de la brisure dou pis	 In the first sentence of this medieval medical treatise written in Old French around
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	 "The body's organs are not damaged every time you dislocate an arm or shoulder, but sometimes they can occur;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 "But it breaks easily in the same place.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 And when it is broken in the middle of a battle, if you decline to help and there are many wounds around, and thrusts at your cheeks as well, and pierces into the bone beneath them, and dies all together.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	 "And if it is dislocated and the eye ball is in between two ribs, then place one hand on each side of its face, press tightly against your chest, and gently put a bandage around both sides as you see fit.
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	 Then they should apply a salve and poultice over the affected area in a subtle way, or another binding plaster, keeping it wrapped up until the wound has healed:
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	 Then straighten out the limb again and hold it tightly in place until healing occurs.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	 And if there is itching or scratching that comes from the skin itself, pain in the joint, abscess formation, wounds healing, etc., then apply dressings and treatments as needed.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then reset the dressing, and hold it tightly until it heals.
de la brisure des costes	 of the break in costs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	 The blisters that occur on the buttocks do not burst until after the back and neck are healed, because they are covered with a covering cloth.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	 "And he shall well understand the questioning.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And if the stitches have been removed as you say it should be done
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 Then apply the plaster and hold it in place with a bandage so that one is properly set.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	 And if his limbs break under the burden and cause him great pain and suffering, as is often seen in many cases.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	 And also in blows, there is and to the extent of a wound, which causes great pain and suffering, and one may have lost much blood as well.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	 And if one of the things that say you should administer foods that inflame the belly to break the stitches from afar.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	 We do not harm it at all unless a stroke happens to it; if one occurs, then we must act promptly
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	 If one happens
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	 And if there is no remedy for the left shoulder due to weakness or pain, it's similar and understandable.
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	 In all cases, doubt arises that the weakened limb cannot support itself from its own strength.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	 And when it is dislocated and moves, if the vein cannot be accessed due to poor positioning, causing discomfort; otherwise, you should lubricate the joint with oil or lotion so as to facilitate movement between the fingers, then treat for pain in the muscle tissue and blood vessels.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	 And if the limbs cause great pain that cannot be endured by holding onto its base and doubt arises from the injury itself, it is necessary to use instruments in order to support the limb.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And when the patient is to have a dislocation of an arm or leg, gently stretch and then bind it with strong thread from wounds if they are large, and provide dressings as needed until they stabilize.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	 "Hold tight the arms when you wet them with oil and wipe it off, then tie a strong bandage around the upper arm.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "After applying the dressing, hold tight to it until it dries completely or as needed.
de la brisure dou col	 "To break (split) a collarbone
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	 "No joint will come out of place if you gently apply pressure when dislocating.
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	 "And also to the elbow and wrist.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 "And when it happens to no one and you know whether he will survive or not, if you see his hands relaxed and limp and dead and cannot move them, and when you prick an arrow, do not let go.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 "The man is in a very dangerous situation and if he is restrained tightly but not to death, the bone joint is saved; and when the wounds are treated with care.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	 "And to the elbow and wrist as well, you will know whether it is stable or not. If the joint is unstable, then check if any dislocations occur in the hand and shoulder.
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 "When someone sneezes while sitting down, it can cause a sudden ejection.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And when it is sewn on the back and he wants to sit up, cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	 The sickness is deadly
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 He cannot stand his suffering in the treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	 And if an accident happens to them, then it's a less severe injury.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	 And if he moves his eyes while applying the ointment of water and oil as much as it is possible to do so;
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	 after that he applies soothing and healing ointments, binds the wound tightly, commands the hair to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	 And does not sleep from the part where it feels pain until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	 and if any of his eyes swell up, he covers them gently.
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and when the wound is large he makes sutures, then after dressing it with fine linen until it heals.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	 And if the arm joint is dislocated, it is called "arm dislocation." Hold your injured arm firmly to support its shoulder socket with the other hand. Then hold the elbow and keep it bent until you're ready for further treatment.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 After holding the elbow, if it is broken and needs to be fixed, then proceed with treating it as soon as possible and curing the wound while it's still clean
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	 "The fracture of the arm bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	 When a joint of the arm is dislocated and if there is no immediate danger to the head
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	 And afterwards, gradually loosen it up, and go slowly while avoiding pain in your arm, cracking or breaking any bones.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	 The healing process is when you hold your injured arm steady as possible, keeping the elbow bent until further treatment is needed.
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	 "and such a fracture of its kind is severe, causing great pain.
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	 The fracture occurs only at the top part, if one breaks it in half, as long as both parts are of similar size and shape
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	 "And if it is broken at its base,
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	 After breaking it in half as described above, hold the top part steady and then secure an end of string or cord to prevent further movement.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	 And remove any loose clothing that may hinder its free movement
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	 "Instruct the patient to lie on their back or stomach.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	 And tie the patient securely when necessary, as long as their clothing is loose and does not hinder movement.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	 Then continue to treatment, holding them steady if it seems necessary, until there are no further accidents.
et c’est li maniere.	 That's the end of our translation.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	 The dislocation of the shoulder.
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	 The attendants are those between the waist and the shoulder blade; if they are dislocated as mentioned above, one must attempt to restore them using either of these methods.
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	 The first sentence is "Don't lie when giving a reason for making your hair grow longer".
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	 And if there are two joints affected, hold the hand up high and if one of the joints is affected.
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	 Then hold the other arm down tightly while it grows to its length, and if there is a second joint affected, do not move anything except for the hair on that side.
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	 Then place your fingers together and hold tightly until the dislocation returns as needed.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	 "Another way to do this is by tying the hand onto the arm and instructing both hands to reach towards the same object that is suspended from their wrists, one at a time.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 "And if the extraction is particularly difficult, restrain one of the hands and have it stretch towards the object while restraining the other hand to prevent movement.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	 And if the dislocation is on the upper arm, make sure to fix it tightly and move the other hand away from there.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	 And if it is on the lower arm, make sure to hold it gently while moving your other hand away from there.
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 "Hold tightly to the limb you want to move first,
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	 "Keep the limb still as possible while applying gentle pressure with your other hand and oiling it, until the dislocation is reduced.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	 "After holding tightly to the limb you want to move first and applying gentle pressure with your other hand, then place the elbow on the shoulder or the chest.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	 "And place the elbow and hold it tightly while holding onto the shoulder or chest; if both arms are in a loose position then there is no problem.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	 "And if you doubt that the limb is not moving, use a larger and stronger stick, between two or three fingers on either side of the joint, so they can both pass through.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	 Then strain on the tendons, as I have advised at the beginning of this chapter to stretch vigorously
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	 And if you see the seat of the tendons and stretching, as we have advised, in the end that you support the arm tightly while it is raised to seventh time, as we have mentioned.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 Then check the third joint from below, which should not loosen up or give way with cold, unless the neighboring muscles come to support it because of its stiffness.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 "If you are referring to the earlier part of this text...
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	 And if nothing is done in time to prevent this from happening after the third joint or more, let it cause its own harm, and keep its hands on its back and stomach.
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	 And make sure the joint is tightly bound with a bandage constantly, and check regularly how it moves or not, that the limb should not move or be misshapen by others.
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	 "And if you apply the virtue of medicine, let him do as we have laid out, in such a manner that the meat is cut thinly first.
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 And when it comes to reattach, no matter how much
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	 It is customary that the shoulder and arm should be reset within an hour or two.
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 And afterwards, one must then apply a hot compress and administer ointments to treat the injured area
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 "...and if there is stiffness or swelling that persists for more than two months...
de la brisure du bras	 "From the break of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	 The arm is made up of two bones, one is called the ulna, and the other is the radius.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	 And the others are large, and that bone is what's known as the humerus.
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	 In such a way that only one of them breaks or moves separately, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	 When the smaller bone breaks, the repairs are light and healing is quick.
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 "And if a large joint is dislocated, causing severe pain and more damage than when multiple joints are dislocated together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If only one finger dislocation occurs gently extend and straighten it
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	 And if the dislocation is very serious, it requires stronger restraint.
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	 And extend the wrist upwards and draw back your hand's fingers higher than others', and the little toes also should be drawn back lower than others', so that you may see further into the eye, while keeping the eyelids closed.
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 Then stretch out your arm to the side with your hand, or to where you are leaning, and another ministering towards the other one's ear.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 Then place them in their best position.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	 And if there is a piece of bone protruding out when it is in its place, and you cannot remove it without causing harm to the surrounding area, then do not try to remove it at all unless absolutely necessary; as we have mentioned before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	 And in using the leech for bleeding, I have already spoken about that single practitioner;
si pren la cure.	 if you take the remedy.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	 And in the beginning of the restoration after a hemorrhage, if you wrap your fingers around and apply oil mixed with wax to prevent bleeding, that it should neither be too hard nor too soft.
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 And keep them steady as they are pricked at their base
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	 And then you apply a poultice made of ground meal with much flour, and bind it tightly to the wound.
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	 make sure that there are six or more stakes in different positions
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	 either the poultice is positioned on one of the bones, or at two points.
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	 and tighter than in another place, and softer when touching with gentle touch as I mentioned in the beginning of this chapter.
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	 The bandages around the poultice should be soft and moist, and not too tight or harsh.
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 And there are threads that are strong enough to tie it down without being too thick or too thin as mentioned earlier.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 Reward the member after a short while.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	 "And if any injury occurs to the limb, whether it is internal or external, as long as the wounds are bandaged tightly, so that they may be healed.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 The limb should not be moved gently at all costs.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 "And again apply a poultice, and let the leeches be warmed up and released, and similar things if necessary.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	 "And make sure the bloodletting cannot come to that member because it is too thin, and if necessary warm up the veins gently and hold them still until they cease.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 "And none of these things that we have said come to harm or injury, unless you do not apply the leeches gently as mentioned.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	 "Or when it happens suddenly, then press the hands to its side and hold them steady, avoiding any sudden movements or shaking.
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 "Then the dislocation is restored in 35 days or less depending on composition and thickness of the flesh.
de la brisure de la main	 arm
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	 It itches the back of the hand and whenever we move our hands a lot, only one side will itch many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	 "And if a finger is broken or torn off, then tie it firmly in place and hold still until it heals.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	 "Then set the hand on a table and stretch out its fingers. Stretch as far as you can, keeping them well aligned.
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	 And fasten the splints, hold tight, then apply a plaster according to how much blood there is.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	 Or you can wrap it in linen
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	 And if the splinter enters through the belly button area, if you use cloth strips and instruct them to prick at their base.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	 Then hold a long strip down firmly and apply it as large as the hand's palm, restraining any movement as you see fit.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	 And if the break occurs in front of you, tell them to place one eye on each palm and hold them steady with their other hand while holding it tightly against your chest, making sure that both hands are outstretched and right.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	 And if they come out of nowhere or anywhere at all, just remove them gently, applying pressure only when necessary.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	 And hold with the hand and use a small strip to lift it out, preventing any movement.
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	 And if the splinter is from elsewhere on your finger or one of the others, just apply pressure with the other hand after removing it gently.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	 "Or tie them well when you apply it, so as to make sure they stay on, or if tied properly at the time of application.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	 "And in the restoration and positioning of sutures, and after healing whatever you have mentioned occurs as I said.
de la cuixe brisie	 "This phrase likely refers to an issue or problem with the shoulder joint
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	 "The ears are often broken when opening it up, and one can see them clearly in front but not at the back;
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	 "And in restoration, if you bind tightly to a strip of skin, along with another strip.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	 "The hairs become matted at the base and extend their roots to their ends;
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	 "And that is when fractures occur in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 "And if it is dislocated at its base and pricked by the nail of one hand or another, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	 "And if it is crooked at the joint and either way you stretch or extend, it can lead to injury;
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 "Then place the arm to rest on its own accord according to its natural shape and then apply the plaster, and hold the stitches so that they do not move.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	 "And if it is at an abscess incision, when he lets it heal over time.
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	 "It should be done in the same way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	 "It is advisable to straighten the knee joint firmly in two or three days, and then turn it so that the toes gently touch the root of the nail. Then stretch out your leg from side to side, and move your head up and down.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	 "Then straighten the leg and stretch it from side to side. Then put a bandage on the ankle joint, then another one at the shin bone.
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	 "Then tie it snugly between the leg and the thigh with bandages to prevent movement. Then you can start doing rotations of 3 or 4 times on each joint.
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	 "And as you continue with more rotation movements for your joints and less tighten the bandage.
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	 After removing the dislocation of the upper arm and the lower arm, proceed to remove the third one that is under it, until you have removed all three.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 Hold tight if the joint does not move from its place, then let it go again; otherwise, do not interfere further with this or any similar thing.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	 And if the joint is dislocated after being loosened and tightened as described earlier.
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	 If an arm bone is broken while removing it, do not proceed further unless necessary.
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	 And if you cannot remove the joint because of breaking the limb or tearing, then do not proceed with that limb.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	 The treatment as described earlier is to be done regardless, unless otherwise specified
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	 There are no broken bones in the upper arm or lower arm during removal, as described earlier.
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	 Certainly
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	 The joints are restored at different speeds depending on their diversity of composition.
de la ruelle dou genoil	 Of the road to hell
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 The road to hell is rough but it passes by many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 And if it breaks only with a small fracture or with force and has any wounds anywhere on the body and is painful everywhere and causes pain as well, that means there's injury.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	 And when the restoration is complete, make sure everything is in its proper place so that it cannot move.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	 After that, put on the plaster and let it harden well. If you have followed my instructions correctly, then bind it so that it cannot move, and repair all the other wounds as before.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If there is an accident which it should be done when it is right, until then keep him sane.
de la brisure de la jambe	 The wrist break
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	 The veins in the leg have two openings which are called "mustels" and "fossles";
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 When the veins in the arm break as they do in the legs, and for that reason it is necessary to reset them just like the two arms all together, and the eyes are also injured. And if both openings are broken at once then the leg of all parts is injured.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	 "And if they are pulled gently
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	 And if the large bone is broken, it will cause great pain, and one sees well.
et torne desoz.	 It is torn asunder
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	 After the treatment has been administered, it straightens up and ties the eyes together evenly;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	 However, at any rate, it is advisable to break the tie and have light treatment so that the restoration may be less severe.
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 Align according to its nature.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	 After completing your work, if you have two faces of pus that come from one leg and the other, and run along its length until it reaches the end.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	 Then stretch out two cords of similar thickness and tie them together in the middle, and with this light knot the leg will not fall to one side or the other, and it is good.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	 "And the doctor does not administer any remedy to the limb that causes this injury and swelling.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	 "The physician also examines whether there is another joint affected by this incident.
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "As long as he remains calm.
de la brisure des os dou piet	 "Of the bones due to injury
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	 "The joint does not dislocate
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	 "If he is holding his breath due to pain in the ribs, and you see that one bone is pressing against another, as if he wanted to pull it out and then place a hand over the wound so that the bones can be lifted up, and press them gently until they straighten themselves.
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	 "Then apply ice and compresses to the belly with the little bandage over the broken ribs, hold it in place constantly, then cover yourself with bandages, and other things that you have prepared.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	 "And when the third or fourth joints are passed, if there is a dislocation on one of them, because you will find the bones broken in some way.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	 "And if any of the two joints are dislocated, when you release them, like we have advised the other joint.
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	 "Then place the second joint with its length according to what I have said, and tighten it as well.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	 "And if there are two or three, or more, dislocate one in length according to its quantity, straighten it with a rope and tighten the bandage over its place;
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	 "And if you are going to apply this treatment to the top of the bandage covering the belly; if it feels good.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	 "It is also necessary that you do not neglect other things I have mentioned for dislocations, such as the others we have advised.
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	 "And afterwards check if there are any accidents.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	 of the bone fracture at the point
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	 "When the woman's body is dislocated, if you make it lie flat on her back and hold her down with your feet.
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	 Then he shall bind up his hand with sinew as a tourniquet.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	 Then he shall apply gentle pressure slowly and gradually until the bleeding stops completely.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	 If she needs to urinate, if her tourniquet is too tight, and if she has urinated while wearing it, he must loosen it gently.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	 If the tourniquet is loose or she becomes unconscious, bind a bandage tightly around her arm and apply pressure to stop the bleeding.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	 Then blow into the bandage until it is completely inflated.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	 Nature will restore circulation if the tourniquet loosens.
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then remove it gently and leave no marks, as long as it is not too tight.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	 And when a finger or limb is broken, if the blood supply to it has been restored as in the arm of the patient.
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 "And these wounds are hidden from him who does not understand them or their secrets.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	 And the dislocations mean most times a right course towards restoration.
enten le donques.	 Until then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	 When it is broken, take an onion skin and apply it to the wound;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	 Then wrap a bandage around it tightly, leaving three stitches or more, and it will be completely healed.
de brisure avec plaie	 "To treat dislocations with wounds:
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	 "It is advisable for someone who has a dislocation with an abscess or the like to be treated now if what our previous statement says holds true.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 "And if the wound heals but not completely, then you should come back to try and reset the dislocation as soon as possible or at least in an hour.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	 "And if the shoulder dislocation is corrected gently and firmly, so that it settles down smoothly, as long as the dislocation remains still, but do not overly tighten or loosen anything, because you are at risk of a bad injury.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	 "And if you try to correct it by gently and firmly applying pressure at the joints, but make sure your hands are relaxed.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	 And if you're unable to remove it by hand when the instrument is one that has been used for removing arrows and which is of iron with seven or eight needles long, and its breadth varies according to the quantity of the wound.
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	 And for this reason it is better to apply three or four stitches according to the quantity of the wound.
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	 And when there is much blood, it does not move at all from the compressed limb towards the outside.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	 And they are called "palanche" because when this dislocation is located near an obvious bone,
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 once it is reduced to one side and stays there, or if both sides are dislocated simultaneously.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 And the breaks must be gentle and the limbs should not easily take hold of the bone as long as you grasp the joint firmly, so that the limbs are unable to grip it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	 And once it is reduced to one side and stays there, or if both sides are dislocated simultaneously.
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	 Then proceed with what was mentioned earlier: applying a splint around the arm and controlling movement to stabilize it.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And when the bone has been reset and the patient experiences great pain afterwards, you know that this is not part of its natural course.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	 If he is in his right hand, then apply a black silk bandage tightly on the arm and clean it properly.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	 And do not put anything other than oil on the wound or let any dirt get in that would bring infection and corruption.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	 After you have restored the limb, let it bleed and cover with clean cloth according to the size of the wound. Make sure not to restrict its movement with a bandage
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	 And many times have made this injury worse, and brought it close to death or corrosion of the limb.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 Or more swelling and severe pain compared to other injuries.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	 And if the wound is large or severe, you may doubt that an accident has occurred and seek to apply a dressing so as not to harm it.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 But in any case, use tough cloths instead of the dressing mentioned earlier, and bind them tightly.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And when you see after the first or second day of dressing the wound if you think that what you have done is all right then put on a soothing ointment to stop bleeding, as well as similar ointments.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	 It's necessary that you dress the second limb twice a day, morning and evening, until it is clean and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	 And make sure both limbs are dressed in the same manner as before to ensure proper healing.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	 And each day the dressing is maintained and it cannot be undone but to remove the bandage when there are small pieces of bone which come from cuts so that you want the wound covered, and all these fragments should be removed that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And a fistula comes to its place, or another way of corruption arises if it is necessary for you to cure as described in this chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	 And when the limb is broken and pricked through to its bone or shoulder joint, as in an elbow injury or other severe injuries, if you do not take immediate action for fear of further harm, many times it leads to death but will linger until it fails.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	 "In the meantime, apply cold compresses to him after every 2 hours or so, then treat the wound as soon as possible.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 And if it does not work, leave it alone.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	 of those who come from sorrow
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	 There are often times after the healing of the bruise, especially when it is close to the joint, and there is a concern about the shape or form of the member.
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	 And by chance cannot make the members their own naturally.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	 "The best way to help is...
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	 "If the patient is advised to use ointments such as oil of lavender, incense, and myrrh, and other spices like acacia and aloe vera, or all mixed with alcoholic spirits or vinegar, if you do not have any of these things...
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	 "...and put them on the burn and hold tight, and don't move your hands at all.
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	 And then dislocation occurs repeatedly as long as the bones are straight.
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	 Or you may strain it with a well-made pulley.
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	 As the bones are straight, there is no pain in using them to move the limbs.
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	 The dislocation becomes more intense with time and is accompanied by swelling in the affected area.
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 Or you may use it without any rubbing as long as it stays straight, and the pain relief lasts while it is right.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	 two limbs which are weak after dislocation
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	 When a bone fracture has been healed, and you need to massage after weak and sensitive parts of the limb afterwards due to any reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	 For one is because it was too narrow when tied up, and did not stretch as he could have.
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	 Or due to the fact that there were too many knots, and it was unable to release its own tension in the limb.
ou por multitude d’arosement;	 The first sentence of this text does not have a direct equivalent in English as it is unique to Old French, meaning "or by many reasons.
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	 or due to excessive movement that prevents its proper functioning.
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	 or when he has little strength in his chest and is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	 The remedy involves gently massaging the affected area to make it more tender, while applying pressure evenly until all pain subsides in him.
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	 and give him rest, and do not worry or fret;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	 Then apply warmth to the affected member, so that any coldness is driven away, and the swelling subsides as the numbness leaves it.
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	 And let him return to his natural state.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	 "The arm was injured after surgery.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	 After the restoration of the member, and it is torn apart quickly, and its form after the member will be smooth everywhere so that his natural state does not come back.
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	 "Many people say they must break their arm completely in half.
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	 And the work is blamed and brings great harm, and many die.
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	 Wherever there is doubt and fear, the tortures are fierce if he has any heated herbs or cooked moist ones as they grow fine, roots, marrow, and similar things.
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	 The emollient is soothing if it does well and you take the vinegar from the mallow or linseed oil as fat.
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	 Or you can use fats like figs or grind them with finely ground coltsfoot and similar medicines that calm the sudden inflammation.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 "Do not hold the dislocation repeatedly for an extended period with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 Let the limb rest when ever any hour
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	 The tortures are harsh and bitter if they are done carefully to the bone, as needed for covering with iron if it is necessary to cut deeply.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	 And place a cushion for support while studying the treatment
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	 This chapter discusses the causes of dislocation.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	 Dislocations occur when a joint moves out of its place and prevents it from moving properly, causing misalignment in the limb and resulting in great pain and injury to the patient.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	 If there is no alternative treatment available, now is the time to resort to another approach.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	 When it is swollen and inflamed, and if reset improperly, there will be swelling at the incision site.
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	 why should one avoid moving when it is inflamed:
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	 there are often pains and other sufferings.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	 At all times, if this will happen, when the abscess is opened, then let it be left as long as the incision site remains closed.
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 Then raise a limb to warm air and oil it thoroughly, then gently straighten the limb as needed, and treat every member when it comes in its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	 "And I ordered the doctors to treat dislocations with great care.
des mandibules	 the jaw
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	 It is often that the jaws are dislocated and occur in two ways
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	 or they may be loose at their roots, and soften over time.
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	 "They are completely paralyzed and they cannot hold their tongue still; it cannot close its mouth, nor can it swallow words.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	 If a dislocation is small and can be corrected with repeated attempts.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	 "If she is completely paralyzed, then you must immobilize her as much as possible and do not harm her.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	 "By the same manner that you apply it to the shoulder, but for the dislocation of the jaw, hold one of his hands at the root of the dislocation in order to hold open his mouth and prevent him from dislocating himself again.
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	 "The other hand should be raised to keep it free.
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 Instruct the patient to gently massage his jaw and move both of them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	 And they move their arms at will, as they please from their own will
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	 "And gently pull on his jaw, especially when you combine them with heat and oil so that they are loosened lightly.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	 "Do not target me anymore if you have already mentioned.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	 When they are all removed gently and the mouth is well lubricated with oil and wax, then bind them firmly together.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	 Rest the hairs on its back and the joints should be in between two supports so that it does not move forward or backward but only side to side, as long as the pain is relieved and the jaws are closed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 And then gently cleanse what needs to be cleaned and do not open the mouth to drink or eat until the jaws are well closed and clean.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	 And if the two jaws cannot be moved back into place within an hour and are still clenched due to fever or worry, then take them out gently with care, and try to vomit while keeping cool; in such cases, vomiting is the best solution for the stomach.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	 And when you see that it is in vain;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	 Many times have died to those who had this disease.
de la forcelle	 the wheel
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	 The tire could not be dislodged because of its thickness and softness, and it was destroyed the first time it was burned; and thus, it is said.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	 And the restoration process is when he stretches his arms out to it
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	 and then presses the dislocated limb towards your palm and it returns
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	 Then he takes an emboîté and band-aid, and holds them in place.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	 the shoulder dislocations cannot be removed from the body.
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	 And if it is dislocated only once when you try to reset it with your hand as we have advised.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then he takes the emboîté and band-aid, holds them in place, and instructs the patient to keep their arm down as much as possible.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 And if you want to set it back into its place when it has been dislocated on that side.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	 dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	 It is not dislocated unless one of the following ways occur:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	 it is not dislocated if only one of its ends dislocates into the shoulder socket.
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	 And to the second part of the thigh
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	 causing pain to that area of the body.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	 And it does not cause pain in the buttocks or behind the back, and
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	 as for those who are bent forward too much because they are injured.
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 Those with enough strength can bend and straighten their bodies without injury.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	 "And in any case there is no use hitting it with blows or kicks, and if you hit the shoulder with a sharp blow, take care that it was dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	 It is important that you try it out while still being careful.
et adonques encomence la cure.	 And then apply the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	 It is noticeable when a dislocation occurs near the shoulder and there is a significant difference in alignment between the affected and unaffected areas.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	 You will find that one shoulder is hollowed out, while the other shoulder is prominent like a handle.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	 "The arm cannot bring its hand back to its side without any movement.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	 "And if it is dislocated in the upper part and cannot be hidden because you clearly see it on the arm.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 "This way of dislocation does not always work if it is new or the fingers are bent.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	 "One way to do this is by gently pulling the arm with the dislocated shoulder upward and placing your hands underneath it. Then gently stretch out the upper part of the joint.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	 "And you stretch up and place under it.
si venra hastanment.	 "If it doesn't work right away.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	 "And if after trying this way as we described, if you think the dislocation is too severe and the arm should be warmed up first.
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	 "And you warm it gently and soothingly with things like a hot bath and fennel and chamomile. And if that doesn't work.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	 "Then apply pressure to the base of the ear on one side, and gently hold your thumb against it. And straighten the arm in the direction you want to move.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	 "And do the same with the other shoulder, if it does not move forward.
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	 "Now both shoulders are in place, and you will follow this method to perform each step correctly.
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	 "And make sure the shoulder blade is higher than the hair on it.
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	 "Then gently lift your elbow over the shoulder blade and hold it in place. And raise your elbow higher than the hair on that side.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 "And do the same with the other arm, moving downward towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 And if it is too tight, if pressed with no weight, then a dislocation occurs now
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	 "The shoulder dislocation can also be performed in another way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	 "The dislocated shoulder is immobile on the ground, whether it has been caused by a fall or anything else.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	 "Once a sling is applied to the arm, but it should not be too tight or loose, as this may cause pain.
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	 "Then extend your hand in front of you and the dislocation will return to its original position.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	 "If it does not return due to anything we have mentioned here then perform this remedy:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 "Take a piece of string about two inches wide and long enough to reach behind the ear. Secure one end around your neck.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	 "Take the other end and wrap it around the forehead, making sure not to tighten too much. Then place this on your head behind.
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	 "Extend your arms so the elbow is behind and hold the shoulder with one hand. Place the other arm at the base of the neck and extend it out.
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	 "The injury has now occurred.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	 And when it is settled in any way that may be, if it is convenient to you to put the salve on as soon as possible with powder from the mill, with incense and cinnamon bark, covering all of the shoulder and torso, then strain through it and tie a bandage around the arm at its base, so they do not move.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	 And it's best to rest the limb as much as possible while the body heals, because it will heal faster.
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	 Then after every 24 hours or 7 days, move it around
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	 And if it is firm and does not loosen up, then you should apply heat.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 And if the connection is due to moisture or from some other cause, it's convenient that you apply the third cut on top of it, whether it was applied before by another incision.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	 And if you do all this and it does not loosen up after 7 days, the dislocation will remain in place, making it impossible to lift your arm above your head because of how it is dislocated or twisted.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	 And if you do all this and the dislocation never loosens up on its own.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	 The dislocation that occurs in the wrist or elbows, back or buttocks if it is caused by an impact and the hands are clenched tightly, requires further treatment.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And hold steady until they are healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	 "After healing comes stiffness in the member and movements after some time, as long as you keep it moist, and until it returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	 "The dislocation is painful.
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	 "The dislocation occurred at the point of injury and has come back to trouble;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	 "It happened in all directions and was particularly visible from the front and back, but could not be easily corrected because it was clear to see;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	 "The dislocation caused disfigurement of the limb.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 "And when you tie a bandage tightly to an abscess, if it is not visible clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 The binding is tight and cannot be loosened, nor should the arm move in any way
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	 "It is necessary that you reset it as soon as possible to prevent its recurrence, since it often returned and could cause further pain.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	 "However, in any case, it couldn't be easily corrected even from the back;
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	 "And as for other dislocations, they cause greater pain and often come with death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	 "The restoration is when it is so severe that the patient cannot hold its own hand any more, you will need to support their arm with both hands.
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	 And if the arms are stretched out and the hands become detached from their base, or if it is connected to the root of the palm as soon as it grows on its own
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	 "And if he has dislocation on his shoulder, when he doubles one hand over the other, it causes pain at the base of his palm.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	 If upon stretching, a firm hold must be maintained.
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	 And if the minister stretches both arms and tugs them hard when they do not return to their place;
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	 Then pull one shoulder blade back while wrapping a long and wide strip around it.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	 And when tightening the joint with one hand if no oil is present to lubricate it, then tighten as much as possible until it grows.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 And when it is at its place, if you apply a lubricant and pull gently while restraining the arm from moving, release it slowly until the hand is free.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	 And if the joint is firmly set, then it stays loose.
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	 And if you find that the connection is not tight enough, then loosen it and retighten it as much as possible while keeping it firmly in place.
puis le deslie.	 After loosening it
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	 And if the joint loosens after removing a loop or knot and it feels tight again while soaking in water and pressing as much as possible.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	 Or you may tie the joint with a loop of coarse wool, let it soak and loosen as much as possible for one night then soak again and remove any excess knot.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	 And when you pull, the joint feels tight so tie it with a coarse wool loop, let it soak and loosen as much as possible for one night then soak again and remove any excess knot.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if this is done two or three times the joint will be loose.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	 And if you see it so moist that it is about to burst with fear, then hold tight.
si revenra a sa disposition.	 It will come back into its place.
li dislocation de la main	 "Dislocation of the arm
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	 The arm dislocation is severe and the recovery is light, more so than other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	 Wherever possible, the limb should be returned to its original position as quickly as possible, otherwise it may become dislocated again.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	 And when you place the arm on a table and stretch out its hand, cover it with another hand, and hold its fingers gently, ensuring that they do not move until they are healed.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	 Wherever possible, you should check if the limb is in its original position properly.
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 When placing it on a table for stretching and straightening purposes.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 "The dislocation occurs at the wrist of the hand if he moves his arms in a table manner and looks at his hands through the joints.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	 "Now let me see...
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 If not, if the patient's veins are closed and they cannot be reopened, then it is recommended to leave them alone.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	 And if the patient can no longer suffer and you cannot reopen it after a few days or weeks, then you should perform surgery to open it up.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	 And do not put any pressure on the patient's hands while they are restrained in this way, and you cannot restrain anything at all.
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	 if the nerves are damaged or cut off
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 If there is no other option but to restrain by fire cupping and surgery alone can be performed.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	 "When the hands are loose and you put it into place as we have taught you to do, then apply fire and let it burn for a time; after that, remove it gently.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "If he cannot move and there is no pain or swelling, if you apply hot oil to it and pull it gently as long as it remains still.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	 "the dislocation of both arms
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	 Do not ever put your two hands on any part of the body or at the back of the palm or stomach.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	 And when you are done with both arms and hold the joint steady until it grows out, then support them on top of each other and move towards where the dislocation is.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	 "And let him go two joints, then put it next to another.
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	 And bind the joint as we said, and lay aside this one, and make them move together.
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And do this for as long as it is straight and equally done, so if you've done it here like before, keep doing until it becomes stable.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 And then do the same on the other side when it becomes loose from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	 "two dislocations of the elbow
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	 "When both elbows or shoulders are dislocated, and there is no treatment available, as the patient may die.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	 And if the signs suggest that both sides should be pulled out but cannot stay in place, and many times they make all members loose, or two fists, or arms.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	 And often it happens to one side four times.
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	 If it happens on the back, you say "Gilboize.
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	 The treatment is that if it comes from childhood.
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 "There are no remedies nor treatments for this.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	 And the one that comes from striking or jolting, or similar events, they have ancient methods of treatment with large words, or he makes no use in all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 But I taught him according to my intention, and formed streams in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	 I say that in the sudden coming before which has no remedy or treatment;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	 and such ones that come straight to the second layer of ribs, and cannot be cured unless they come directly from the back as I said.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	 and it is that the hairs should be shaved on his lower jaw, and the restraint of them so they do not fall off.
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	 Then cut the hairs on his forehead in earth and one more by piercing it, and bind them with sinew under the ears of hair, and another by stitching, and both legs.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	 "And let him minister with leeches, one for the ear and another for the eyes.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 "And let them be firmly applied as we have said, so that they may lie on the eyebrows and hold their paws in front of their eyes until they are closed.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	 "And if they do not improve with this cure, then take three long rods and break them into pieces, tie the ends together, and place a bandage over their eyes.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	 "And let him put his eyes on the other side of the bandage, pressing hard until he closes it at both ends.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 "If you notice any fainting spells that come from turning your head when someone turns to face you.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	 "And let the leeches be applied to the ears of one arm and across his face, then apply them to the other ear, nose, mouth, etc.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	 "And after the cut is made, whether or not it can be undone, let the incision remain firmly in place until it heals.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	 "And after the second incision is made, whether or not it can be undone, let two stitches holding the palm of your hand in place to hold back the movement.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 "And then the two strands are tied around the finger, one to the first cut and one to the second, tying both ends together with silk so as not to move.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 "When it is healed, sew up with silk the incision made through a hole in the skin as well as sewing up each ear separately and stitching an eye of a third needle so that the lower part of the spine is straight along with the rest of the ribs, then close the stitch over one.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	 And at the end of health if it is convenient to administer soothing and healing medications with what we have advised here.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	 And never give a placebo, nor do they come back after the spine has been opened up and treated for dislocations.
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	 It is he who opens it, so that one must not have doubts.
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 due to this there would come death.
des dislocations de la hainche	 "Joint dislocations are a serious injury that prevents the joint from moving properly
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	 Injuries of the knee and shoulder only occur through dislocation, not from other causes.
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	 The joint of the knee is dislocated into four pieces.
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	 Dense and flat, front and back
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	 And denser further, little flattened in the front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	 And the knowledge of dislocations is that when a patient dislocates their leg with an arrow or stone, it is longer and causes more pain than normal joints. The arrows cannot increase the size of the wound due to fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 "And it is from this dislocation of the shoulder joint, because that which dislocates the elbow comes.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	 The sign of the one who comes to burn is that it can be contrary to these precautions.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	 And if there are signs in front of it, then its leg is well-aligned with completion.
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	 In any case, do not double the pain by doing so, and if you feel it necessary to stop before; hold your breath, and squeeze your muscles, until it passes from below the ankle
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	 The sign of the one who comes behind is that it cannot spread and double in size, and the leg is shorter than the other one, ankles are relaxed, and a bone is extracted from beneath them to the side.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	 The symptoms of this type of dislocation are that you repeatedly cause it to dislocate itself and its healing takes longer depending on its position. If there is no treatment available;
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	 And I suggest that you should make sure your arm or leg is in a proper place, otherwise
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	 And in the case of a fresh dislocation which is quite common and hard to fix if you hurry too much when resetting it and the bones are misaligned.
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	 Because of this occurrence, there is no other remedy available
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	 If it does not return in this manner, then you should apply force and hold the limb tight with both hands, or bind it tightly to the ground.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	 And another minister is to stretch out one hand and tightly grasp it in such a way that you pull your other arm towards your head.
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	 And the third minister is to tie the patient's chest with cords, using both hands so they cannot breathe until released.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 And stretch it up and down once as long as the abscess remains on the ground, while you hold them in place until it is released.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	 This manner of extension is common; if a dislocation occurs as we have mentioned, it's alright
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	 If not, then apply a remedy to his likeness.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	 When the dislocation occurs at the upper part of his shoulder, you should tie it to its side so that is remains on the ground and then hold it in place with a cord from above.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	 Then straighten out the bent arm, and bind the large vein of the limb to prevent bleeding.
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	 If it returns to its place now
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 This method of dislocation is less severe than others
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	 If you do not hold the affected limbs together with great force on their heels and toes, and onto their knees and ankles too much then the limb may be stretched further than others.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	 Then let it hang from the top of a pole, or supported on the ground with both arms extended.
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 Then instruct the patient to bind their arm with ropes from above and have other ministers holding it who tie it onto the limb as well, because the dislocation is now correctly positioned.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	 And when the dislocation is at its place if it pains them as we have said in those who are gentle and strange to their limbs straightening out properly on both legs.
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	 Then tighten (or bind?) it between the fingers of both hands into a ball.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 And plant the cloth moist so it doesn't stick to the hands, then extend both arms outward towards him, and make sure each arm reaches up to his head when resetting the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 "It's alright then.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If not, lie down and press into it as we mentioned in the previous chapter, and prick at the healthy part of the extremity.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	 And when a dislocation occurs, it is advisable to stretch the affected limb as much as possible and follow closely what I have said.
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	 And put their arm across the chest of the opposite hand, and stretch it downward towards the ground.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	 And when the dislocation is over but cannot be stretched downward to ground level, it is advisable that he should lie flat on his back as described in the previous sentence.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	 And with his face up and the hand extended like before, and he must also press against the shoulder joint in this manner.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	 And when the limbs are extended, they will straighten
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	 unless he holds tightly with both hands and pulls on a rope
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	 Resting for three or four hours, then lie down, and hold the rope tightly.
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	 You will see that they are straight if the rope is held tight, as seen before, and leave them for three hours.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 Then lie down and make a strong effort to relax your limbs while holding on tightly.
de la dislocation dou genoil	 Of the shoulder joint
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	 The veins are evacuated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	 First is by knowing, first purging and then bleeding.
et ne desalue point devant.	 And no more evacuation should be done after that.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	 And the signs are as you command the patient to bend his leg to its socket, and if he does not straighten it at the socket, know that evacuation is necessary.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	 "And when you restore all of them in the right way, extend your leg if possible, and place it against its face, and place your back against its feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	 "Then take hold of his elbow with both hands, pull them together, then bend the fingers and thumbs so that they form an 'X'.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	 "And as for the other limb, extend your hand as long as it grows in length and its signs show that it is properly aligned with its socket.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	 "Place the splint on and firmly hold your arm against the socket, then straighten it out until all joints are aligned well.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 "And do not force them to be straight while the limbs are relaxed.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And when one member is out of place as long as treatment continues very severely as we have experienced in the healing process so that it may be healed
de la dislocation dou talon	 Of the arm.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	 The hands are never swollen and do not swell completely, or burst
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	 "The signs indicate that the shoulder is dislocated and try first at the part where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 Lift your arm gently, and it is necessary to stretch your hand slightly as you move
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	 And when the arrow has been extracted completely, if necessary, hold it with your right hand and draw it out gently from under the arm, from near the elbow.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	 Then place your right hand on it and hold it there for two seconds, then stretch upward with all force.
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	 And do this again as we have said before, pulling and stretching the arrow out until it is released.
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	 If it reappears after that, you are doing it correctly.
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	 If not, continue the treatment because it reappeared.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	 And if it cannot reappear afterward, if you do not hold the arrow firmly against its base with your fingers on the ground between your feet and tie a bandage around to prevent any further movement.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	 And he instructs the patient to put his hands on top of it, as well as others who may be near it.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	 And the fingers should gently move around each other to hold onto the hair while pulling it out.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 And he holds his eyes steady as the finger moves around to reset the dislocation in place again.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	 And when he reaches this point, he puts the strap and stoppers over it, pulls it tautly, and holds tight to the leg, and waves the arms that are behind his shoulder, making sure they do not move too much.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	 And he lets go of it for a few seconds or minutes, depending on the situation, and gently pulls with his hands if necessary.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	 Then he releases it at the third or fourth time, and tries to remove the hair in four more attempts.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 And if it goes forward to its end, then you must hold steady as he continues to move around.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "If the arm is dislocated, you should lift it as gently as possible and secure it with splints; allow to rest for two or three days.
des dois	 You are asking about the translation
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	 "When both arms are dislocated and it is appropriate to stretch gently while working, it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	 And if there are dislocations occurring due to any reason or cause, then it is necessary for you to sit on the bed with your legs straight up and placed against what opens the joints. Then press firmly onto this position as he continues to move around.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	 And when the eyes are closed and no longer open, if you place your feet on top of a flat surface with the dislocations, then hold steady and let it be three times. Then release.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 You should keep him in this position as long as he remains calm.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	 "Of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	 When a wound comes with the dislocation and it is seen to be treated, many times occur that the limbs die;
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	 if you are not cautious in the treatment and do not utilize it well and neglect to take advantage of its benefits for a long time, then you will be foolish and miserable and slow.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	 "And begin with gentle care towards the patient's hand, leaving the hair free, as you cannot see any hope for recovery.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	 "And when you do see some hope, gently move the limb back into place, just as quickly as it moves out of place.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	 "And when the limb is back in its place, treat it gently as you would an abscess, and if necessary remove any infected matter.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	 "And with the dislocation comes a break, so fix it as you would for other injuries, and do what we have advised in simple cases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 "And remember that if you enter into a state of fear as I have mentioned, for it is contrary to the nature of your Creator and the healthiness of your body.
