O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	 Oh you, dear readers, I have completed this book which is the foundation of medical knowledge assembled in its entirety and has reached its conclusion through my discussions and explanations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	 And it came to me in a vision that I would complete this treatise on surgery, which is part of the work of hands.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	 And because the work of hands is so great in our region and has been extolled throughout all ages, it seems no one can surpass its details as seen in the old books on anatomy which describe how the hands are made.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	 And of this there came an error and the vanity, and close the intentions and align the science.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	 "It seems to me that I am interpreting this correctly, as it should be explained in detail according to the way of exposition and explanation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	 "The forms of the fire treatment and other aspects related to curing will be explained, accompanied with an explanation of how it is performed.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	 "And because there are no great masters of hands to be found among us, it is the art of medicine that extends.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	 "It is advisable for someone who becomes enamored with the science of anatomy as Galen did to stretch their knowledge of bones, nerves, veins and arteries, number of them, and the motion and rest of them.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	 "And for what else does Ypocras not work as expected and the wound care?
et meismement en l’art de main.	 "In addition to this art of healing.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	 "We tell in the introduction to this book that there are certain things that must be done without fail and with precision.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	 "And so I want to say many times more than those who are engaged in this science, and if they abandon the art of healing.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	 "I see a fool who does not know how to approach a woman or how to perform an operation;
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	 Because so many wounds were outside of where they should be, causing death between his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	 And after that, treat a vein in the leg and make an incision into it, cutting through to where it is large
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	 After he removes with him some part of the vein, three people died.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	 "And I saw one who was called the deceiver, and see the size of his veins and their great size; and if he touched them at all, they would soon die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	 And another doctor who practiced our treatment that had a broken leg and with an abscess,
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	 and the doctors who lacked knowledge restrained breaking of the bone with too much force, leaving no healing at all to the wound, and left it untreated until the end.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	 and commanded that he not remove the dressing from him;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	 And they delayed until his leg was all healed, leaving it weak, leading to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	 I called upon him to come and cut off the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	 "And when I dislocated it, it did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	 But every way in which the joint is damaged or misaligned will make it unable to heal.
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	 It could not be corrected while the limb was lost entirely.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	 And when I saw another way to treat it that worked, and then inflamed through the veins of its cause.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	 Because the chancre (a type of ulcerated boil) when it is full of melancholic humour cannot be treated unless you touch it with iron if one can't get to what has been corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	 And therefore, when teaching hands, you should know that every hand has two parts:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	 it means knowing which side of the body is affected by more serious conditions.
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	 And I will show you in this chapter where there are doubts and fear.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	 You must remember to hold back your feelings so that they do not harm the patient's voice.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	 If you take your arms in holding them gently and firmly, using the best way that by God's grace you come to health and be healed.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	 "Allow the open sores to heal naturally.
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 "Do not doubt or fear this; let it happen and you will enter into another world of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	 "He has no friends among his family members:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 "Do not take any illness as an opportunity to insult me.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 "I have translated the text based on Chapter 3.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	 The first chapters are of fire cauteries and those of medical remedies, and the chapters end with a poem about justice.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	 And descriptions of organs, and the instruments used in cauterization, and all that is necessary for doing work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	 The second chapters are of healing and cutting, and wounds, extractions from arrows, and similar things.
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	 And the chapters end with descriptions of organs.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	 The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and sprains, as well.
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	 It orders the healing of joints that are painful to touch, and the straightening of limbs.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	 In order for our minds to remember the usage, it is important that you give them the quality of help and the degree of assistance they need according to their condition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	 I say that what is medicine, which includes both diagnosis and treatment, involves more long words and subtle sciences and secret remedies.
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	 And because of this people speak longer about wounds and agree on what to do for them;
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	 I often get tired listening to their long discussions, as it is my longest words that they use.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	 I say that cautery can generally help any flesh where there is matter, whether it's the skin,
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	 or heated skin versus dry skin, and warm blood versus cold blood.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	 In hot and dry skin, there is no doubt, they said that cautery is a great aid;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	 "They said otherwise:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	 "Cautery is not worth more than heat and sweat.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	 "Because the fire itself is hot, and it should only be cured of a hot disease by heat, not by cold.
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	 "And those who dispute this say that cautery provides great help to the cure of a fever and dry illness that comes from the cold outside.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	 When you purchase the clothing of someone and their moisture at a place of fire, you cool down the body part with cold water
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	 I agree to this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	 Because it was tried and found no fault once through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	 "And in every way they say that those who have experienced it and know how to use the cautery will find relief for their ailments, and remedies, and causes of illness, and all kinds of treatments.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	 "And for other types we have our own doubts as well, whether it be cold or wet diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	 And they assembled and agreed with the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	 "And remember," friends, that fire cure is gentle yet strong; it should be applied to wounds with great care.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	 "Its effects are simple: only the member being burned will feel pain, and no other part of the body will be affected.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	 "Burning remedies come from one part to another, and bring about the healing of pain in illness.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	 And through time
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 Nor does the heat and good health of its body prevent it alone if there is not enough
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	 And through experimentation and the length of my service and study that I have put into it, there was a breakthrough in the art,
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	 and for the sake of sparing words because it does not please me to reveal what is hidden or fire, and the quality of the blood, as long as he is treating diseases with his own hands, as a philosopher says when demonstrating.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	 And I forgive you in my thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	 "And have it understood, dear one, that you must apply the cauterizing procedure.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	 And I say that cautery is beneficial to all people because the healing of wounds comes through the help of cauterization.
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	 Also, cautery is most beneficial for necessary pains and haste to prevent greater evils from occurring in the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	 And do not think any more, dear friend, as long as they stay still.
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	 because the disease cured by fire does not have an end to it
et il le dient ensi;	 and he will die eventually;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	 However, caution must be taken when using fire therapy as it is not a cure-all for the complexion and dries out humors that are related to pain, and may cause wounds in doing so quickly.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	 And one can be sure that the disease will not return again according to the complexion of the patient and his body's health.
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	 and they will be eliminated by the acquisition of meat and similar things if caution is not taken when using fire therapy, as burns may occur due to dryness or moisture, so it's important to avoid excessive dryness and excess moisture.
mais ce avient poc.	 But this happens quickly.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	 And many people do not understand when they hear the word "cautery," and it's clear to see
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	 They do not believe that cauteries are only after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries people for the reason that when we administer our manner of cure in any disease they don't hold value, after we administer our cautery, it is valuable.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	 "And if you truly understand the importance of cauterization after medicine, do not follow the intentions of those who are mistaken.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	 The former said that cauteries of gold are more effective than those made with iron, and they did not say what else was different about gold or iron.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	 And they said that the needles used in cautery do not harm the patient but it is difficult to see because I have tried and found that it is seen by anyone.
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	 And cauteries of gold are more valuable than those made with iron as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	 And whenever you heat it with fire, you will not know how much it is burned by the heat of gold, and if it is burned so much that it cools off.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	 If it is heated too much
si font au feu;	 if you burn it with fire
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	 And the heat will cause it to stop overheating
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	 And through our means of applying fire cure, we have shown its utility to our work
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	 This chapter teaches the patient how to perform gentle procedures that make it easier for them to find relief
dou cautere olivaire	 Olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	 Olive oil cautery is painful and can be caused by diseases such as "soda" or excessive humors leading to swelling of the eyes, ears, and many other ailments like migraines, sore throats, and similar ailments that come from cold temperatures causing paralysis, stroke, and similar conditions.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	 The form of this cautery is that the patient's hairs are burned with a solution which relieves the pain and itching for three or four days according to how much virtue and ease and comfort their ailment allows them to endure.
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	 And then, repeat the process on the affected area.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	 Then hold it between your hands and put its hand next to you
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	 After that, place the root of your palm over the base of his eye between their two eyelids;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	 and when you remove it from its place, if there is blood, then apply the fire cure called "olive oil," which has this shape:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	 And hold tightly your left hand gently and gently remove it.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	 Then let go of your left hand slightly, and release the joint you see in front of your little finger
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	 And if you don't see it, as long as the cautery is applied and you can feel the bone like I described earlier;
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	 After taking a small piece of cotton gauze, apply it gently and softly on top of the wound, place it over the area to be cauterized, and leave it in that position for three days;
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	 After you have burned through the cloth,
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 burn until the skin is healed.
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the wound that has been called "Four-arm," as long as it heals completely.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	 And they realized that when you apply more heat to a wound, it becomes more swollen;
et por ce si aide mues.	 And for this reason I am helping you.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	 And they say that one must be very careful with the cautery as part of the bone may become burned and then treated as such.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	 And it should be done gently and firmly to prevent the bone from breaking off as much as possible, just like how women put on their jewelry for fear that they will break a bone.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	 The wound should be held open longer than necessary
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	 After the cure, it must be treated and dressed.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	 And these two methods of cauterization seem to me to be no better than any other way, unless there is a fear involved.
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	 I think that leaving it up to you seems like the best idea.
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	 because dislocations occur due to continuous natural solutions, just as we have seen in our other members;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	 and I think that when dislocations are caused by a weak muscle, the first attempt at treatment is more gentle and mild, to which end it is used in such cases.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	 "The main pain arises from
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	 When all the chronic pain comes and lasts a long time, you should use ointments that are called "poppies" and purgatives to purge excess phlegm and oils from the body.
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	 And when they perform the fire cautery as we have described, it is not effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	 If a dislocation occurs due to a strong force and it cannot be easily corrected
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	 Unless the fire cautery is performed as we have described, you should not perform it in that way.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	 After performing the fire cautery on joints of the head near the bone, as we have described, and perform the cautery using a small tool called "scalpel.
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	 And you put into them a small amount of water.
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	 And hold your hand so that it does not move near the bone.
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	 In this procedure, pain is significantly greater than in other procedures.
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	 The fire cupping should be done more gently using smaller cups that are not used for the main vein of the head.
dou cautere dou chief	 The first sentence of the medieval medical treatise translates to:
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	 When one of the joints becomes very painful and is accompanied by an illness that comes from the head, it is often treated with various remedies as in other diseases I mentioned earlier.
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	 Once you know how to perform cupping, then you must understand and apply the medicines accordingly.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	 The cupping for medicine should be done if you have a hook to remove the arrow from the eye and then fasten it in such a way that you can pull out the arrow shaft without difficulty.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	 Once pulled, if both hands are held tightly and restrained well for twelve hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	 "And then apply a dressing to cover it up, leaving it exposed for two or three days.
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	 "Then place the cold compress on the affected area until relief is felt.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 After curing a burn when it has healed completely;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	 "And if you have any more burns to treat, I will provide further instructions on how to apply the healing medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 Fire cautery, proceed as follows
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Prepare the fire cautery as described below.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	 "And it is called 'closure' when the wound has taken on the shape of a scar or if there are only small scars.
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	 "And when the sore is very painful, hold down your head and gently squeeze it a little while you wait for relief to come.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	 "Let go of your hand if any redness appears, which is dangerous, and there will be a lot more bleeding.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	 After cutting off his hair, he put some sort of oil on it.
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then he applied a dressing to keep the wound as clean as possible;
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	 And if you use the cautery to treat this wound at its tip, be careful not to cut into any nearby arteries that may already have ruptured.
de emigraine	 wound
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	 When you cure the wound as we have described in previous divisions of diseases, do not forget that the cautery is for use only by a skilled physician who knows how to use it properly and avoid injuring himself.
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	 And when applying the cautery to treat a wound with a line of about half an inch, make sure you apply it only once and hold your hand steady so that you do not cut into any arteries or cause damage to the bone.
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	 And beware of the mouth when it is used, and its nerves do not relax until it relaxes and spasms do not appear to harm, and be aware of the danger when an artery will be cut or at all, great fear and especially for him who does not know what he does.
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	 And leave a way out
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	 But I will tell you how to handle the artery when it is cut open, and I will show you in this book where he fears
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 And if you see that the fire cautery does not help with the disease and the hairs are inflamed, cauterize it in such a way as we have said, and heal the wound while it is still fresh.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	 And if you see that the instruction I gave for the fire cautery on the artery is not working and you need another way to apply it, with the cautery of the two handles.
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	 And the best of all treatments are fire cautery
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	 "Of the pain of the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	 When the ear feels pain from cold, and one applies the solutions and other treatments we mentioned in the previous chapter, the pains cease.
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	 After inserting the earpiece into the ear canal with both hands, and you gently pull out a little of the root from it.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	 And on points after that to the other ear.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After healing, as long as it is good.
de la torture de la bouche	 Of the tortures of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	 Torture that should be cured by fire cautery are not the same ones which bleed when they move, as we have said in the discussion of diseases.
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	 and do not perform any cauteries that come from a wound or bleeding.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	 When you cure this kind of torture that comes from the blood vessels and vomiting of saliva and phlegm, and it is not worth anything, then consider using three cauteries.
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	 The first one is at the root of the ear, and the second one a little above the temples, and the third one on the crease between the eyebrows.
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	 The fire treatment is applied to the area where the healthy skin ends, and also on a small part of the nose between the two parts of the ear.
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	 Let the fire treatment be as long as it touches both cheeks.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 This is how the fire treatment should look like.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	 And it resembles a scar that we have seen before, but it is slightly more subtle and should the callous be a little thicker.
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the ear as I mentioned earlier, until it is healed completely.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	 If there was a stroke earlier and it is cured as we have mentioned earlier, you should not hesitate to apply the fire treatment again.
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	 "The second horn is cut through the middle, and then the first horn which is called 'vezzle' as we have already mentioned before. The fire cautery applied to the mouth of the stomach.
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	 And so continue with the procedure previously mentioned.
de litargie	 "From exhaustion
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	 This illness requires giving large and frequent doses of medicine to a patient.
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	 After the second horn from the abscess is cut through, place it in front of the opening into which one can treat abscesses.
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	 This will be the method for cauterization.
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	 If done as mentioned before.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	 If he is well then good.
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	 And if not, perform the third cautery on top of the previous one in order to have a big one.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	 "And the treatment if you find others, and when you see it swelling, and the wounds are inflamed, then apply the cautery.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And as for those on the other ends of the bones, and as with others so long as it is healthy.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	 "And if the cauteries are called 'olive-grower', as I have just said.
de la froidor dou chief	 Of the frostbitten person
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	 "It is important that you try and see what we have described before, so that it may be done correctly.
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	 "After removing the abscess, you then apply the cautery to the head and base of each bone, as well as behind and in front of the spine.
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	 "And if you continue this way and find that the wounds are inflamed and the illness worsens then apply four more cauteries to the spine.
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	 "And let it last as long as your hand is light, so that you do not tire yourself out in doing this.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	 After a cure as long as it is sane, until the cautery wounds are healed.
de l’epilempsie	 Of the epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	 Epileptic persons must not use the frostbite remedy unless it is accompanied by a numbing agent; and before using any other remedies we have mentioned, first cleanse your mind of any existing medication.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	 and if there is any pain that cannot be relieved, they will gargle and chew on hard foods.
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	 after the main part of treatment, they will apply the cautery on the face and neck;
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 and if the eyes are swollen or closed, they will apply the cautery as I advised someone with paralysis of the cornea and eyelids, on both sides and in a circular manner;
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	 If the veins are inflamed, perform this subtle cautery procedure as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	 When the cause of melancholy is fluids or excessive moisture and blood vessels are swollen and thick, then apply this cautery procedure as we have described to someone who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	 And if the cause of melancholy is declining fluids and swelling in the veins, then do this cautery procedure as you are about to perform on someone who has paralysis:
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	 After the main part of treatment.
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	 after doing a good job as before and making it circular if necessary, then let him go back to his room.
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	 and the eyes tightly closed for all parts.
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	 After presenting this statement, make sure to erase any errors or typos from previous sentences.
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	 And immediately after applying the fire treatment, if it is painful for them, they should be put aside and not used later.
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	 After seeing the circle due to their head injury, leave them alone and let them cool off.
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And repeat this procedure once every seven days with another ointment, as long as it is healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 "And if you use fire to burn more than necessary, you will injure.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	 This method of cautery is commonly used on the forehead and cheeks.
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 Then apply a mixture of butter and tallow and grease liniment over it.
de l’awe des eulz	 the eyelids
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	 After first signs of eyelid inflammation appear due to the division I mentioned earlier, and if it becomes more severe or frequent than that, consult a doctor for further treatment and care.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	 After the patient has been instructed to apply the fire treatment on their forehead and cheeks, then they are told to perform a second cautery on each temple, until both eyes remain steady.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	 And apply the cautery to all veins and arteries that are visible on the forehead, being careful not to burn any part of the temples.
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	 And be cautious of too many wounds appearing simultaneously if you can help it
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	 I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incision of veins how to hold them steady.
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	 And no matter what, do not perform fire cautery or harm your bones.
dou cors des larmes	 two streams
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	 When the eyes of the patients are old and accustomed to their veins, or if the arteries appear swollen on the surface.
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	 And it is seen that these are cold and flu-like fluids, which should not be burned like I said at the beginning of this treatise.
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	 Burn them with fire on the forehead and temples as well as their bones.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	 And if there is an additional need to burn his skull gently around any small area of cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	 two streams
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	 When you administer these medications as we have advised in this chapter, do not miss any, unless the patient is allergic to aspirin.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	 After resetting the shoulder, apply a fire cautery oil.
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	 And apply another cautery called "clavicula" to both ears, pressing gently on them.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	 And ensure that you do not obstruct the artery
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	 The form of cautery called "clavicular":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the paper from the oil is softened by disease and moisture, only then apply the cautery called "olive":
de coi ci est li forme:	 The form of:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	 And if you do apply another clavicula to both ears as before, they will feel comfortable.
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 Do not let go of the hand until there is no third piece of paper to obstruct it, as I have previously advised.
dou poil qui point l’oil	 two hairs that touch oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	 There will be no issue when the hairs are covered in pitch and prick at the oil; do you know how to apply the two types of cauteries?
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	 This means "it is to know how to heal fire," or "to practice medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	 The patient should be instructed to allow their hairs grow long and even.
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	 And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	 When they are born and they reach a certain length, then shave the patient's head with a razor blade;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	 After that you must remove any remaining hairs in the shape of it was smooth with water and shaving them close to the body.
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Then you must apply a fire-cautery oil on the skin and massage it gently with a warm cloth; then shave off the hair.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	 After shaving their head you must cautorize each part slowly and carefully, making sure all hairs are removed completely;
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	 "And it is the duty of health care providers to provide medical supplies such as bandages and raise hairs at the tip of the arm.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 "And until he holds his breath for three breaths then it is recommended to apply ice and moist heat alternately until the burn has subsided.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "After treatment of a wound as long as it remains healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	 "And when the hairs return and the bandage is softened then you can reapply the fire treatment if necessary, just like before.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	 "And when hairs are burned and the bandage is soft enough to be at its original state, level or even, and do not prick the hair.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	 "The medical fire treatment is that you instruct the patient to let hairs grow long and even, then shape a bandage into the form of an eyelid.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	 Then take some French soap and warm cloths, apply them gently.
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	 Then, if it doesn't cool down, apply ice in a cloth and gently press against the area where you have applied the paste.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	 And keep the disease at bay only if it is cured with one application, unless there are more abscesses to be treated.
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	 Then apply the oil soaked in cotton gently on the affected area.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	 And the dislocated shoulder should stay in place and press the paste gently against it, applying it repeatedly until the pain from the medicine is gone, because there will be pain as with fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	 After you have done this for some time, your body will need it.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	 And when the medication has been applied and you see that the cloth is free of adhesive like it was released by fire or cut open;
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 And if it is injured, then it must rest.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	 If not, continue to apply the medicine as soon as possible or if there is no relief from it, until your wounds are healed and your eyes remain still.
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Continue to apply the cold compress as long as your ears are still red and after treating the affected area with the ointment called "Dyafein" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 "And make sure you apply good ointment to your wound with great care so that the medicine does not touch it.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	 And after the paper becomes moist and the hairs prick with oil, if you resume the medicine on that one which is irritated by the paper being properly cleaned as you did before.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 After treating it until it is healed.
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 It's the form of a wound remedy.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	 And such is that wounds vary in size and kind, according to how they affect you;
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	 And do not let this right way of learning from this art
de la cure de fistule par cautere	 Cure for fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	 When curing a fistula as we suggested in previous treatments and your remedies don't work, then it is advisable to apply the cautery according to this method
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	 Instruct the patient to place his hand on the abscess
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	 And gently hold your hands in a manner that prevents him from moving or injuring himself.
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	 after placing the cotton soaked with vinegar on his abscess, or in rubbing the oil of vinegar into it.
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	 After performing the cautery procedure
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	 and gently touch his hand if it forms a long band of cloth, ensuring that he holds onto the bandage.
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	 If you see this happening with one hand to another, and if it happens like a tent,
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	 but always remember that the treatment is good as long as it is performed correctly.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	 After pressing on the fistula to remove it, and treat the wound, and dry it up.
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	 "And if closed tightly, when opening it, and tears occur at the corner.
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	 After applying the cautery paste, hold your hand tightly to the part of the nose that will be cauterized so as not to move it.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	 And apply the cautery on fat tissue and burns it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 "When you come to the beginning of the cautery process, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	 If not, if you encounter the cauterization again after a while, continue to apply it with care and leave 3 times.
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	 After applying the cotton powder on a blister and curing it until it is healed, pass 3 times if not yet healed, then apply corrosive medicine while the sores are open.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 And do as your physician instructs you to do.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 "And there is also a method of cautery for fistulas that none of the ancients have mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	 You intend on forming a fistula?
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 After taking note of this manner, I can proceed as follows:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	 and I make a quantity of one
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	 holding tightly with your hand or firmly, so the limbs do not move at all, as their roots do not retract towards their source.
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	 and it is advisable to apply oil to the affected area with a soft cloth or cloth;
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	 if the lump is of fistula nature, and the healthy part of the skin should be taken into account for maintaining healthiness.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 And if there is a fistula resulting from the cautery as we have mentioned, it's bad.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If not, administer a potion to the vein and guide the fistula back into place as desired by applying it gently where it is cut out.
des crevaices en levres	 incisions in veins
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	 On multiple occasions, there are cuts into veins that are referred to as "hair," and even more so for children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	 After curing these cuts in the way we have described through division and treatment, do not allow any more bloodletting until you apply a smaller, milder bleed-out.
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	 And I treat him with extreme caution as long as he remains alive.
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the sore, so that it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	 from the base of the gullet
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	 When a pus comes from the base of an ulcer or ear, or any part of the body that is exposed and can become infected, after it has been destroyed and rotted and becomes fistula.
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	 and you will treat him as if we have advised earlier
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	 according to the quantity of the fistula
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	 after puncturing the fistula, hold your hand until it stops flowing blood from the hole, and then let go.
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and do this one or two times after following our treatment instructions as long as it is healthy.
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	 if he is cured on the first try, that's good.
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	 If not, it may require further medical intervention based on what you find in his treatise.
dou movement des dens	 movement of the tendons
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	 When the veins harden from moisture and become stiff, and you treat them with medicines but it does not work, then put a poultice of aloe vera on the affected area.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	 after you apply the fire cautery and it forms a vein, after using another method to remove the vein.
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	 Instruct the patient to keep their arm steady while applying heat at the site of the burn.
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	 After lightly holding onto his hand and removing any bandages, apply the fire treatment as desired by the patient.
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	 After cleaning their mouth of food residue, they should let it heal for one hour and then rinse off thoroughly
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	 And in this manner, the moving tendons will be corrected, and the gums will remain restrained from moisture, and the moisture will be expunged.
de la dolor des dens	 From the pain of the tendons
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	 When pain arises from cold or heat, whether it is from cold or fire, and medical treatment does not work well, then apply the remedy in this way:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	 Burn therapy (heat) and fire therapy
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	 The burn treatment is such that you need to apply a piece of iron or steel at the end as well,
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	 After wiping off and wrapping around with a piece of cloth soaked in burn gel, hold it steady against the painful spot and keep it cool as long as possible.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	 "And so as long as its virtue remains at the root of the tooth and you pull gently on it in order to loosen and put your finger over it until the pus flows from the abscess.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	 "The fire cautery should be so severe that you take something made of iron or steel and hold it in your mouth until the pus flows from the abscess.
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	 "After applying the fire cautery, make sure it has cooled down before removing it from your mouth and holding onto its handle with one hand while you hold onto the tooth with another.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 "Do this carefully, because the pain will be extreme for some or tomorrow.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	 "And make sure you keep your mouth open and steady while applying the fire cautery to avoid biting it. Then rinse thoroughly.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 "This is how we apply the fire cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	 And do what you will, according to your ability.
et c’est li forme de la caine:	 It is the shape of a cane:
des scrophules	 "scrophules
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	 When the scrophules are cold and wet, they need to be dried by medicines so that after the fire is applied on one side, it can be applied on the other.
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	 Apply heat to the abscess once and if it is cured as soon as possible until the abscess has completely healed.
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	 The abscess should be tested with heat according to its quantity and left for three times.
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	 Apply the cotton roll tightly until the burn has healed.
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the wounds and making sure they are clean
Li forme de la cainne:	 The shape of the vein
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	 When cold water is poured into the pores and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, it should first be treated with solvent remedies.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 After applying fire cautery to the root of the throat, hold your breath so you don't choke on it and avoid drinking any water for a short time
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	 After applying fire cautery to the joint of the arm at the base of the spine, and if there are any 'clavicles' as they call it here, which is a small bone in front.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And treat it so that you can hold it steady until it heals completely.
de la toust	 from the tongue
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	 When all the diseases of bones are from cold moister and it has no fever and is a chronic disease, you apply fire cautery to its surface as well.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	 And another cautery between the two breasts;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	 And apply fire cautery to 'the clavicle', which is a small bone in front, as they call it here.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	 And if you see it, apply fire cautery by pricking into the 'pains' bone where the disease of the ears is located.
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 And let them prick at their base
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 "After curing the left one according to this method, and also perform the cauteries at three points in the same manner:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	 And because they are more gentle, you do them three times each.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	 "Dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	 "When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	 After he pricks the hair on his back and chest
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	 after lightly touching it with two fingers, which should be done gently with both hands.
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	 and the binding is loosened when there are two needles inside it.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	 burn as long as they prick at their chest and come together with four cauteries.
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	 for when it is done with the cautery that has three needles, then there are six cauteries on its surface.
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	 and the nerves follow the subtlety of a tent and this is the shape of a cautery that has three needles.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	 "There are no times when the eighth nerve is touched since it has eight burns.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	 After setting it on fire, please arrange it with care.
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	 after resting the abscess, and let your limbs rest as long as they are well-rested.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 "If the dislocation occurs then this is a case where the severe burn of the shoulder needs to be treated separately from the other burns or multiple burns.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 "The joint has been reset and the moisture and wounds have been treated.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 "When stomach cramps come from cold and moisture as they are applied to the complexion, they multiply in number on him, and the usual remedies do not help him; for it is necessary that his feet be supported with their heels and spread out their legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	 After the third cautery, apply two cauteries to each ear lobe so that they are at three angles, and there is space between one and another as they move separately.
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 And the cauteries should be applied so that they open up both parts of the ear, and the figures of the cauteries should follow this shape as closely as possible.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	 And if you apply a large cautery to the stomach in this form:
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	 That person who fears this cautery should apply it piercingly and steadily to the stomach, just as you have shown:
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 After applying all these cauteries, put on another one called "pins.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the cure of the treatment we experienced before, as long as he is sane
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	 The stomach feels pain from fruit and moisture as well as excess volume, until it returns to its natural balance.
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	 "And to treat the wound, as we have mentioned earlier, ensure that the hair is kept steady if it is pricked at its base.
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	 "The third cautery should be performed in the same manner as before with this shape and size on your forehead. To treat it, you will need to remove any pus that may come out.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	 "And when performing a double cautery procedure,
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	 "When performing two single cauteries at once and holding your hand steady throughout the process.
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	 "And for only one more double cautery procedure, ensure that both eyes remain open and the eyelids are not pressed together.
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	 "If he cannot hold his breath even if he gasps for air, then he should extend his legs, and gently ease back into consciousness.
et c’est li forme:	 "This is the end of it.
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	 And when you are in the midst of cautery, if there is a need for further cutting with a scalpel, be sure to do so carefully and thoroughly
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 And make sure that he does not cause any injury by doing this, as the edges of a blade can be very sharp and it is important to observe them when working closely.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	 When it comes to the liver, you need to determine if he has an abscess on the surface of the liver or in its interior
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	 If there is one on the surface, the pain will be much stronger than that if it is located inside.
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 If it is in the interior, then the pain will be even more severe.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	 And when this treatment is intended for the eyes, make sure they are covered over their eyelids.
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 Then take off or remove one of them if the abscess is located there and also shave off any remaining scalpel to ensure it doesn't cause any injury.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	 And as long as the veins are open and there is no blood clot present.
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	 After the treatment of wounds, until he is well.
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 And it should not be used by anyone who has not studied medicine in depth and has never cured any illness.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 After it has been very hard for a long time and you think that leaving it alone is better
dou cautere de pleuresin	 In this medieval medical treatise, "dou cautere" refers to a particular form
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	 The former said that you should do the root cautery many times; so
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	 Take a long and thin root of aloe vera, make it dry and as thick and long as your finger.
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	 And smear it with oil and hold it to the fire, and when you are done cautery on one side of the nose between the septum and the nose.
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	 And do another one between the fifth tooth and the sixth, moving down a little bit;
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	 And instruct him to move his arms, also between the esophagus and stomach, and in between two spaces, so that there is a gap between the fire therapy and the two spaces.
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	 Do not press your hand with too much force while doing this as you would when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	 And it was said by none who have ever used the fire therapy that one should not put the abscess between the eyes and nose until they are fully healed.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And the pain stops as soon as we say in the post-nasal passage with the throat.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 "But regarding this matter, there is great fear or a fistula that cannot be cured.
de la mice	 of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	 Regarding the cure for the disease mentioned earlier and how it relates to our discussion of various treatments, there are three ways in which you can apply the cautery treatment:
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	 The way to do this is by doing three treatments or four depending on the length of the hairs and the shape of the hair at the base of the nose.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	 And not press your hand too hard during all the treatments while holding onto his arm.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	 And another way to perform this is by having the patient lie on their stomach and then applying pressure over the sore area until it stops.
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 And gently press on the sore area until it stops, or if a bruise is coming from hitting the arm, and lay down your hand according to how the hand lays next to the body, according to its length, and the pressure should be according to the width of the shoulders.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	 After the sore has been inflamed until it is completely healed and then apply pressure to stop any bleeding that may still occur after healing.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 And if you feel like continuing with another fire cure on the other spot.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After treatment when there are still purulent discharges, please proceed with further treatments
de ydropisie	 dislocations
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 Cautery should not be applied over wounds (dropped stitches), as it is done in the manner described as "asclytes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	 When you cure according to the ways we have mentioned in sections, and your cure is not causing harm, it would be best if you applied another fire cure on the belly, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the back of the thighs, and then last on the spine;
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 And hold steady the eyes so they do not move until they grow
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	 After leaving the cautery, do not let the hair be shaved short and tidy after the cautery.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	 Healing would take place, and all wounds would be treated with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	 The shape of the cautery for the belly or the shoulder that we have mentioned before.
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	 And in the back it can be olive shaped as where it is situated.
de l’enfleure des piez	 the loosening of the veins
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	 When the veins are swollen in those who have varicose veins, it is advisable to perform a fire cautery between the auricular and the ulnar points.
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 And gently hold your hand with the cauterizer so that you return.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not enter too deeply into it if there is great awe of it, and you should cauterize as follows in that form
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	 After performing the two cauteries on each leg at the point of the knee.
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	 "Instruct the patient to have one cautery on their forefinger facing up while holding down the thumb with the other hand.
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	 "Let the cauteries grow steadily until they are firm and equal in both hands.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	 After the other treatments we have spoken about.
de la menoison	 from moisture
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	 When stomach issues come from cold or moisture, as long as the gastric and intestinal juices are retained and not digested properly, they cannot be treated with any other remedies.
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	 And you see the patient experiencing severe pain and great suffering if they have had a stomach cancer before or if a stomach cautery is used.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	 And for any other small wounds on the hand or fingers, apply one of these smaller cauteries.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	 And if you see many ulcers and the patient is suffering, make sure to put sutures into their finger nails, one on each nail; also two stitches on the stomach itself, because treatment will be helpful as long as it has been applied correctly.
de la cure des emorroydes	 "Of the wounds
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	 When the hemorrhoids are very large or multiple and old and filled with cold and wet corruptions, they can be cured if you apply cauteries as described in chapters previously.
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	 In the spine there are two nerves that branch out from the spine in all directions. First nerve:
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	 If the stomach is chilled and no meat is cooked, and swelling of the face occurs, then apply heat to the stomach as directed, along with one on each side of the chest.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 And leave the cautery open for a while longer.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "After curing it so that it is normal.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	 "Of the charcoal, which is called 'the lul'.
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	 When you are done with the first application if there is a second that needs to be applied, then place it directly over the previously treated area.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	 and I leave my hand as long as the previous cautery has been in place for some time, so that no more harm is caused.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	 Do this once or twice, and if there are multiple areas to be treated then cauterize each one as we have instructed.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	 After treating an injury to the member, as long as it is healed.
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	 And if you use a great deal of fire on cautery, then there will be even more help.
de plaie mal curee	 "from a poorly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	 If the veins cannot suffer from injury or incision, we will tell you in its own right, if it comes with a disease that cannot be cured by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 If there is no fistula present, and it is hollowed out from filthiness or moisture, if the doctor performs a delicate procedure to remove it completely, then make sure you cover yourself with as much gauze as needed to absorb any remaining fluid.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	 After applying the cautery that seems to be working well, and removing it from the fistula according to how much it stings when withdrawn and reapplied, depending on whether there is one or three times, until the wounds are healed.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 And keep in mind that you may have to remove nerves if necessary, as well as large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	 If the fistula is in the arm and the intestines, then you must be careful about these wounds, do not perform this procedure elsewhere, think that it may be dangerous.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	 After treating the injury as long as it is healed and all wounds are fully closed, then you can safely remove them.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	 "And when matters are settled, such as it has been reported, they become stiff, causing pain to their eyes.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 And one of those we will mention in its course.
de la maladie des reins	 The disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	 When the pain of fruit comes and is very severe, and does not go away with the usual remedies, it's advisable to apply a cautery on both sides at once as we have mentioned before.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	 And if the cautery is made in a single line, there will be three or more wounds, and they will do great harm.
de la vessie	 The bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	 When the bladder is weak and prone to fruit and moisture, if it holds urine in, then apply cautery to its base on both sides of the urethra.  Where upon stinging or pricking occurs at either end, whether left or right, there will be cauteries that pierce through as they did once before;
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	 And hold tightly onto your back as you are pulled towards.
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	 Or hold tight to the shoulder in the form of this statement
de la marris	 The marriage
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	 When the marrow is cold and moist, and cannot conceive anything, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends harden.
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	 And when they come, if great pain is felt.
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	 Then you should perform the fire cautery to the buttocks as we have said when performing it on a vein.
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	 Or hold tight to the shoulder, as mentioned before.
de la hainche	 The arm
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	 When the moist internal organs rise to the surface of the vein, due to this reason if it moves from its place, and a sign is that the leg becomes longer than the other when measured together.
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	 And hold tight to the two ends of the vein as you perform the fire cautery on one side of the neck in a manner similar to that of a circle, and look towards the base towards the place where it enters into the body like when turning. If the vessel is dense with the circle, then draw it out
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	 And if you want to cauterize the stomach,
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	 If not done properly, perform three more burns on the larger veins and do them in succession with all your strength.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And treat it as long as you can stand.
de la dolor de la hainche	 arm
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	 When pain strikes in the bone, it is often cold and wet with moisture, causing the wounds to worsen as we have stated before.
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	 It is advisable to purge out of the large fatty lumps or other similar pills that are harmful.
Aprés li fai cautere;	 After performing a burn,
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	 The method for burning should be according to the second manner.
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 It is important to administer hot and cold treatments in succession with medicine.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	 The burning should be done according to one of the two methods, which are as follows:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	 "You should cauterize the blood vessels of the third degree, and you make it deep and great, so that every cautery, except for this one, is superficial.
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 "Not once should a cauterization be made within the main artery of the arm, because it would lead to four times that way.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	 "And if you see a cautery being done on the dislocated joint mentioned earlier.
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	 "But do it in such a way that all of the bones are covered and both arms are involved.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And that is how we do it in surgery when the pain persists in the head and does not go away with pressing on the shoulder or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	 "And if it comes to the shoulder and leg, then you should do two cauterizations at each place where the pain is located, and one cautery on the inner part of the elbow for two.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	 "And if it's a cutaneous cauterization, or if there are deep cuts involved;
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 "And the patient's limbs hurt so much that the pain spreads from two to four ouch points or more at each burn.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	 And it worsens over time.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	 And the pain can spread to other areas like the arm or leg if not treated properly with a proper burn care; and also make sure that you don't cause more harm than necessary by using excessive force during treatment of burns
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 "Some patients had their shoulder dislocated and were in great pain as a result; they couldn't move it at all, and it was injured and corrupted from this injury.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After a belly incision there may be death
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 And the pain is in two parts combined, first cautery on one part and then on another, according to this manner
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	 And it is known that cauterization of the skin can be done in different ways with varying degrees of severity, such as using metal forceps or a larger implement to make one incision between two incisions and so on until all incisions are made.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	 And the cuts should be as even as possible, with each cut being done equally well;
et c’est li forme:	 And this is how to do
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	 And then twist it tightly as possible so that the hair is red and straight up to touch your skin, and if you want to stop it, turn it off.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	 After the fire application once or twice times only
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	 And then apply the ointment of butter and let the wound heal completely.
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the incision treatment until it is healed
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	 But Albucasis says that we use little of this fire therapy for fear of its pain, and few who use it.
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	 And all the veins are burned which can cause great suffering, and where they move.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	 The fire cautery is such that if you do not use it properly and let the skin's edge be burned with iron or fire until a certain length, then the two ends will meet in height as much as double the thickness of one.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 And they are to be tied together in this manner
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	 After putting on the bandage of the arrow wound with a piece of cloth from his own garment, press your hand over it.
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 After you heat between the two circles of fire that burns with a low flame for one hour, and leave it in place and let the bandage burn and sear the skin.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	 Because he had an infection from fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	 and when the dressings are not enough to hold in place, gently touch your hand with an instrument and remove a gentle bandage, leaving it for three times, then put on a black gauze as much as possible.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	 And leave them for three hours that you may purify yourself.
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the treatment of wounds as much as possible.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	 And if the pain is severe at the elbow or the knee, use a compress that was used on the same area.
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 This method may be dangerous and should only be done by trained medical personnel.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Take both hands alive, as one with another, and they will break together, and put them into a new vessel.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	 And if there is a small opening, the patient must not try to squeeze it closed with their fingers
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	 and when you have put in both the first and second pots well covered, and added the salt and sugar to it as much as possible, let this mixture be taken by hand to your kitchen
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 And let it rest until the mixture becomes smooth and thick, or is ready to be eaten.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	 Then if he has done well at this, they should perform other procedures for treatment of the disease and cautery on other parts of the body.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 "She does this as well with fire and other remedies that one cauterizes the vein gently with tweezers and alcohol, all these things together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 "And another remedy he tells us is for the pain of sciatica in both lower limbs and thighs; that there's no other remedy needed, and if you apply this remedy once, it will heal as instructed later.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	 "And you apply this way that the body is gently squeezed from both sides with a smooth fat-free sponge, and you squeeze it in the vein and under the arm, leg or any other part where there is pain, as well.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 "And leave it for three hours while making sure that the hair no longer feels the fire.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 "And then you put them into a bath as hot as they can stand it, and then bring them in the light, and the pain will go away completely and be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 "No blistering agent or similar medications should be used after the removal of ulcers.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	 "Dysarges says when a varicose vein is cauterized of many causes, if it helps at all;
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 "And this cautery should be done in this way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 "Take one and a half ounces of oil; and put it on the spot between the thumb and forefinger.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	 "After removing the charred part and applying fire until it is charcoal, put on the wool and leave it as long as it is ashes.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	 And continue as before until you think it is right to make a small incision and relieve the pain.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 The cautery method is called "cautery of fire.
de la dolor dou dos	 "From the pain of two
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	 When pain comes to the back, whether through exertion or from impact, or by excessive cold evacuation, or by any other means of freezing matter, none of these causes are good; for he who has been infused with such cold matters.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	 It is advisable to apply something other than bitter pills or similar things before applying the cautery method. If the pain continues for three lines, then continue with cauterization and every fifth line thereafter until the pain subsides.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	 The cautery method is performed using a "point.
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	 If you see it, do three cauterizations or four to the base of the shoulder.
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	 This disease often appears in childhood and is indicated by symptoms such as itching when it moves around or pain.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	 "And you hold tightly to the lower eyelid with two fingers, while holding on to its appearance as it holds onto others.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	 When you see it, apply the fire cure as prescribed by this method.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 If there is a purple patch on the skin, treat that area specifically.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you see it, apply the fire cure to the skin in two or three lines and make sure there are pins between each of them.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After the fire has been applied as prescribed in this method and that you do not apply any more fire if it's burning excessively or close to a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	 Joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	 "Joint pain due to moisture that spreads throughout the body, and when accompanied by a chill, which are treated with fire in one manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	 "The cautery is applied internally to the joint pain, or externally according to this method:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if it is desired to prick at its base, you should apply the fire cautery all around.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	 "And if the pains spread to other joints and this occurs frequently, apply cautery on all veins in three or four applications depending on which part it is applied to.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 "And if you are better for longer periods, continue this method and do not stop using your hand until both eyes become red.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 And if the pains come on both sides, apply fire cautery as we suggested in our previous chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	 "If the pain is in the finger or palm area, apply cautery to the second eyelid:
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	 And if they remain painful when removed from the shoulder joint or the hand's fingers.
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 And if the pains come and go in quick succession or intervals, then perform a fire cautery on that part of the body and apply pressure to the affected area as well as medication.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 "When you hit it hard and push out the pus, if he is helped by God.
de la routure dou syfac	 "Of the way that you make
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	 When an abscess comes to a head and pus begins to come out quickly or in intervals, if you decide that it's time to cure the boil, make sure not to squeeze out too much of its contents.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	 And when one thing comes from within a belly, if the things that come from it are coming and going quickly or in intervals:
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	 After that put your hand between his shoulders and tell him to hold tight as the boil is being repaired, ram it with both hands, and make sure all of its contents are out.
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 After applying the cautery treatment
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 While it is calm, while he drinks water
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	 Restrain the joints from moving.
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	 And hold their arms steady so they do not move further.
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	 and cover his body with a cloth to prevent the cautery from touching any other part of his body except for the area being treated.
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	 Then apply the cautery to his entire arm while holding onto his hand and wrist until you reach the bone, if there is no bleeding on the first application of the cautery then reapply it gently.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	 And wait patiently as the joint does not move when performing the cautery.
que tu ne le brulasses;	 Don't burn him further.
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 And that he will live without any other harm occurring.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 "And when you come close to a fire, your wounds are of no value.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	 And apply the cautery gently according to their size and large people larger according to their size.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 After applying the third procedure, let them shave their beard as long as they are even.
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	 After the other procedures have been performed and it is well healed, let them shave their back as long as they are even.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 And consider making his nostrils long and straight so that he does not snore in bed.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	 After the third procedure, when they want to get up, give them a well-made bandage and apply another one.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	 And let him rest well, work slowly, be wary of excessive drinking and eating, and have too high a fever.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 When the lesson is completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 After curing the fire cautery, I will tell you later about other treatments for this patient.
de la routure dou ventre	 The womb's lining
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	 When the others wounds heal over and are closed up, you should see that they do not grow any more, at which point you apply another cautery as per its quantity, and then close it with glue.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	 After applying the treatment as we have described;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 and none of the elders had advised to cauterize at three points in this manner
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 And first make an incision into the joint and then draw it out wide with a line to hold the dislocation in place, making sure not to cut through the bone of the arm.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 The first cauterization is lighter and easier.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	 There was no pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When there is no pain in any member, whether of a blow or an injury, and the pain lasts on until it subsides; but when it comes to cauterizing at the point where they are called 'pricks', and also cauterize them according to their length and smallness, and their flexibility, location of torcs and suffering.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	 If the patient is well after the first cautery it should be fine;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 if the patient's condition does not improve after the first one, then proceed to another cautery as custom is that it should be done on the nearest limb where the pain persists;
de meselerie	 Melioration
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 There is no cure for the disease once it has been caused by cauterization and primarily comes from the decomposition of blood and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	 You cannot cauterize the veins; if his illness is at its onset, and he has been cured according to what we have said in this division, and you doubt that there will be no more pain or suffering, until you perform the cautery on the head
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	 I cut off his nose to one end, and towards the front at its finish.
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	 "And he will have trouble with his toes.
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	 "And he will hold the eye steady as long as possible until the blood from the veins has stopped.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 "He will cautorize his nose according to what is in front of him.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	 "And the dizziness occurs everywhere.
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	 "And it becomes clearly visible if you hold the cautories that we have mentioned or chief, and one cauterizes on the nose, another on the eyebrows, a third above the eyes, four below the eyes, five above the cheeks, six below the cheeks.
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	 "And two on the cheeks, and two on the forehead above the eyebrows, one at each hand joint, and below the elbows.
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	 And if you wish to cut them off at their roots while they are growing, do not burn them.
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	 Do not use a fire cautery on the arm's bone or any other bone in the body except for the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	 And as you do more cauterizing, you will find more help and benefit from it.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 It is because the nerves are already damaged that there is no pain when cauterizing if done correctly as the skin becomes charred and crisp.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 "It is important to make sure the patient's hair grows long and even, as that will help guide them through various procedures.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After curing the left arm with honey and other treatments until it is well healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	 When a member becomes inflamed and is treated with ointments and plasters, and it does not improve after attempts at cauterization of the limb depending on its size and smallness.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	 And if you make a fire through the vein's hole.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat the wounds until they heal.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	 "And once the cautery is applied to the hand and foot, it prevents movement of the member, except if it moves freely.
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 "And whenever there is no constraint on the arms and legs moving as they should, none of this occurs.
de albaras	 of the shoulder
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	 "When the disease called 'albaras' is cured by cautery, and the physician knows nothing about it, he applies a little cautery according to how much blood can be drawn in one go, as long as the bleeding continues and stops at the same time.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	 "Then he applies a powder of flaxseed and lentils with rose petals and leaves from the same plant. And for hemorrhoids, for an abscess in the anus, or any kind of sore;
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And bind it all together with linen bandages, and put it on his back as long as he is conscious.
li cure de chancre par cautere	 The treatment of chancre (scrofula) through cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When a chancre appears at the outset, and you see it arrest, if you cauterize with a fire cure by burning an even circle around it.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	 And all of them said to do cautery as for ulcers.
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	 But I think it's not right because I doubt that he will be healed and cured completely, so I do not wish to try this at all.
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 The second part of the sentence means that if you perform a fire cautery, which is known as "circulation," just like we said in our previous example.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	 The elbow cannot stay still
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	 When someone has an ailment called "abdubing," and it is about to die or from the excess of moisture causing it to swell excessively and he has pain, whether through the tendons.
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	 And you have seen that it will die.
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	 Unless the cautery is performed on ulcers punctually.
aprés le laisse ensi.	 After leaving it alone.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 She will grow ill from working too hard.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 And if you give them the complete treatment as prescribed by the doctor or physician
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 While treating them for 'adubelati' illness as long as the cautery continues and if given a complete course of treatment which is prescribed by the doctor, then it will cause the sores to heal in a manner so that the flow of blood is restored in such a way that the course of disease is eased.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After the cure has been perfectly performed
li cure dou feu par fer	 cautery with fire
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 Another way to treat disease is by "burning," and nothing else than the burning of member
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	 If you see this ailment in the left that can cause suffering, avoid using sharp and large forceps. Instead, use small ones as advised by the doctor or surgeon.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 After all cauteries are performed and there is no longer any infection or contamination present in the area, nothing of what was corrupted should remain intact, everything that has been corrupted must be destroyed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then let it rest for three days and put on the burns with oil so that the burns of fire are healed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After the treatment of burned members
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	 And if you see after three times healthy ones have appeared it is good
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 And when that is not the case, and there is a recurrence of cauterization in the corrupted areas.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	 The treatment for this condition is different from using fire cautery;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	 But all cauteries of fire are worse in every way and I have already explained the treatment for this condition by dividing it into two parts:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 Take what you have read earlier.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	 The hairs that come out
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 It occurs many times when piercing through the skin is a disease called "closes" according to our understanding, and it is a very painful thing that causes harm.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 The cauteries of this disease are done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 It is to know fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	 "The fire cure is that you should shave and make it smooth like a mirror, so when the hair prickles at their base, hold them steady to prevent movement until they grow.
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	 "After applying it all over the finger, keep your hand tight around the prick as long as the prickling continues on both sides of the finger.
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	 "And leave them in place for three days until they stop itching and peeling off.
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 "Then apply a salve of bitter water with it to the skin and let it be smeared all over at night; and after dawn remove what is not necessary from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "After curing the dislocation, it must remain fixed as long as its bones are aligned.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	 "And if they are converted by blows to the head and many times occur in hands and feet, it is advisable that you apply a hot cure.
et est en teil maniere:	 "And do so like this:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	 "Take a nail or any other sharp object, and stick it into the vein's hole and artery. This is important because puncturing veins can be dangerous.
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	 "Stick the nail into it until it pierces through entirely, then apply some hot oil and keep your hand steady as you pull back the edge of the nail towards the base of the vein. This is important because puncturing veins can be dangerous.
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	 "After applying hot oil, let it sit for an hour.
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 "Then remove the nail and allow it to fall out completely at its root.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 "Afterwards, while you are working on the rest of the body, also treat any burns that may occur at the joints.
li cure dou trembler	 The patient is instructed to tremble.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	 "If any of the fingers or toes are trembling from coldness, or if they are numb in some way, it is important to perform four burns on each big toe and one burn between the small toes.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	 And you shall instruct them to have a heartburn cure with olive oil.
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	 They will make the patient's cold symptoms worse if they tremble or hold tightly onto their illness.
des pustules puans	 pus filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 No such thing is evident on the surface of the body or pustules are present that come from infected substances.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	 It is advisable to perform a fire cure as soon as you notice that one of the sores has become inflamed
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 A subtle application of a mixture, which can either be applied to the fire so it is held in place or rubbed into the root of the abscess, or onto a long lance for cauterization.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	 And once the cure is applied in this manner and it becomes clear that there will be no bleeding to speak of, but rather all superfluous fluids which are present.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 But you should perform this procedure after the evacuation of wounds is complete.
quant li artere est copee	 The shoulder joint has been dislocated
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	 There are often large eruptions of blood from the artery which is cut near the wound or at the incision point, and similar things occur in other parts of the body.
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	 "And there comes great pain from misalignment.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	 "And whenever this occurs, whether you apply pressure on the vein's wound or not, hold tightly as long as it does not stop bleeding by itself.
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	 "Then apply fire cupping to the affected areas more intensely and for a longer duration until they turn bright red;
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	 "Then apply cupping with one or both hands depending on the size of the wound and its location; place it over the vein where you hold your hand, and keep it in place as long as it does not stop bleeding.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	 And when you remove your thumb from the vein and the cautery is released, if a more intense cautery that has been set on fire is applied quickly to it.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	 "And do not cease to perform this one after another until they are stopped;
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	 "And make sure you do not harm the nerve that is related, and nothing else occurs on or near the wound.
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	 "And when the artery is severed and cannot be reattached immediately due to its great size, then it can only be treated in one of these ways that we have mentioned:
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	 "or by cautery, or by extraction when it cannot be treated immediately, or through very high pressure applied to the artery, or with medical treatments that can help repair the damage.
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	 "And should hold still and remain still.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	 "Consult the medical practitioner about any additional treatments that may be prescribed or required.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	 "And if it occurs without any medical treatment being available, then place your fingers over the wound as we have mentioned and tightly hold until the wound is closed.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	 "And do not move it should remain still as the cold seeps through to prevent freezing and frostbite from occurring.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	 "But if he has experience with cauteries or medical treatments, then perform them first.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	 The second book of medical treatments
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	 Here is the translation of the opening sentence: "We have spoken about the first chapter in which it is advisable to use fire cautery or other medicinal treatments and remedies for wounds.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	 And in the following chapter, we will discuss this matter more thoroughly because it is a crucial part of our work.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	 And so that you know, when it comes to this chapter, there is more risk and fear than in the first chapter, because of this reason one should use them with greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	 In the following chapter, there are often evacuations of blood when opening veins and incisions near vital areas. It also covers treatments for wounds, extractions of arrows, and cutting into stones.
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	 And in that chapter, there is often doubt and fear, resulting in many deaths.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 And I assure you to proceed with care.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 Because people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	 if a person is so sick with their illness that they die due to the severity of their disease and the strength of their pain.
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 And of these must have fear
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	 You shall know it is time.
«atendez, je sui garis»;	 Listen; I am the gatekeeper.
et li maladie est despitouse.	 and his illness is dire.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	 But only agree to those who come with this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your clothing, and do not fear too much that you don't know from which it comes.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	 And use prognosis and guidance in the treatment of your wounds so that health may be restored.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 This will help you restore your reputation, glory, and memory for ages to come.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	 Three cheers for our beloved masters, let us drink with good cheer and delight, may the Holy Spirit inspire us from its hand.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	 I have instructed this healer through other healers as to how the fire treatment should be done; that is where one of these healers will come from, for it is necessary that you find out more about what which requires your most skilled attention.
dou chief plein d’aigue	 The two major parts are equal
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	 It is often accompanied by the illness of childhood that comes from playing too hard with a child's head.
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	 And no one can say what causes it to reappear.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	 "And there are no cures for this disease until infants, and many of those I have seen die.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	 "I think it's important to avoid working on the chapter completely.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	 "And when the dislocation is caused by moisture, and it becomes increasingly severe as time goes on until they cannot hold their head in place.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	 "As the moisture increased, it became more severe and this moisture was accumulated between the arm and the chest.
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	 "When dislocations occur due to moisture, they are severe and the moisture is accumulated between the arm and the chest. The dislocation occurs at the joint and you must try to remove it with a wide cut.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	 "And as time goes on if the moisture continues.
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	 "Then you must try to correct the form with a slippery substance:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	 If the moisture is more severe, and the abscess becomes larger, if you perform these moves in a cross shape as described above.
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	 And you see the marks on the cheeks when you press with your hand at the temples.
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	 It is advisable to follow this method in dealing with the third eyelid.
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 After the incision has been made, there is no moisture present.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	 After restraining the eyelids and powdering them, it is rubbed with wine and oil, and left to heal for five days.
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 After that, treat the wound with ointments and burnings, and leave to heal the eye by tying it up securely until the member is relieved of pain and becomes healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	 Another way to make an incision is by looking at or pressing the large part of the abscess and pulling it open.
car aucune fois est elle devant;	 No matter how many times it occurs on;
aucune fois derrier;	 no matter where
aucune fois en destre;	 Not a single time there
et aucune fois en senestre.	 And not a single time on its backside.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	 When the abscess is opened and drained, follow what you have learned earlier.
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	 And be sure to not cut into an artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	 And do not bleed profusely if the patient dies due to too much bleeding and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	 The beginning of a new sentence
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	 When there is a disease called "catarrh" in the eyes or nose, and it is contagious, and the treatment of medicine does not profit alone because when the cautery is applied to them they are closed so that they cannot be opened until they have grown
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	 It is important that you hold tight as possible, so the hairs remain steady and do not move until they are ready.
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	 After wiping off the excess of the cloth tightly so that the arteries are opened, then drain the hairs at all ends with one cloth.
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	 Then look to see which eye first and whichever is closed first after the ears are pierced through should be repaired.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 Then tie the eyelids tightly and apply a small bandage to each eye, so that it stays in place until you have finished the work; whatever is on the larger side should be done first.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	 And if you see, stretch the strip tightly across the artery and hold it firmly until they tear off; then tie them together with a thin strip of two fingers as tight as possible on to the bone, so that it is through the large part of the chief.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	 "When a vein is opened...
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	 And when you hear the pulse rate of 3 beats per second, then gently press on that bone.
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	 And if necessary, you should stop the bleeding by applying pressure with a bandage or cloth.
puis regarde la plaie:	 Then examine the wound.
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 If the bone is still protruding and the stitches are not visible then apply pressure to stop the bleeding, and continue treating the wound until it is healed.
de emigrainne	 "When an artery does not open...
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	 "When the patient complains of...
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	 And the way to extract them if they are causing hairs on their temples, and apply pressure at the artery in their temple as it beats strongly, and is quickly released once any coldness has passed.
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	 And once it is released, if the pain lingers and strangles his breath then gently remove any tight bandage or cloth, and apply a gentle hot compress to ease the pain until the artery visibly opens.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 "Then place a small bandage over where it is dislocated.
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	 "Then apply gentle pressure until you feel the vein, then gently remove it and ensure all pieces are separated.
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 "And apply gentle pressure to the artery if you feel one end of it, then slowly remove that part and take out as many pieces as there are.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 If she fails to comply, do nothing at all
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	 "Take three stitches at each corner,
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	 "If the artery is large, use two stitches from a strong cotton thread to prevent bleeding near the wound and cover all of them.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	 "Then remove any excess between the two stitches in that manner and then if you see, if another surgical cautery is necessary for the bone as long as the pieces are covered;
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	 And it is this swelling which is severe, with no feeling of warmth, and a red appearance.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	 As for the cautery, to finish with the treatment
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	 That's because it is more severe in treating the wounds.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	 When extracting from an artery, one must wrap the lower arm with gauze and hold it tightly in place;
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And when applying a tourniquet if there are dry medicines that make the skin numb and tense, hold it tightly until it is gone.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And if you are applying it to an artery as tightly as possible and experience any pain when coiling around with the tourniquet, wrap your lower arm tightly around and hold on.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	 And if you have none of that, when wrapping the lower arm around it must be as tightly as possible until the skin is frozen, and hold on to your lower arm as cold as possible until it stops.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	 "And when it is necessary and more severe to cauterize the artery than two times, but the cutting should be very close so as to hold its heat for a longer time.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	 When the blood vessels are too small, less heat is needed.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	 "And it must have between the two cuts a large space, and then when you've made the second cut, and you feel the artery stinging as if it is touching bone, clamp down on both ends tightly.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	 "And make sure there's enough space between the two cuts so that you don't cut through to the other, completely.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 "This is how the cautery is performed:
des larmes	 tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	 "When the tears of the eyes have descended into the veins that are close to the ear, and you see there is no cure for medicine, you will tie off the artery with a bandage tightly, watching closely as you move it.
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	 And when the hair of the patient is wet and moist such that it burns the paper, and scorches the papers, and extinguishes the fire from the tears's heart; then there should be more attention to this treatment
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	 And they called it the "rough cure", and that you make three incisions at an angle on either side of the forehead.
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	 And on the other side of each incision make a second one in front downwards towards the nose, and the others go to either side through the paper, and you keep an eye out for any incisions into the arteries that are hidden behind by the papers.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	 And after this hold your hand steady from continuing to the second ribs, and let three wounds be made as much quantity as you can bear.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 And apply a piece of sponge and sprinkle some powdered gold on it to wash the wound, then put an ointment that is made from these parts onto it.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	 "The second incision was made after the first one.
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	 "The second incision was made between the two incisions on the back of the arm and then performed a similar incision to this one.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	 The instrument used for the first incision is called "cultellar"; on one hand it's quite sharp, and on the other hand it's dull; neither of them are satisfactory, so this type.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 After it has been shaped towards the ear on one side and towards the bone on the other; after that, shave all over as closely as possible to the first incision.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	 "Hold the eyelids steady until the incision is complete on both sides and then perform a similar incision to this one.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	 "Then extract all the blood, express your voice from the wound,
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	 "Place a bandage made of gauze on the wound and apply wet dressings of wine and oil to it. Make sure the eye corners are covered,
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Take the other eyelid and gently press it down to prevent a swelling of the eye; then apply basilicon oil for healing wounds, as well as other treatments used in treating wounds until they are healed.
dou reume des eulz	 And again
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	 When any vein is cut open with regularity, you see the arteries thicken and become inflamed, and damage to the walls occurs.
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	 And as they are pricked, severe pain often follows, and the veins break through.
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	 Since there is no relief from these accidents that bring about such great pain and suffering, the wound becomes infected if it isn't treated quickly.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And you instruct the patient to recline their head back slightly, and then make a great bend in the forehead, and another one on the nose as well.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	 And beginning with the removal of a tendon from the left temple to the right temple, and so on through the incision into the bone.
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	 Then remove your hand from the nerves in the temples that move around the corner.
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	 And when the bone is cut open, if you pour water on it from a sponge, and then wipe between the two layers of the incision with gauze soaked in water, and press gently.
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	 Then apply honey and oil to it gently, and keep away from the abscess.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 When healing is complete, you should gently apply heat to the area as soon as it begins to appear, then treat with warm compresses that promote circulation.
En teil maniere:	 In this manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	 Remove the first and second eyelids, and cut off the third eyelid.
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	 The surgeon will make an incision in these wounds to start it healing.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	 removal of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	 One of the things that we hear is one of the three things
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	 or grains, or stones, or third molars, or similar things
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	 Or pain, feverishness, or sicknesses.
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	 Or other fluids, whether they are warm and hot, or similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 If something enters the deeper part of the ear or any other way that does not cause pain to the ear, it must be removed from the ear, by placing the ear on its side.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	 If you see the third, if there is no clear oil of saffron or similar oils, then perform an extraction.
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	 "And when the ears are torn off or pierced through with a needle,
et estent l’oreille au desus.	 it is held closed
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	 This cure often comes from this treatment
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 and if it doesn't come off, then they apply a subtle pinching to bring the shape.
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	 If it moves with pinches, that is good.
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	 if it doesn't come off and they apply the subtle pinching of two fingers.
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	 And if it doesn't come off with this treatment and if you hit the ear canal hard or pierce through the eardrum with a needle, they squeeze tight to prevent any movement until the needle is withdrawn.
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	 Then it should come off because this has often been described as effective.
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	 And if she cannot get free in any way, if it is pressed by the others, and has nothing to hold on, then put some cotton around.
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	 Press against the base or whichever part that might be, and squeeze tightly.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	 And if she cannot get free from all these things we have mentioned, and you press the ear lobe so tightly that it bleeds.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	 And the manner of doing it is to first make a small cut in the lobe of the ear and extract two abscesses according to their size, then hold them between your hands and pull the ear towards you, and then make a little incision at the base of the ear fat or near the dependent part.
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	 And if you do it in this manner as long as you continue to cleanse the ear thoroughly and wash your hands often with saliva.
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the treatment as long as he remains sane
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	 And if it is swelling that comes and goes, then administer an extraction
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	 If he cannot open his mouth, instruct the assistant to gently push or pull slightly according to this form
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 Apply an incision to that grain/portion
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	 But do not worry as long as you think the ear is wet due to moisture from the ear, until you have done many pieces;
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 Then gently pull and squeeze it if necessary after doing several pieces according to what we said, ensuring that the extractions are done correctly.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 In that case, when it is convenient to lubricate the ear canal with soft cotton swab first and then gently extract the grain.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And if you think so, you may also use this method on another ear as well.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 If it works for that one, then it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	 And if not, then take several pieces while holding tightly to his hand and gently apply heat;
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	 And place a cloth or gauze on his ear and squeeze gently from one side to the other, firmly squeezing another spot near the ear while holding onto this one in the ear;
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	 "And it continues to do worse until the arrow is completely out.
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	 "And if you see one joint and hold the other with fire until both joints are burned.
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 "Then repeat this for any other joints as long as they remain all.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	 "In the extraction of a stone, if it is small in size and accompanied by similar things like pus and wounds, treat as you would for a cut.
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	 "But if it's large enough to feel pain, apply an enema of poultice.
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	 "This is the lighter choice for those in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	 "In the extraction of ears when you apply treatments like those for divisions and distillation, and the treatment does not profit, if it is convenient that you look at the ear in sunlight.
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	 If they prick with very small needles, and if it does not move when you hold down the point where that joint is located.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And so forth of the small ones and large ones.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	 And apply more carefully to the ear in proportion to the severity of the pain, until it stops completely.
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 Do this as long as you keep holding them down.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	 And if it doesn't respond to your touch, puncture the bone with a needle as I have said in the previous statement.
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	 and if they don't move as we have said, administer the extraction of veins with someone who has experienced previous extractions in cutting into the bone.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 And if you apply your oils and medicines to the ear at any place as an instrument, where that joint is located as you see it.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	 And if you use gold or silver particles of the appropriate size for piercing, and apply them with precision to those parts mentioned above by distillation.
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	 And by pressing firmly on the instrument of rain well done so that you may perceive raising and lowering movements in time
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	 Then apply oil or juice from your medications into the ear canal, and whichever you find works best in it.
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	 Then apply firmly to the instrument with cotton wool, and press gently until oil is distilled or thoroughly into the ear.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	 And apply to the ears with cotton wool, and distillate in it so that it comes out of the ear.
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	 And remember not too cold as this medicine may be ineffective if applied at a very low temperature.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	 removal of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	 No child is born with any earwax in it
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	 And this is a common occurrence when there are injuries in the ear or if it has been forced out of place, and such occurrences come rarely ever to be heard in the ear unless you can see
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	 "And no time occurs when a person falls,
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	 "Whoever comes across a deaf person who cannot hear when they try to speak is in the worst situation and it's important that you put an ear trumpet on them.
et regarde dedens:	 "And look at these ones:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 "If you see a person with a full head of hair, then it is possible that they may have difficulty speaking properly when they want to speak:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	 "And if someone turns away from you and cannot hear behind them either, then it is possible that their ears are blocked up:
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	 "If their hair is not long enough or curly enough around the ears and they try to speak softly but still cannot hear properly because of it, then that is very bad:
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And if you prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	 "If the hair around their ears makes it hard for them to hear properly and they try to speak softly but cannot because of that then you should hold onto their ears gently and make sure not to touch any of their ear holes:
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 In his ear put a tampon soaked with warm water, and then apply cold compress on the Egyptian scar.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	 Keep applying warm compresses until the burn is healed or apply ice and vinegar powder to soothe it.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	 And if you see swelling in the ear, keep applying warm compresses until it subsides.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat until the burn is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	 And if the bleeding comes to an end, if you put a sponge and wrap it in ice cold water, then place it over the ear, and apply other remedies that are used to cure wounds from things such as distillation.
de la char des papieres	 of the paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	 When the hairs are moist and dry, you stretch them with strings and tweezers, and apply a mixture of vinegar from their roots.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	 Then treat for the burn.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	 And if the patient is on fire (meaning a cautery has been applied), apply another one slowly and after incision.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	 And many times repaired, could not any thing from their roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	 When they are burned by fire, the roots remain seared and do not come back
de la gresle	 of the glue
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	 Many times the eyes of these things seem to grow in shape and size, and because it is this disease called "grandine," and is an assembly of great moisture on paper and parchment.
li ovraiges est telz:	 The work is such:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	 when the patient has this disease on one side and another, it's an easy thing to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Then you take the two large ones, then remove some of each part lightly, and then apply a bandage tightly
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	 if you do not cover with paper that prick just a little bit, nothing happens to the wound.
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 And it is large, when the assembly has one seam, and the treatment as long as he is healthy;
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 "If it's small enough not to exert much force, then there should be no problem as long as the wound is properly healed and closed.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	 "If the ear canal is being cleaned with cotton buds (ear swabs), and if you turn it inside out or insert one end into another, then gently pull and push from opposite sides.
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	 "If the tissue is torn by incision, no harm will come to it;
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	 "If the cotton bud is burned and treated with fresh oil, it will heal as long as there are no wounds in its shaft.
de la graisse des eulz	 "From the grease of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	 "Exinach is fat that burns through paper and cloth alike, often injuring others, causing eye damage, coming down with headaches, and it can not be seen in the light or by the sun because tears fill its eyes.
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 "As they lie down their faces become swollen and they lose consciousness as a result of the injury.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you press on your left hand and pull it out
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	 The manner to perform it is by placing one's hand over the wound.
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	 Then apply a dressing of linen and wrap it around in the shape of a circle, so that there is enough surface area to cover all parts.
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	 Press on both sides and close up as much as possible in the shape of a circle.
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	 Then apply some moisture to the affected area with something sharp and not too wide as it could cause further injury.
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	 Continue pressing until you can no longer see the wound.
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	 And apply more dressings as necessary to cover the wound completely and prevent further damage.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	 Stretch your arm as wide as you can to either side towards the ceiling, and then bring it back straight again.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	 Hold your arm there, stretching as wide as you can towards the ceiling, and then slowly bring it back down to where it started.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	 And as you stretch your arm out towards the ceiling in the beginning of the stretch, if you feel any tightness gradually ease it.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	 Then stretch your arm as we instructed earlier, and hold the stretch steady for as long as you can, and keep it gentle to avoid injury to the joint.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 If such wounds burst and go into the eye or mouth to corrupt the moisture which is already present.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And once it is calm.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the base of an eye is touched, then apply a gentle treatment until it calms down.
des poilz des papieres	 hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	 When the hairs sprout up naturally, do not touch them other than to trim them, and keep it clean. If they start itching or become irritated as the hairs grow, there may be problems with the eye lashes or eyelids, causing issues such as tearing or inflammation that come from over-use of eye makeup products and lotions, so try to avoid this by keeping it simple for now.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	 And its treatment follows these ways:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	 Either by fire cure or by medication as dictated by the practitioner of the cure; and it is done either by cutting and stitching or by leeches, according to what I say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	 It is advised that you apply the head of the leech on your thumb and then remove it from the oil on your hand gently.
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	 If she is converted, it's good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	 But if he bites an artery at all;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	 And if the leech bit it on one of these hairs and pulls them out to its base completely, or tears all the hair off, then you tear it off immediately.
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	 Then in removing the paper from his body and tearing out these hairs all at once, remove it with great force as little.
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	 After wiping the paper with a small cloth and then pressing it against another flat surface, if you feel that the image is not in the right place, make sure to align the image according to its size as shown on the paper that was provided earlier
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	 If there is too much space between the two, align them closer together.
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	 Then wipe off any excess liquid gently onto the two lines you've written on, and begin drawing the larger letters.
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	 Then draw one end near a hair root of average size, and then trace the other line to meet it at one of the two corners.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	 Then join the two lines with a stitch of very fine wool thread, and sew it tight. When you've done that, remove any excess threads from between the two corners as much as possible without doing damage to either corner.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	 "And if there is no remedy or treatment available, then leave it as it was.
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	 "Then apply a compress to the wound with gentle and firm stitches, as it is recommended by an old doctor. However, if that does not work, then there is great fear.
et si a une autre maniere:	 "And another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 "Then take the cloth from an appropriate place and apply it to the wound as described below:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	 After applying gentle pressure with small force, do this form:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	 "If you cannot hold tight or the cloth is not steady, if a needle is pricked or there are threads, then lay it on gently.
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	 "And take another thread from the second, which is lighter and smaller than the first. Then weave between your two threads evenly.
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Gently massage the injured area repeatedly and gather all of the threads from the wound to stitch up.
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	 Hold the eyes steady as you cut into an abscess or sore that is oozing pus.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	 No time arises when hairs of the paper are cut off.
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	 If you use what we have said about incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 But the stitching in one and two is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	 The cure for wounds should be based on this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	 And that you gather the paper and straighten it according to what I have said, then sew two stitches by heart, and make them fine like the paper and wide at both ends.
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	 And cover up with two stitches on each part where you hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	 Carefully align both ends with respect to each other on a sheet of paper, then draw lines between the corresponding points:
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	 And leave it as is without any corrections, and the line that holds it will be strengthened and reinforced until he puts his mind to it.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 If the handle breaks due to excessive force, then treat it as long as it is still usable.
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	 And if a wound occurs and the paper is removed, leaving no hair behind:
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 You will draw the lines between the two points according to this shape and size.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	 The shapes are as you require a small sharp needle, with thin silk thread:
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	 Align the ends and draw them gently one next to the other, so that you can stretch a palmful of thread:
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	 And order him to gently touch another thin thread of silk softly, and hold his hand over it.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	 Then put the arm on a support or rest.
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	 And so let it lie in the sun until it is healed, because healing wounds this way is subtle and quick. Then pull out the arrow from just above the hair root, pulling gently on the paper while you remove the hairs naturally.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	 Then pull out the hairs up to the arrowhead, and cut off those hairs if they are one, two or three hairs.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	 And then hold your hand steady as you remove the hairs from the paper with the natural hairs.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	 Then treat and remove the hairs when you have removed all of them, if you pull through to the end of the thread that you ordered him to hold onto. As long as the arrow remains firmly in place and you guide it with your eye's view.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	 "Once you have shaved and trimmed your beard, leave it for two or three days so that the hair grows in its own way and nature takes its course.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	 "If the hairs are short and attached to the natural curls of your cheeks, then you should pluck them gently with one or leave it as is, making sure they grow long.
de la porriture de l’oil	 In the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	 "When this illness is called 'aleacrati' or the poison comes in oil, if it has two ways:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 The first way involves natural remedies and the second involves unnatural ones.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And there is bleeding or bruising from the wound, or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 "The method of treatment involves you choosing one and burning away the old remedies and putting on new ones, until they are good.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 "And only use in this treatment any remedies that are known to be effective and have restraining qualities.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	 "If you do this, then it is worse than the first ailment.
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	 but if more remedies are used, as for those mentioned.
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 and the swelling of the joint or the abscess is completely removed, and all wounds are healed, and in applying this remedy.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	 And the strength of your remedy will remain as it was before, so that you should not move suddenly in its new form.
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	 and the treatments we have mentioned are no longer effective as before, that is, it does not revert to its previous form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	 "Of the chaff which comes in oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 "This illness, also called 'axacratia', is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	 The injury comes from tearing and burning and cauterization of things similar to these.
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	 and the method of treatment is that you pierce with a double needle, inserting it into the ear lobe, and make incisions on both sides at an angle, so that the needles go through to the other side.
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 "The arrow pierces through to the bone
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	 "The body parts move according to how it is convenient.
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	 "If not, if the patient clenches his fist and holds the paper tightly between them, they tear the paper.
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	 "And the edges of the incisions where you make them should be straight and aligned so that when they are put together, it forms like the shape of a letter not having an 'X' in it.
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	 "Then put that arrow through to the bone according to how long and thick they are, until it reaches the paper. Then fasten the two edges together tightly, so as to form a line.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And apply the remedy for those who have mentioned the softening of their limbs and tendons until they are healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	 "And if it is from a burn or stitching, make sure you shave the hairs off the paper as close to where this occurs.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	 Then cover between two of the tent poles as I mentioned.
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	 The treatment should be according to the shape of the illness, as there is much variation in form. The main features will guide you on how to restore the body back to its natural shape.
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	 And I should adjust it according as necessary and based on further instructions provided later.
dou soudement de la papiere	 Certainly
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	 When this suture occurs on the hand and is placed neatly against a white surface with oil-based glue, it cannot move or be torn, if you want to cut off its point by using scissors to cut through the paper at that location.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	 "Instruct the patient to hold their breath as much as they can, so that nothing touches or is too rough on the sensitive area, which should not cause any harm and does not burn oil.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	 "And for your incision, make sure to heal the one that is sewn together gently, as it needs to regain its original shape.
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	 "And every stitch in the one that is sewn together should be done without any pain or discomfort. Also, gently remove and separate it from its surrounding area.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	 "Then put a soft cloth between the paper and the oil, and apply it with fine wool in abundance of water.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "After the first treatment, continue to use strong cloths and similar things as much as needed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	 Of course
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	 "The remedy is done in two ways:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	 She is nervous and seems to be a good cook. If you touch her with fire and take care of her wounds properly though, she won't die
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	 Both are good at cooking, and they both strive to catch everything in sight and all the light as well as the motion of oil
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	 The incision method is that it cuts into the scalp first to drain off blood.
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	 Take the bandage in your hand and cut out its corners with scissors, then use it for covering wounds.
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	 Then take a needle, and sew the horsehair or deerhair or buffalo hair very tight.
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	 Then double the needle point and tie it tightly to the bandage. Insert the needle into the bandage completely covering all of its surface except for a small area at the base where the hair will grow naturally or leave it as is if the incision usually does not cause tears.
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	 "And only once it has happened to one of them alone, along with their filaments if we have mentioned.
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	 "After that the scar will be full and wide where this shape is seen:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	 "And keep in mind that the scar should not touch the smooth surface and tear it apart, and the edges must be kept intact.
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	 "After incision there will come a period of swelling and bruising, and it leaves just to the other side.
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And then you should apply treatment as long as he is sane.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	 "And if one of them is not moved and you do not want to prick the other bone many times this treatment will cause a resemblance to the medical condition.
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	 "And if you divide it in this way and cover the wound with a dressing made of linen tied tightly according to this shape.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	 And you realize that it is moving slowly and the reason for its movement cannot be seen, if a drop of oil from this joint was dropped onto another joint.
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	 Continue to treat the other part as you did with this particular treatment until it is completely healed
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "There is nothing against it as long as you hold the arrow and treat the wound promptly while applying pressure; then repeat on the other side until both are healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	 And if the appearance of the skin on the lips is filled with oil to such an extent that it separates and forms part but not all, causing tears to flow continually.
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	 Drops a red oil from this joint that comes from a drop of the same oil.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	 of the charcoal which has been put on the bruise
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	 The eyes are never red for no reason and are held tightly closed with paper and torn away from the face, appearing like a bruise.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	 And the joints that are put into place with their heads in position then treat them with the eye and cause all of these troubles to cease, and it is sustained by power.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	 After applying the first cut, continue cutting towards the end of your hair, and be sure to avoid touching the roots.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	 And if the incision is shallow and you have to make it with small force due to which one of the reasons we mentioned in the chapter about cutting into veins and doing minor surgery.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	 And once the incision is complete and you have finished cutting all the hair if there is blood or any corrosive medicine, put oil on it with clean cotton to prevent infection.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	 And if nothing is broken and the bones are set properly, and you doubt the dislocation, let the oil stay on it and treat the dislocated joint gently.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 And then come back to your shoulder as soon as it is healed, and every time you wash the hair in this way.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	 "However, it is necessary to apply a mild healing treatment at once.
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	 and for the vein injury, immediately go in.
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	 And you must not use your hand in any of these cases until you know that the joint is stable.
des voines des eulz	 veins
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 They are red veins that show through the skin and tolerate being exposed to the sun's rays but become fragile over time.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	 The physician must be sure when looking at it, where there are sores and no other diseases before.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	 And the joint in this way
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 Instructs the patient to put his head on a firm surface and then supports it with both hands according to their wisdom, so that its movement is subtle as this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	 And make two incisions at the base of each vein.
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	 And the joint should be held gently with both hands and released after a while until it can move freely.
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	 And keep the joint from moving unless you gently press it with your finger tips and perform this exercise at noon in front of the sun, doing it frequently as necessary until the joint.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	 And when you have done this, if there is a drop of oil on it that turns green and red, it indicates the disease has returned.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	 If you do not have the ability to collect all of it at that time, if you put a cloth on it and soak up the oil from your fingertips until the pain in their eyes is alleviated and leaves no trace as long as the pain persists or worsens, then rinse thoroughly with this method which has been described.
et c’est li forme des forces:	 This form of treatment requires force.
de la fistule de l’oil	 from the fistula in the skin
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	 Fistula means a hole or opening, like in the case of an abscess that has not yet healed.
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	 When you cure with cautery and by burning medicine as I have described earlier, it is not easy; if the wound continues to burn even when you hold your eye steady, then it must be fatal, and all moisture that is present should be drained away until the wound has healed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	 And when the error is discovered, you will see the corruption and the deformity if there was no instrument to correct it.
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	 And they are called "unforesight," and done by using an instrument to correct it, or pointed as if with a needle as it is in this form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	 And remove the crookedness of the arm and straighten it between your two hands, and press lightly with your hand until you see that the correction has been made.
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	 and do this every time, then return to the straightness of curative remedies.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	 if the limb is swollen and painful, and the blood vessels of the arm are swollen, return to its normal size every time, it won't move anymore or open sores will not come, only when it is healthy.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	 if this isn't done with another instrument that straightens out the fistula in this way
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 And when the dislocation occurs for the second time by force, and through remedies applied, but if it is discovered that the joint has moved in this manner, then there should be an attempt made to correct it so that the joint does not move further.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	 Then apply cold compresses to the injured part of the body and loosen any tight clothing.
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	 And afterwards restore the affected limb with fresh ointments as much as possible and if it is numb or stiff due to cold.
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If this is a minor injury,
de l’issue de l’oil	 after removing the old limb
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	 if the eye is fully opened and does not cause any obstruction or discomfort when closing it, then you should let the patient close their eyelid.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	 Then apply a fresh bandage or cloth soaked in honey and aloe vera, incense and cedar oil. And then bind it up securely with bandages and dressings.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	 Here is the translation: "And regarding how to tie the knots when tying tight ropes, and two crossed together in four groups each, then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that they have best.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	 "Then tighten them with strong cords, and repeatedly tighten them so as not to tear.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	 "After tying the knots and leaving them tight during the day and night, and repeating this as much as you can, if it is convenient that you loosen up.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	 "After tying at the end of each day and night, and as long as you see the oil repairing itself, it is good.
se ce non;	 "If not...
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "...if you keep tightening the knots and loosening the ropes, and tie them as tight as they are.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	 dislocation
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	 "When there is tearing in the woven cloth, loosen first and then fix it with paper if you find a tear like this one.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	 When the patient sees a sharp pain at the root of their arm or leg, it is necessary to prick another needle in that part next to the one causing the initial pain.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	 Then pierce through and let the first needle be placed according to its placement.
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	 Then prick through the second needle and place it in another vein further along, holding firmly. Afterwards, remove the first needle from its thread and insert it into a nearby vein filled with oil.
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	 And leave them as long as the second needle is in place, then treat any discomfort arising from it until the wound has healed.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And whenever a wound is held steady by the second needle in all parts of the cloth, as long as it heals properly
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	 And if the hairs appear to be thinning or become fine and brittle after pricking at a very small sharp point that comes from oil, they will lose their strength and fall off.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When he has recovered
de la bowe de l’oil	 "In the bowl of oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	 This illness is called "alcinqueti" and occurs when blood vessels are assembled in the oil, resembling veins that connect to each other.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	 The appearance of the incision should be such that you grasp the patient's hand firmly between your thumb and index finger, then take hold of their head with both hands.
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	 Then you will make the incision, do not hesitate and try to remove as much hair as possible around it, looking for any movement in the eyes.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 If they do not move as expected, then you must proceed with the operation without further delay.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	 If you hold the patient's hand firmly while making an incision in their palm and then take a very thin blade to cut along the blood vessels on both sides of the incision towards the wrist.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 When it occurs and if distilled with hot oil applied to the affected area gently or grease mixed with honey, then only another treatment is necessary as long as it remains stable
des aigues de l’oil	 of fire
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	 We have the similarities of veins in the division, and what should be considered when piercing.
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 if there is any doubt regarding safety.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	 It's important to keep the burn between your hands close together, forcing away light and applying clean oil tightly.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	 Then apply paper soaked in oil to the affected area on both hands so that all of the wounds are covered or one hand at a time.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	 Then take the affected area in your right hand and call it "almagda," or in your left hand for the other.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	 After inserting the needle of the instrument into her ear canal gently and with care at that point, you must gently withdraw it as soon as it touches the base of the oil gland. Then, after removing the instrument which is called "almagda" smoothly, continue to hold your hand until it reaches the base of the oil gland;
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	 It is important that the measurement from the oil gland to the end of the ear is equal to or shorter than the length of the instrument, which is called "almagda".
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	 The oil gland.
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 If you see the bone through the ear canal paper, then put the instrument into its place where it should be and press it out along another path after that.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 Now he has to lie flat on his back with his arms extended out in front of him, holding an instrument tightly in each hand.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	 After taking a short rest and moving the second path along it, place the instrument in position with gentle pressure. When it is fixed tightly and cannot move, gently rotate your hand slowly and slowly;
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 "And then gently put some oil on it.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 After bringing the hand up with the instrument he is to stop the motion and lubricate it well in oil and after that gently place back on his body again.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 And those who are of our nature we should approach with plenty of oil.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	 And the patient should not be able to enter into the oil through his pores as some people have very hard skin which would damage their eyes if you choose an instrument that is called "albert" and whose shape
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	 "After this is only connected and not too tightly pressed but gently apply some oil as we have described.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	 "In the end of this work when the bandage is applied to the patient's back while lying down in a quiet place.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	 "And so let it be moved gently and lightly with no movement of the head in any direction.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	 "Then let it be removed gently in a quiet place and remove its head and view everything closely without moving. And then tie the cord tightly once more.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 "It is only necessary to do this in the course of treatment or after cutting but it is important that you do so for safety.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	 When you come to a joint, apply ointment on it while facing the ninth hour, and cleanse with it what touches the abscess.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 When you are done applying ointment to all joints and have come to the ninth hour, if there is any bleeding from wounds, you must wrap them with cloth so they do not show in light.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	 And then turn it into its own case and cases that come to be like that.
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 Then you should not enter in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	 And there was one of the Saracens who said that in some places people used magic to make things grow, but we do not see any evidence of it here or anywhere else in our land, nor have I seen any evidence of it in books written by the ancients.
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	 And by chance this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	 These are the likenesses of magic things, since those who do not know them see them like that.
et soient d’arain proprement:	 "and let them grow naturally
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	 "These chiefs have great subtlety and they deceive in three ways.
de la char sor le neis	 "from the burn until the wound
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	 There are no hairs that prick the vein or make any other type of injury.
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 If they have been burned with heat and pain, if there is severe burns in white hair.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	 When the hairs that are burned do not heal and become damaged, it is important to keep them between your hands in direct sunlight.
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	 And wet the nose of the patient with cool water so they can be applied to the burned hairs and the wounds.
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 Then continue applying a small amount of cool water gently from one side until you know that the hair is completely healed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	 If there are no signs of healing, do not try to apply anything further. Gently massage the affected area with cool water if you need to, without causing any additional damage.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	 "And do not move your head or shoulders if it is otherwise necessary.
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	 "And do not harm yourself or the patient with too much cautery as long as they are still alive and all their hairs are intact.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	 "If it is necessary to remove them, do so carefully without causing too much harm as long as they are still alive and all their hairs are intact.
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	 "And if it is necessary to remove them without causing too much harm, then do so carefully into the bone of the joint.
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	 "Until it is necessary to cut off one or more hairs gently and carefully with your hands only, and avoid touching any other part of the body except for that.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	 "And let them grow until they are as long and thick as you like in your own hair. Do not touch the lips or face while growing.
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	 And many times there is an attack on him who tries to do it
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 And each time the child comes by one hand and then the other by mouth to the other hand, and they do it one after the other while holding onto what is there
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	 Do it as much as you can until the evil one has corrupted that thing and then treat them with fire, extract the poison, and burn off the hair in Egyptian fashion, and place them directly on the eyes.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	 Do it three times or more, as long as evil spirits contaminate everything that is dear to you
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	 And then put on the eyes one drop every few moments as long as he is sane and if he needs healing water from medicine that way.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 And this is the method for purifying the spirit by distillation of oils and medicines you get.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	 And it may happen by fire or water, similar to how one can catch fire, causing
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	 and when you see smoke, if there is a flame near
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	 And hold the eye tightly to prevent it from moving when one holds an oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	 "from the burn until the wound
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	 Many times occur to the head with a condition that is called 'tolly', and spreads and becomes large as long as it looks at something.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	 And to prevent this from happening you should apply the burn treatment or other healing agent as soon as possible.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	 And if it is not corrected when it becomes large, and if it gets hard to see clearly, fix the injury;
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	 If you don't hold tight enough with fire it can result in a severe infection, as if one fails to correct the injury at all times, and great damage occurs to the eye.
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	 The first sentence to translate is: "et se li apostemes est de soef touchement.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	 "When one cannot speak and communicate
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 If someone presents a solution to the problem in this chapter of treatments, I will benefit from it, for none are useless
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	 It's important when the wound is fresh and covers all its surface.
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And after stitching two or more layers together, heal as much of it as possible.
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	 And when the layers have healed on both sides, if it is desirable that you clean all parts of their surface as much as they can withstand, then stitch together two or more layers and bind them with a bandage, and powder over the bleeding wound with fine powder and incense.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And sprinkle over the powders a bit of strong or other fragrant powder to help it dry quickly and heal the wound as much as possible.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	 The manner of suturing is to assemble the solution
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	 or with needles if you have said in the suturing on the belly
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	 or with sutures, as I told you
des apostemes des levres	 of the limbs
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	 A main fist is dense and hard to cut through veins, arteries and bones.
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	 unless you turn the flesh, and shave all around it, and pull on all sides gently and evenly.
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 Then apply the new flesh after cutting through a vein, until you are sure of its evenness.
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then apply the new skin and treat it well until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	 Of the joints
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	 There are often convulsions at the sight of a bleeding wound, which people call "a bull.
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	 If you hold it with needles and keep its root firmly, and leave room for the blood to flow freely or the wound.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	 After spreading salt on the wound, or other powders restraining and dehydrating;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	 And when the second incision is made, it often happens again.
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	 If nothing comes out after the cautery.
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	 These are the forms of wounds to be treated with cautery.
des sordens	 the sores
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	 No such occurrences have been recorded at the root of the spine between the ribs and the diaphragm;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	 And no such cases are recorded when the teeth turn black and white as they decay, until their roots become decayed;
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	 If you make sure that the abscess is between your hands and its opening remains open, and you extract the teeth or sores as they appear, until nothing more happens.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	 And in doing so you remove blackness and whiteness, and greenness and other stains as they fade away.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	 And if you do as I say at first time, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	 But if not, try again after the second and third times, as long as you have tried all of them.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	 And the teeth have different forms of injuries depending on what caused them, for example those from a blow to the mouth will be different from those from between two teeth.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	 These shapes and others should also appear with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	 It is important when treating the tooth pain to take two tablets as prescribed, because it must not be done otherwise
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	 Because that substance has such a high concentration therefore there is no excuse for taking more than prescribed.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 After the patient has pulled on his tooth
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	 Many times the pain from the abscess should be treated, and it should be done whether or not there is a healthy tooth in front of it.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	 "And it shall not move while the pain lasts, as long as they are inflamed, for we have already wished to do this healing.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	 "And when you are certain of the toothache, it is advisable to soak your hand in cold water.
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	 "Then gently apply both hands at first, and then firmly press the veins.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 "And if you put pressure on a vein between your fingers, it will hold still as long as you do not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After firmly pulling out the tooth, if it still hurts, then put a gentle pressure on its base and remove gently from any side; after which you will move in order to make sure that no harm has been caused anywhere lightly, and repeat what you have done before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	 "And if the pain is strong and constant, it may be that your veins are being pinched or constricted. Then wrap them in cloth to release them.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	 "If you gently hold the veins, they will not break when pressed upon.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 "It is advisable to soak your hand in cold water before applying any medication or remedies for toothache.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 And make sure you do not break it and leave some part of the skin, and remove the arrow through the malice of its root causing greater pain than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	 And may you always do as the learned physician does, who by their swiftness and diligence never break a single bone, nor bring about any harm.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	 Nor may they ever come from a great sickness caused by the roots that fester or break bones as we have seen.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	 And when their tendons are torn if you soak the affected area with vinegar and oil.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	 The sores they bring that fester may be helped by soaking the affected area in vinegar broth.
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 And if not treated, it will worsen.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	 The extremities of the veins are where they must first be held steady so as to last through many points and large openings.
et ce sont les formes:	 These are the forms.
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	 If they are amputated at their base and do not grow back, then they must be made of strong wood, so that they may hold firmly in place.
de la racine des dens	 from the roots of the hairs
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	 When the roots are torn and bleeding, it is advisable to apply wet cotton soaked in burning oil or vinegar until they clot.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 And let them grow as a single piece, like this:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	 And if the roots will not stay tied to these hairs, it is advisable that you cut off all the hair and expose the roots.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	 Let the hairs be thick and coarse if they do not break off cleanly.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	 If this does not happen when using these methods, then it is likely that there was a problem with the method used;
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	 If there is an instrument with two handles, how do you hold it?
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	 The other tools that are meant for tightening up the roots and the instrument with large handles whose shape is...
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	 Or if the hairs are thick and coarse and still break off easily, then it is likely that many of them have already broken.
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	 And these other hairs which do not count as yet;
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	 And the greatest subtleties of this instrument he is to master himself by means of it. for such cases and diseases are rare indeed, or if an instrument was not known before its diversity; and in that case one cannot break a bone, nor any other joint, unless they will, seeking as hairs which may be useful, I have advised you, and shown you the way to do this, like:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	 "And let it rest firmly so that the bone does not slip out.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	 "Then apply leeches as medicine and if there is pus in the bone, it will be small enough to use with this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	 "When the teeth are set in place naturally and their shape is good, and especially in women who have pulled them out with tweezers instead of pliers, they do not move after the tooth, it is right to pull, but only gently, as otherwise they can damage or break.
adonques lou raie;	 "until the root has been removed;
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	 "and if you are with tweezers, use the instrument that has this shape and is small enough to fit in your mouth; it must be made of steel and sharp.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	 And gently and steadily hold the tooth in your hand for a while to prevent damage from other teeth, and if you want to remove it, then take that tool whose shape suits best.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	 "It's like using a needle when making arrows;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	 And when it is very small or barely noticeable, if it does not move as much as you prick.
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	 Finally at the end it has no razor and its teeth are too blunt causing damage to the tongue if you try to remove it as much as it is long, otherwise it will damage or distort the speech.
quant li dent lochent	 When the teeth chatter
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	 When the tooth is loose or comes out through impact or injury and cannot be pressed back in its place when you try to do so, treat it with restraining medicines.
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	 If you use a thread of gold as restraint because the thread of silver becomes green and rusted, but the iron is still unaffected.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	 And if the threads are too thick or thin depending on the space between the teeth;
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	 And if you want to adjust the teeth, if you take one thread between two healthy teeth and put them in place. If there is more than one or less, as long as it fits well at the other tooth.
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	 "Then cover it gently with your hand, holding it gently and steadily until you have no more movement.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 Or if they prick at their base of the tooth.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	 Then bind them securely with threads, and tie them together, so they are between the sound tooth and the mouth.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	 Then let it stand as still as possible for a while, and if they become loose or come undone, tie them securely with another thread.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 if it is still and serves its purpose well, this is how the bones are shaped and their outline is made.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	 And when the tooth becomes loose, then they remove it in its place, one by one, as we have said.
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	 and they do not get tired of removing it from its place or causing harm to the shape of a healthy tooth until it is removed as we have said, so that it does not move at all times.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	 And if you want to know
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	 "No creature comes from earth or nature itself, except [this one].
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	 "Or by a wound's sudden blow.
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	 "The ulcers are so severe that you should open your mouth and let the sores touch your tongue, but not bite it.
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	 "Then cure the ulcers gently and steadily as the tongue loosens its hold on it, until they are healed or ulcerated. If you bite them, immediately cover with something soft.
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	 "And keep in mind that the cautery should not be too intense for fear of damaging a vein.
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	 "Once you have done so, gently remove the bandage and expose the skin. Then apply something cold to it.
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 "And let the sores rest until they harden enough not to stick anymore.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	 And when they apply heat to a broken bone
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	 and if you do not move it immediately after applying the fire cautery, which is painful in itself.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 And another treatment as long as he remains sane
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	 and if you look at the eyes closely or far away they do not feel pain, but continue to prick them because it is a carbuncle.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	 and if he is declining to his illness and has moisture on the incision, if they prick it slightly or gently with a small knife, and release one side and then the other.
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	 And if you move it to another place, as long as the broken bone is covered with healing ointment, then come back and treat it until everything is done.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then remove its splint and let him rest, and continue other treatments as long as he remains sane.
des apostemes de la gorge	 The abscess of the throat.
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	 "No matter how many times the throat is opened and the second mandrel cured as we have instructed in the division process, if you are not careful they will not heal.
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 "It's very important to be gentle and use a good color, otherwise it may cause harm.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	 "If the root is red and large, if you are not careful when using iron, that will be a very bad thing to happen.
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	 "But let it grow as much as it can, and once you decide to start removing it, if it breaks by itself then that will be a very bad thing.
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 "And if it is light-colored and the root is subtle then you must first test this instrument to see how well it works; but before starting please make sure that the tool's blade is properly aligned.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	 "And make sure the wound is covered by the sun and that all the cuts are clean and wipe out any pus from around it to make sure there's no infection. Then press your tongue against everything to see how well it works.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 And if it is silver or lead, as fine as hair would grow
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	 Can you press the tongue to every instrument, and see where the arrow strikes and the feather goes in, and tear off what is left more than your teeth.
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	 Then take none of the feathers with it, then tie onto the instrument whatever shape may seem strong enough
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	 And all the veins are torn, and one place another, and they are bitter, and it is made of iron or stone.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	 "If you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a needle.
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	 Or you may find them on one side or another.
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And when you have cut one arrow, if you pull the other out in the same way as before, after cutting the wound gargle warm water and warm air to help soothe the throat and ease it, and the pain may go away, or the taste of sharp stones might be bitter, or bitterness from burning fruit, similar things.
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then apply the treatment as soon as possible
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	 And once they have entered through their nostrils and come out of their mouths in pairs, if the patient is able to close his/her mouth tightly
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	 And when examining a woman with an abscess in her throat, it means the abscess is small.
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 And if the woman cannot breathe through the opening that is swollen, and cannot drink or swallow, she will die soon thereafter.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 "The eyeballs were swollen with two punctures made by a needle, did not.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	 And when you have reached this point, and cut off one end of the vein, then treat the wound as soon as possible.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	 Then reset it in the other part too and put a pad over the mouth and pressure on the tongue;
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	 After cutting off one end of the vein in this way, there was only a small amount of bleeding;
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	 "He put his finger down her throat to gag her and began to drink violently, and continued to strangle him with the rope.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	 "His eyes rolled back, and he was filled as much as it could hold until his stomach was full.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	 "Although I burned and the fire increased in strength:
ensi demora sens croistre;	 "His heart stopped beating.
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 "And God separated us from those parts, and I alone remained after him.
de l’uve	 Of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	 "When the vein is reopened, it is empty and long; if pressed 'perpendicularly'.
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 "If it is large or wide, if pressed 'vein'ly.'
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	 "If it is divided as we have said in the section, and the cure profits nothing, and you see that the fingers are released, and it is subtle, if convenient that you catch hold of it.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	 and those who are gathered together and remain one piece
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 And it is red or dark blue if you make the incision in it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 There is great danger in the abscess
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	 When you see it, according to what I said before, let the hairs grow and remain in its length. Make sure the hair is placed before the sun so that it can be used as an instrument when we have mentioned this previously.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 Then cut the tendon in its groove, and treat it with salt or alcohol, and take out any other instruments that we have mentioned in incisions of the second order.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	 And make sure there is no excess moisture outside its natural end.
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	 If you add more, if it causes trouble to the voice or ear.
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 After the incision, use what we have mentioned in the second order incisions and apply treatment as described before.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 And if you prick at their base (the hair follicles), hold steady your gaze so they don't move until they grow
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 The manner of the cautery is to be done gently and evenly.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	 And it is that the hairs of the head are placed in their proper condition and then pressed against the instrument which we have mentioned earlier about the fire cautery, and close with a sharp live touch, unless they are too thick or too thin.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And in employing this instrument, its form is like
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	 And the surgeon places his hand on the patient's forehead and applies the instrument to all of their face.
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	 And the hairs are placed on their cheeks and the surgeon presses it into the patient's mouth from its side if they cannot swallow or breathe properly.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	 Then the surgeon takes his hand and presses it into their eye as much as possible for a certain amount of time until he sees no more pain or movements from the medicine.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	 "And if you see it, put cotton around the wound and hold the cotton tightly in place using no other bandage until the bleeding has stopped.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	 "Afterwards, leave it to dry for 2-4 hours or as long as necessary.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	 "And if you have more medical experience, and the bleeding continues after applying the burn dressing, then cover it with gauze or a clean cloth, and maintain cleanliness in that area.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Or if you have ice available, apply cold compresses until the bleeding has stopped.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	 "This treatment is more effective than just applying a burn dressing.
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	 "If you apply it this way, with gentle care and patience, gather all or none of the herbs mentioned above in one pot, then simmer them.
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	 And when you put it on firm ground, make sure to place it firmly onto that surface.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	 It can be made of gold or silver and placed in the patient's mouth until the blister pops due to the friction from the cane, so long as it remains intact.
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	 After the blister is done, make sure it's dry and don't start anything new from the beginning of the procedure, because more harm may occur.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 And do not perform any actions that contradict this instruction.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	 If the instrument is not present, when you take a stick and place it in one of the patient's hands so that they hold onto the blister firmly but do not bite too hard.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 Because this remedy will be most effective if you do it correctly and without causing any harm to the mouth as well.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	 "Maintain proper breathing through the nose or mouth at all times.
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	 "Do you want to see what it is that you will hear? And press the tongue to the sun at all times.
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	 "And that which does not open the mouth and is restored to the throat should be swallowed immediately so as to enter into the stomach.
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	 "In this case, it passes through vomiting.
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	 "Or the hairs swallow a piece of sponge or a piece of bread crusted with salt, or a root of lettuce, or a dried fig.
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	 "And it passes through the sponge filter and then into the throat.
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	 "And when she comes to her place, she will open up again, and you will swallow.
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	 "If it is not from what we have said, then take the instrument of pleasure in this way:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	 And if they fall down the throat, it will make them choke up at their top
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	 And be sure to not touch the epiglottis so that they do not fall out, nor break off from their base.
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	 And make sure to not touch the instrument when you have it on so that they do not get burned or hurt themselves;
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	 If there is an accident and he takes everything off at once, as long as the instrument remains on.
de la sansue de la gorge	 The throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	 There shall be no medicine given without consent, if I have said in the division by the treatment of medicines;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 And when it does not profit me, then look into the throat for the evil of the sun, and press its tongue to the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 If you see sores, if they are small ulcers or blisters, or if there are tiny lesions which might be related to this
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 If it no longer benefits me if you take a sharp needle and insert into the sore throat, and bite gently on this instrument, do as mentioned before.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 The sores are getting worse without any treatment.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	 Then drink something cold, and wet your mouth, and force yourself to swallow, and move it with your hand as you wish;
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 "And if his breath catches him by surprise
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	 And if it does not happen as we have said, if its breath catches him by surprise due to the sudden onset of suffocation, then I will apply the method that I mentioned in the smoke inhalation.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 Do this many times because she needs targeting.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	 The method of smoke inhalation is to apply a heated object or cloth over the nose and mouth so that it touches the skin.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	 Then apply the smoke inhalation and seal their mouth shut with a cloth or heated object if they do not fall unconscious but rather breathe in and out.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	 And she will regain consciousness now, and if it does not happen or happens later on, continue the smoke inhalation procedure many times.
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	 "And when the veins are cut, there is often blood evacuation.
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 And although they may be forced by a governing power.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	 The shape of the instrument when treating the disease is such that if it can be seen through the mouth, then the tongue becomes curled and may enter the throat.
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	 And it is like sucking on a stick or burning one's finger, if you take hold of it you cannot let go.
et vez ci la forme:	 The shape
li chapistres des apostemes	 physicians
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	 The forms of incisions are like those seen in other books on the subject, and they differ greatly in size and shape.
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 And one is done in a manner similar to how it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 The second way is to cut into veins located at the wrist.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 Because of their different foundations and purposes, the two types of physicians differ in terms of judgment; one is experienced through practice while the other gains experience from observation.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	 If an abscess must be pierced through all the way, until the hole is made exactly as large or smaller depending on its completion.
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 "And if one or more of them die as they complete their task,
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 When physicians operate on joints, they let it rest until the wound is healed and as long as the tendons of the joint are torn, because this causes contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	 "Or the main limb pierces through until it is done if that limb dies first.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	 "Or when it pierces into its base if he should die,
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	 "And only when you pierce the main limb until it is done and that other limb dies,
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 It cannot be healed in a short time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	 "And you should heal the wound of the main limb after it dies according to its completion and when the pain is eased, and the limbs are still from bleeding, and the discomfort and redness, and debatement and agitation of the main limb, and other signs,
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	 "It is advisable to ensure the incision or extraction site is as clean as possible.
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	 "And if the incision is located in the arms or legs, and into joints or arteries, then there may be bleeding.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 "In this case, focus on stabilizing the affected member first.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 And when arteries are cut while eating, if you leave the incision until it is complete in digestion, as we have advised
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	 "If you encounter a perforation when performing the procedure, if your veins become inflamed and covered in dirt;
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 "then the sores will grow deep into him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And if an artery is pierced as wide as the chest and it reaches all over the body, then his limbs are affected.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	 "Make sure to clean all wounds thoroughly;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	 "and in large wounds, deep cuts, and many injuries similar to the size of the incision site.
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	 "And if there are such wounds that require immediate attention, seek medical help immediately;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	 "If you encounter swelling or redness when removing the bandage, do like this when doing stitches:
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	 "And if it is dislocated at three points, or as if the arm were cut off close to the elbow, and as near the shoulder.
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 If it has been dislocated in several places, such as at the top of the arm or above the elbow, among others.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	 If there is no head injury and a superficial tear, it is advisable that you simply remove it.
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	 And if the tear is large and causes significant damage, it would be advisable to remove it, but not to take off all of it at once, but rather a part.
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	 Then cover the other eye, and leave nothing untouched by removing that one.
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	 Do this many times gradually as necessary until the wound has completely healed.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 The dislocation is caused by weakness in the joint, or old age, or very thin bones.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 "When the patient is restless with an abscess issue and cannot be calmed down, do not worry about it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	 "The surgeon performed a great incision on the patient. When you see this small wound, and look at it closely...
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	 "...and if it's a burn injury, ensure that you are applying cold compresses to the affected area.
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	 "...and if it's a large abscess, you should attempt to drain it gently, ensuring that pus does not flow out in all directions.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	 "...if you have opened part of the abscess and are cleaning it out with cotton or gauze soaked in water, be sure to keep them pressed tightly against the wound to prevent leakage.
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "...then apply a dressing as long as necessary to cover and protect it.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 "And those who have wounds become inflamed as the result of this procedure, may their wounds heal quickly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	 "...and if the patient continues to have infections and abscesses require further treatment with powders described in this book, or you feel that it is necessary, then apply moist bandages soaked in wine and oil to calm the nerves.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	 And the patient should put on damp and smooth towels or moist cloths and warm and cold water, just as we have said.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then remove the abscess and the wound when it is appropriate, as long as he is conscious
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	 And then do all necessary treatments on the abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	 Or what we have said earlier must be done before performing any procedures related to the abscess, and go ahead with the treatment of the patient.
des soros	 "Of the arrow wounds
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 "Or may I suggest that you take this as one continuous sentence? If so please translate the following text into English without any line breaks:
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	 He has excess moisture or heat that is present when we have described it;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 And if there are hard and painful stones to remove, he has no doubt or fear that he cannot move against it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 "And in the course of treatment if there is any instrument that has been called an 'entromissory' (a type of probe used to introduce a catheter), then it means something like this:
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 "And if it contains moisture, when they are removed with the following procedure.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	 And when the moisture is outside, do not leave the hair containing that moisture alone, as it will return if nothing is done to prevent it.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	 "Then plunge them into Egyptian onion juice if they are present.
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	 If not, apply it gently and evenly to the wound, then leave it on for another hour.
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 They will continue to work even if they are already burned.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	 And when you come back from the first hour, then apply it for another hour and continue this way as long as it is well tolerated.
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat the wound with the most suitable remedy, as long as it remains calm.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	 And hold your eyelids steady if you follow this form of treatment for a longer time.
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	 and wipe out all scabs, and apply your entire treatment in order to heal the wound or injury.
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 And do not make it contrary if you do what I have told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 And if the eye pierces it, and tighten and cure as you have been advised to do.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 And cut into the pierced eye gently, especially if there is less blood because it may be close to an abscess.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	 And if any of these bones or joints lacks moisture, or if there is no such thing as a woman's bone:
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	 and I found the joint so small, sharp and white, unable to break it.
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 And if there is no such thing, one must treat them as a broken bone does.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	 In other joints coming from children and the roots of the ears, the treatment should be severe to prevent any recurrence or injury.
et les cure si com il covient.	 And the care that is necessary.
des scrophules	 "scrophules
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 "The stitches of the incision are often opened up to the anus and back, and the corners of the anus, and never come elsewhere or wrong places, and are usually in agreement with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	 And every arrow shaft must be thoroughly cleaned on one side if the joint and the bone are injured as we have mentioned.
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 The similarities of these arrows exist in many cases.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 "There are some who contain moisture, and there are some evil who would not obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	 In that case where you see the bones arranged in the thigh and they are similar to the chest color, there must be no defect or injury anywhere along the vein nor artery.
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	 "If you wish to proceed with care and respect for the patient's dignity, and if you hold onto his ear lobe gently while applying a compress on that part of his head near where he was injured, then take great caution when removing the bandages in order not to cause further injury.
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 "Go slowly and steadily, making sure not to touch the nerve or vein, nor cause any other harm by handling it too roughly, make sure your hands are steady when removing bandages gently.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	 "And if you touch a vein or artery and it doesn't stop bleeding, put the wound in vinegar to help coagulate it.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 "Keep pressing on until the doctor is able to heal it and make sure you stop when told to by the doctor.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	 "And when your turn comes again if you come back quickly for more treatment as needed.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 After being instructed to do so, if he is unable to move his arms or legs at all, that means
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	 And if it pricks the base of a vein with great force, then only bind its base tightly with strong thread and leave it to bleed slowly.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 Apply the wound with Egyptian cotton gauze, then treat it
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 And if you cut off the entire abscess, make sure to gather up all the pus and treat it immediately; otherwise there is no treatment for its size.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 "If you want to open the root of it [the dislocation], then stretch it out as much as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	 If the hairs grow too long and prick when you try to remove them, leave them alone until they die.
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	 And if it is on the part that should not be touched, in dependence upon it, then treat wounds and similar things with care so as to avoid contamination.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the wound is well healed, if the treatment of wounds proceeds smoothly, as long as it remains so.
de squinance	 Of squinch
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	 They spoke and talked about the circumcision of the throat.
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	 But I do not see any words in our land who write, nor is it their speechwriting that they write.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	 For those who have drunkard's disease, it is advisable to cover the throat with a cloth called "epiglottis
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	 no help can be provided by this method because any vein or artery in the body will respond with pain and swelling if exposed to saliva or mucus
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	 When a disease is in the throat, it is recommended to cover your nose by preventing strangulation if you are going to speak.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	 It is advisable when we want to open the epiglottis that we make a small cut between the two rings or by cutting through it in half along its length, not on the membrane.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 It is simple and easy to remove it if there are no complications and the veins return immediately.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	 And if you're afraid, when it extends the skin of the throat all around to its length then cuts it off as soon as it grows.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	 "And remove all swelling from the wound, if you see no blood clots, then bandage it securely as instructed.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	 "And demonstrate by cutting off the flow of blood from the arm that has been torn apart and through weakness of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 "Leave the wound to heal on its own.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	 "And when time is not delayed in doubt of strangulation, gather the two ends of the wound and tie it tight so that no blood flows out.
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Then administer medications to calm it as much as possible until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	 The throat is completely closed and the patient's breath stops; they die very quickly
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	 "And when the eyelid cannot be opened because of the swelling and it breathes through the wound, then keep it alive by maintaining a constant flow of air.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	 "And when the patient commands to let it heal as long as they are free of disease and its healing is complete in three or four weeks, then he commands to suture the wound and treat.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 "I will tell you what I see.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	 "I saw a girl swallow her pride and choke on her words.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 "And I called for help but found it too late to save her life.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	 I found the wound and saw that it was bleeding and could not be stopped by any means except with saliva alone; the patient would try to suck the blood through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	 "I sought out the wound and treated it until it was healed.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	 "And I saved her life but left her with a broken voice thereafter.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 "Because of the way she treated my epiglottis, no one was afraid to trust me.
de la grosse gorge	 The large neck
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	 "The epiglottis is called 'a throat hernia', and can be very large in size, and is often found in women.
et est selonc II manieres:	 "And there are two types:
naturez, et accidens;	 "Natured and accidental.
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 "Without a cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	 And the dislocation is according to two ways, one being like pulling something out of place and the other way is coming from an artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	 And it causes fear, and one must be very careful when trying to remove it, as the probe and search for it can cause great harm.
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	 If you use it as described above and do not cut into any vein, if the probe cuts through your skin or any other part of your body, then immediately stop.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 And make sure to hold it tight and keep searching until you feel absolutely certain where the dislocation is located.
des nous	 There
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	 The two ways I mentioned are: one being like pulling something out of place and the other way is coming from an artery.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 And it's important to note all the differences between what came in through the artery versus what came out of place, as they may require different treatments and approaches.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	 I say it is strong and fierce until it is completed,
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	 until the strength and fierceness are over
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	 When there is neither strength nor fierceness nor pain, and contains it itself, which are its own secrets and follow the course of nature's laws, it grows larger and becomes more powerful;
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 And they grow like this: either strong or moist, whatever the nature of their growth may be, in the division as I have said.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	 It is necessary when you come to the cure of not that you first examine carefully with all your senses, the instrument which is called "entrometissoire," according to its shape and character as it comes or chaplain who follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	 The manner of cutting into the abscess is that you pierce it as deeply as possible and then hold steady until all the bleeding has stopped, then according to how big the abscess is, it should be cut out.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 After removing that, please ensure you stay there as long as possible.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	 Moisture runs cold, causing it to lose its heat, as I have mentioned before.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	 And after the incision, if there is no moisture, it will be hot. If you prick at its base and draw blood gently from any part of its body and wrap it in a cloth soaked with clean water to cool it down as needed.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 If you do not take it out immediately, if it does not bleed when pricked at its base or from any part of its body.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	 If there is no bleeding after removing it, then repeat the process frequently.
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if there is some bleeding but no excessive bleeding, then apply the poultice with soothing ointments and hold it steady to prevent further injury.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 And if there is large bleeding from the wound then treat for severe burns as well
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	 "The vein should be moved in the opposite direction or another way if you press firmly and forcefully on the joint's base. Leave it to rest for a few moments or up to three.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	 "Afterwards, come back here [to continue].
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	 "Here are the three ways they can be done:
grans et moien et petit;	 "large and mild [ways], or small.
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	 "And if you take the third way, which is called 'albert', or if you do it with 'breb',
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	 "large and mild [ways], to pierce the abscess.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	 "and similarly to the needles used in hunting wild game. Are these sharp and of steel or iron? And they can be yellow and more effective against blackcurrant.
et sont de III manieres:	 "And they are of three ways:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 great, mild, and sharp, according to the amount of the opening.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	 The forms of dislocations are like this:
grans, moiens, et petis;	 great, mild, and sharp;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	 and if there are some with two bores of three ways as well.
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	 and if there are ones with three bores, they also follow the third way.
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	 And if there are some with two bores, or one bore alone, and they are from three ways.
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 It is necessary in their case.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	 The cause of these is to make it sharp and so that they do not cut off the nerve or vein.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	 And these intrusions are usually resolved when opening an abscess, but not always.
et sont de III manieres:	 And they are of three ways
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	 great, small, and minor
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	 do not let it move except in joints, legs, arms, elbows, and ankles.
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 no other small instrument is used, similar to the lancet, in order to treat abscesses; so that shape, where there are sores.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	 "The procedure should only be performed once with care of veins and arteries. Otherwise, it may cause severe harm or injury.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	 Once it becomes inflamed from any injury or wound, as long as the fingers seem to be injured too
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 and they will stop bleeding and heal, if it is convenient to follow this way until the end of this line
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 Then wash the fat, and apply the salve to treat the wound at once; then sew up all of the layers of the wound with stitches, and continue treatment until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	 and it is full of pride because of its great size like a woman when she gives birth to twins through two openings.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	 where one line ends at the other end and the opposite of that line has more lines, according to this form, in which some lines have an even number and others an odd number of lines;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then scald the leather between the two halves, and also remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powdering, which is necessary in the treatment, as long as he remains healthy.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	 and if he is not healthy or the incision has not been made entirely, then so that the wounds may rest, or for the treatment of the wound, it is advisable to fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 And leave them as long as they continue to heal and the fat, then cure until he is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	 Abscesses
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	 Abscesses often contain moisture and can cause sores; it is to be feared that they will occur where there are doubts or fears.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 "That which contains moisture must be wrapped according to this form, beginning with line b and ending with line g.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the bow in the arm is injured and if it pierces the skin with cotton, then let it stay on one side for a while, and after dressing the wound carefully as much as possible until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	 And if the arms are of similar structure, as in fractures of bones, and the wound is treated with cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	 of a vein's opening
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	 When the artery is cut, when the vein is severed as it happens many times, and so does the artery lose its life and vein.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	 And if one suspects that this may be due to an artery being cut through, then it is important that the wound is disinfected immediately
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	 If you suspect there's an injury here as well, then check for any signs of bleeding.
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	 And if it is due to the vein, then apply pressure immediately to stop the bleeding.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 This is a foolish attempt, and more often than not the result will be severe pain or damage to other organs.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	 It is advisable to avoid the fire cautery method if possible, and also to avoid it in those who have been stabbed through an artery near their lungs.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	 And then the artery must be cut off completely, as much as it is uncovered;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	 "And hold the artery of a single vein in two pieces for two days according to what I taught you regarding the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	 "Then hold on to the vein between the two sutures as long as it remains intact, and loosen its attachment.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	 "Apply the remedy that I mentioned before they prick.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 "Treat this wound while it is fresh as much as possible.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	 "And if the arrow is from an artery, hold onto it with both hands until you remove all of its pieces, then remove the remaining piece and pierce through to the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	 "Then tie off the arrow, as I told you earlier, or if there are two pieces of the same vein in both sides, then take one of them.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	 "And if you doubt the hairs' strength, if another arrow pricks at the same place where the first arrow pierced through the base of the eye and holds them steady in incision.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	 "Then hold it until it becomes full-sized, then remove the bandage tightly and let those who are tied to it go free.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Then apply a dressing of cloth and oil until the wound is healed.
des apostemes des ners	 of the eyes
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	 veins and arteries, they become inflamed when too much pressure is applied, or through excessive exertion, causing pain
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	 "And this can happen when advisors and doctors are absent or in a poor state of health. And the patient's appearance changes, becoming pale and shaky from pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	 "And when it is restrained during, if the eye feels pain and does not stay still with the body, but rather tries to escape.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	 "Therefore, it is necessary for all things and cannot move in any direction; those who are in dislocations must not try to force them apart with force.
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	 "Due to shrinkage
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 And those who are bald or have a receding hairline, shave their hair carefully
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	 If the abscess is painful, cut into it gently at its base;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it is large and painful when the abscess is opened up, stitch up the wound and continue treating until it heals
des grosses boces pendans	 heavy eyelids
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	 No other ailment occurs inside and nowhere else, except for this one which is called "fungus" by its similarity to ashes, and the root is subtle and large.
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	 And in it there are small and big pains;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 And I saw one whose belly was white and had many of them inside it who were more similar to fungus than anything else, there was no difference between them, they were all smooth, and the root was small, and they were very thin, and in burning pain, because of excessive moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	 I inspected it and found that one was around 18mm high, while the other was about 6mm. The incisions were made when you looked at them they seemed to be moist, and their color of the arteries is bright white and wet and subtle root
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 If the needle is too long, or in your presence, apply fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	 Because many times large dislocations cause serious harm without proper treatment, such as using fire cautery to treat it.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	 And if you see the vein exposed and fearful of cutting it, then take a well-made needle thread, tie it around the artery as we have said, and leave it two stitches;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	 And then hold it, and do not let go of the thread as long as you prick at the artery, and continue with your work;
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	 And if it's painful to cough near the belly button, but you must cover your mouth well with gauze and then apply the fire cure so that it doesn't spread.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 And after treating the wound, make sure you don't cover your face with gauze that is colored and poor in sense and feeling as well as being damp.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	 "Let us go to the treatment of the liver after this.
quant li boude ist fuer	 When blood boils
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	 The appearance of a boil comes from a burst wound or abscess, and it is usually on the belly.
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 And it comes from cutting through the abscess and bursting the boil, if there is redness around the navel indicating an abscess in the liver or intestines, which may cause severe issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	 And if it is through the outlet of the intestine, then there are many more complications, and when pressed from both sides repeatedly returns, and with great effort may swell up at the entrance to the bowel and cause much harm.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	 It comes from moisture, it is light and quick to spread when you press on your hand hard, make sure not to force it.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	 And if it happens through these signs, it will tighten according to a certain amount.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And if it happens from weakness or dizziness, when he looks at his face and sees the sign of a vein or artery,
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 "If you wish to continue treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 "Because there is doubt and fear when working with the abscess incision or the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	 And if it happens from the intestine or bowel, when you press on his abscess and feel his pulse, then withdraw all at once, as quickly as possible.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	 Then command the surgeon to operate between your hands, then go inside and remove all of it through the wound, and after that clean out the abscess thoroughly.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	 Then tie him up with a strong rope or tightly wrapped cord so he cannot move away.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	 Then wash out the abscess and extract its contents,
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	 "Once you have taken hold of it with both hands, if one lets go, and pulls on the stomach.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	 "And when you take hold of the belly button, if one lets go, and pulls in some excess skin;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	 "And if you force it in the opposite direction or towards your own belly button, then come back to its original position and put on two more hooks, and pull the remaining two hooks, and remove any remaining hooks that you have placed.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	 "Then hold the arrow in place with four hooks, and when you see it, remove the hooks, and let loose as much of it as possible, and cut off any remaining flesh.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	 "Or you can let it go when it appears subtle and loose, then treat for what is necessary, as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 "Do not heat or rub the sore where you bruise it, then treat the area as needed, and rest the affected limb.
dou chancre	 There are two possibilities here: "there
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	 "We have discussed in the previous paragraph about draining abscesses and mentioned that incision should be made for treatment. Here we discuss how to manage the healing process.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	 "Let the abscess mature until it becomes ripe and ready for cure. And let the previous one know that as soon as an abscess is in the beginning or at its infancy, incision should be made to remove it.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	 "When they are mature and ready, only approach them as needed because there is no need for incision in that case.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	 There is no need to make a cut before me (the healer).
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	 "Abscesses are removed when they mature to the extent that incision is needed according to what we have said before. That means you should never apply a black salve.
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	 "When there is a clear swelling of the abscess, first make an incision to drain it.
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	 Then remove the pus from all parts and leave nothing behind.
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And leave the abscess completely full and empty your hand or any other part of it. Do not prick at an artery or vein if you are using a fire cure as long as it is steady.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After that, continue the treatment until there is no longer swelling.
de ydropisie	 dislocations
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	 We have mentioned the signs of dryness and that which way the assembly of the fire is done, and what signs are cured by medicine, and what signs are cured by iron.
si est eclites soulement;	 If only one is injured.
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	 And do not prick it with iron in these two cases.
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	 It is to know, when one hears trumpets and hears of war
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	 when you see the resemblance of dropsy which is called "dropsies" in medicine, and its treatment does not help if one sees that the veins are weak or there is another illness besides dropsy, then take care of the belly and similar things.
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	 If you don't want to do it because it causes doubt
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	 and if you see the vein very thin, and there is no other illness besides dropsy only, and it is not too narrow nor too wide, then go ahead.
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 Take the vein in your hand and press it against your belly from the bottom to the top of the chest, then take the spathula sharp as this shape
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 "And then the dislocation occurs.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	 so that it does not pass through you if it tries to go into the intestines when you squeeze it tightly, and you do not make it bleed.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	 After looking for a dislocation inside,
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	 if you find it necessary to perform the Heimlich maneuver on this individual and place your hands around their neck in order
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	 If there is a dislocation due to liver disease, you should perform the Heimlich maneuver on this individual right away.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	 If it is due to injury, then do not perform the Heimlich maneuver and instead treat their wounds so that any excess blood does not cause harm to this individual's weakened liver.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	 Thoroughly examine the skin around the area and the underlying tissue between them as you would when scraping off one layer of clothing or wiping away dirt.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 Thoroughly examine the skin as it starts to change around the area, and once the skin is removed, treat the wound with appropriate medical care.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	 And is attached to a thin wire, or made of metal, and in the small part there are holes.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	 Or connected by one part, three parts;
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	 The other two parts, and the first of another;
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 And they are dislocated similarly to a rope, and it is the shape of the incision that surgeons use for cutting.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	 On the head of the axilla, when the veins come to light, they are now held by the instrument;
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	 When you see more than is convenient in the middle or third part, due to the need for strength from an arm, as if one hand was struck, or approaching death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	 But see according to the quantity of his strength, and according to what the presence or absence of wounds signifies.
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	 Then take the instrument and hold tight to it as you blow into the straw that is connected to it.
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	 Then gently touch the instrument with the other hand, and if you see the patient struggling to breathe hold on a bit longer.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 Do not do this again, keep it gentle until he stops moving or breathing.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	 And if you doubt the patient and leave it alone when he is suffering from a severe illness or fever, or when bathed in water, fire, or sun, and he wearies of drinking.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 And the patient with dry medicines until he is healed, and cautery on his stomach, liver, spleen after extraction of the arrow if I have advised you earlier.
de l’estopement de la verge	 removal of the foreskin
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 There is no child born without a foreskin or whose foreskin was not properly retracted or uncircumcised.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 If it is convenient to perform the operation in such a subtle and delicate manner as this shape.
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	 After the fire cautery procedure is complete and healing has commenced on any part of the body affected by it, if one is stung or pricked with an arrow at its base, hold steady the eyes so they do not move until they grow.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 And in such cases there may be doubt and fear, as many die, for the blood often evades when opening a vein, or incising an abscess, or treating wounds, or extracting arrows, or cutting into stones; it is uncertain whether they will come out alive
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 If the foreskin is properly retracted as described above, if a doctor closes it gently, just like we said, then it will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	 Those who do not have the strength in their arm to pull it out are at a disadvantage because none of them can raise their arm high enough without first straightening their elbow.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 and cannot get up for this reason that the material does not come to light, which is a bad disease
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	 The manner of doing this is that the patient should stretch out his body as if he were a piece of wood and try to lift up their upper arm above their head, so long as they are still able to move around.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And you must guard against any injury that comes many times, and if it happens when the abscess is opened up, and heal the wound as long as it remains intact.
des pustules de la verge	 sores or boils on the legs
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	 Often they come in groups at once, and make one appear to be ill
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	 They are both good or bad.
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	 If you want to gently pull one out with a pair of tweezers and remove all the others then put cotton soaked in Egyptian ink on the wound.
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal the wound as long as it remains intact.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 If they are malignant, you should also use a fire curement to treat them.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	 When you have pulled it out and there are two parts of the hair that were growing together and one part was cut off then if you want to remove the hair that had been severed first.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 And when it is burned, if you treat the burn.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	 When you cure an abscess, if it is not completely closed, and there's still a small opening or hole,
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then apply a paste made of honey and flour that is mixed with the husks of dried beans and lentils, then treat it with other treatments as long as it remains fresh
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 "And when the lunar fire cure comes [to be used], if you administer it according to its prescribed form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	 The cautery instructions are as follows:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	 This concerns the treatment of wounds and abscesses.
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	 And if a small opening in the abscess is still present and needs to be closed, then apply pressure using a clean cloth.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	 And when the hairs grow around the base of the abscess which have not been circumcised or are from an injury or incision, if desired, you should shave them off with a sharp instrument until they become smooth and even.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	 And if you want to scrape it gently with fine sandpaper.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 Next, take hold between two and the use of a soft brush in cold water gently.
de la circoncision	 circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	 A circumcision is similar to other wounds but has its own characteristics
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	 Wherever we apply this work of our willingness and properly young ones, if it is done with good care and diligence, then it is better than any other and the most light in health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	 The previous statement suggests that the author is expressing surprise at how the circumcision of infants wasn't common as per their laws and they only learned this practice through experimentation.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	 But if you want to take the greatest part of doctors and surgeons who practiced circumcision then they were strong and had all their wits about them;
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	 And if you want it in the two places mentioned above, for example those of the glans and the foreskin then you will be doing very well and have great success;
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	 The dislocation occurs with great pain, causing the limb to become misaligned.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	 And often the dislocation occurs with great force and drives the limb forward, causing misalignment and many times it is accompanied by fractures and I want to make clear that this can be very serious indeed.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	 "The mutilation that has been performed on the body is complete, for its force will be exact in cutting through it as before.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	 When you press your hand, if you apply great force without holding on tightly enough.
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	 But the fingers should be bent at a good angle with respect to the palm of the hand.
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	 And if the first treatment fails and you think of a child, when he touches it, do not let him touch anything else but hold his hand firmly to its base only, and then gently release it in all directions.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	 Then hold his hand firmly between your hands straight out and apply pressure equally across both of your palms or the fingers that you hold tight should not allow any movement at all.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	 Then blow hard on it to force it out or towards you, while holding its base steady as long as it remains in position.
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	 Then thoroughly clean up the residue that is gathered, then tie it to the base of one long thread, and tie another end to something else.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	 And then tie the other end of the thread to a hook and to an object that can hold it securely, and secure between them, then gently pull on both ends until you feel the base of its tail.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	 Then let it rest slowly and gradually because this is how the healing process works.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And mix together the powder with a small amount of oil that has been heated until it becomes like a rose sauce, prepared with roasted onion and red pepper flakes, then let this rest alongside another cure while both are curing; continue to care for one as long as you can keep it safe.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	 "The form of the words to be translated is this:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	 The dislocated joints should be loose and flexible, and they must move in similar ways as before.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	 If there is an error in the translation, it could be that the patient's veins have been cut during the incision
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	 So if you decide to stretch his arm or leg, ensure that they are stretched out flat against your chest.
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	 And hold it tightly and make sure you do not let go if the veins tense up or cramp.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	 If they prick their finger, and the vein is inflamed if you let it stay still until the swelling subsides gently.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	 If his arm or leg cramps up, do not worry; it will pass without causing any harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	 If the arm or leg is covered in sores and powders, as we have mentioned before when treating wounds and powders, if you stretch it gently and carefully enough, then nothing will happen.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Treat the patient as much as possible, so long as he is sane.
dou retenement de l’urine	 Retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	 "Hold back the urine if there is an obstruction in urination or discharge from hemorrhoids, abscesses, boils, wounds, or similar things that we have spoken of.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	 "And if the urine is not discharged, and you see that the obstruction is in the urethra or lower of the bladder, then it must be held so that the hemorrhoids are kept between their legs.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	 "And have them placed on their back, and extend their belly from the part below the waist, and hold the hemorrhoids steady as possible.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	 "And when they are constrained to empty their bladder through the lower opening of the urethra, because the urine is not discharged.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	 "If they do not come out as we have said and the hemorrhoids cause great pain if you administer an extraction with all the equipment that is called 'enema', because this is how it should be done.
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	 "Or if one side is slightly injured.
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 "And if the head of the hand or arm is injured and half an inch long.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	 "And the method of the issue with urine is that you use a double thread and sew into it a piece of wool or cotton, and then sew over the top of the needle.
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	 "And then you cover the excess of the thread and stitch over the top of the needle, and put a drop of oil or turpentine on it to lubricate it. And then place the abscess under the needle, and sew up the vein and close off the opening with oil or olive oil.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	 "Then tightly cover the needle as far down as the root of the vein. And then stitch it up on both sides to close it off.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	 Before applying the poultice to the vein and sending it towards a visible target, make sure that what you are doing is done according to this order or else the poultice will move in the wrong direction.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	 Stretch out the thread slowly and steadily as you go along it, then remove the thread from following the wool.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 Continue applying the poultice until the vein is visible and aligned with the target.
des maladies de la vessie	 hemorrhoids
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	 If sores or abscesses occur in the rectum, or it is filled with pus and you use a treatment called a "clepsydra," this remedy may help.
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	 She is closed tight; if it hurts or bleeds
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	 On one hand, and on the other, as you see.
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	 And if the veins are too narrow so that they burst due to application of the poultice and excessive bleeding occurs as a result.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	 And when you apply your medicine in the vein, put the chief of the surgeon near to moisture, and treat with a dressing that is applied as needed.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	 If you apply moisture to a cold surface, then wipe it off quickly
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	 If he enters wetness into the body, and feels pain immediately
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	 And this is how to use a subtle blister to treat the skin
si est ci:	 If so:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	 It can be gold or silver, and comes out through an incision above it.
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	 And if the patient is left-handed, or both hands are tied
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	 Then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you have used to treat it into another bladder. Tie them together with a double knot, so that when you apply the heat, both are in place.
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	 Then apply the blister to the edge and hold your hand in it continuously until you feel the heat from the moisture.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	 "And if you don't have a bandage, if you take some parchment, and make it into a circle, and press it gently against the wound.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	 "Then roll it tightly as you would roll a bandage, and make the circle tight like how you would make a knot, and tie it with oil and moisture, so that it is firm.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 "Do it the same way you did for the bandage; press firmly until all the moisture has dried.
de la piere	 from the base
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	 "We have spoken about the ways of treating injuries in the previous chapter, and medicine extraction techniques;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	 "And I said the difference between a sharp pain and false alarm, and that when you suspect the latter should try to avoid it with size;
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	 "And in bandages and blisters;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	 "I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	 "The bladder sphincter is tighter when it's first opened and becomes looser with age, indicating that the bladder has gradually expanded.
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	 "And opening the urethra will cause great pain, causing repeated urination, and eventually leads to injury of the urethra.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	 "The base of these dislocations causes harm to the limbs.
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	 "It is mild in children until they are 4-5 years old, and gradually becomes stronger with age.
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	 "The treatment for these dislocations varies depending on the severity of them; those who have a more severe one may require more intensive care than others.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 "When coming to treatment, first make sure you cleanse the area thoroughly in order to remove any impurities that may cause infection.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 "He never asks for mercy.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	 "Then grasp the dislocation by its base and apply gentle pressure downward towards your feet if you suspect that it is from a bladder stone. Do not remove until it stops moving.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	 And let his hands lie between your hands flat on his thighs, so that his chest may be lowered downward.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	 Then draw the arm towards you while supporting it with the other hand above
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 If one feels a stone in the abdomen, if now you should cut into the belly.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	 If it does not respond to the touch of the surgeon's finger at all, if your second finger is numb or weak, his limbs are stiffened and young.
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	 And draw towards the base of it, and pierce it as well, and if you feel in your second finger on its belly, that there is an opening into the bladder.
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 Then press downward towards your second finger, and hold tightly to it so you can see where it should be cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	 Instruct the minister to press down upon the bladder with his hand, and instruct him to extend towards his right arm all the coils above, and towards his left arm stretch out the coils in the part where one makes a slit.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	 "And after removing the bandage...
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	 "...and between where the cushion is and its foundation, never move it but with care from the surface to the bottom.
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	 "...and so hold it firmly and steady at the bottom, and both sides should be firm or fixed, depending on how much space there is between them. Do not press too hard.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	 "...in case one of the cushions is pressed to the bottom, it may cause difficulty in working...
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	 "...and if there are chips or edges.
si est griés a issir;	 "...if the joint becomes loose.
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 "...and if one of the cushions is torn or frayed around its edges, and rounded over, that can cause some tearing.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	 "If there are chips or edges on all four sides, make the piece bigger...
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	 If she does not leap, it is advisable that you stretch the Achilles tendon when they are this tight around your heel so that it doesn't cause injury.
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	 You put a gentle pressure on his Achilles tendon at its point of origin.
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	 If you do not gently pull him by the Achilles tendon while his leg is bent and straighten it if there's no pain.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 If he has more than one knot, first loosen the largest at the base of his bladder, and then pull it out little by little afterwards.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 "If the knee is extremely stiff and needs more stretching, you should make a larger cut in order to do so.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	 These things occur to the patient's pain:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	 either he dies or his urine comes out through a hole that cannot hold it.
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	 But every time you try to stretch or beat them tendons, while pulling them apart piece by piece;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	 And when you have completed your task if there is incense and aloe and dragon's blood and binding, and release it by removing the thread soaked in oil and wine or with oil and vinegar cold to calm the eye.
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 After tying off the suture of that vein, do not remove the ligature just yet.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And when you loosen it if the loose end of oil and vinegar is separated, then apply a compress for the wound until it stops bleeding.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	 And the eyes become inflamed from the pain and cuts, and freezing of blood in the bladder, and so by holding back the urine which flows out naturally.
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	 Whenever you pierce a vein, and remove that blood, if it remains in the bladder, it may cause urinary retention.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 After cutting off the incense and saliva from that vein, give it all the care you can, as long as it is alive.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 And it is advisable for you to cure all of his wounds, tie both of his legs together, and arrange the medications near him.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	 His lower leg is small, and it's bleeding heavily from a cut in its side, and his urine cannot be collected.
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 If you treat this as I have said so many times before, then excuse the size of the treatment area for this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 "I have gained experience in that regard.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	 Lay out three equal angles on this form:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	 Then put a finger and lift up the edge of the wound so that it does not come out in the urine;
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	 And then bandage the wound gently on the side where it is deepest until it heals.
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	 Then take the bandage in your hand one piece at a time and slowly pull out every other part of the bandage from there too.
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 If much urine comes, then press your hand on what is most pressing due to the deep wound that is located at the side of the leg.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	 If a bone is broken, and it moves with urine, and it bleeds.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	 And if he cannot do this by any means to prevent it, then place a bandage over the wound and treat the cold abscess that is in the wound.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And let him rest as much as possible until he recovers.
de la piere des femmes	 For women's vulva
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	 When the third thing happens and there is no other choice,
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	 one is that he is a virgin.
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	 The second thing is that you cannot find a woman who has had intercourse but has been castrated; or conversely if she was castrated.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	 And the third way, it is that you cannot find a woman who is skilled in manual dexterity.
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	 And the fourth manner is that the bottom of her foot should be stronger than the bottom of his, in order to cause it to have greater strength and pain. And you need someone who knows how to use such a thing well, or else there will not be any effect at all.
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	 And give a demonstration of how to do this in the life of women, or you can ask any woman who understands one part of that art to perform it for you.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	 Look well at whether she is still virgin
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	 unless they want to test their courage or perform it in a hidden place.
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 If she feels her vagina tighten due to the pain and commands her to touch it with a finger or press on the base of the vagina so as to squeeze out any semen that may be present.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	 "She shall move it gently from the entry of the vein to its exit point, as far down as possible, until she reaches the root of the thigh.
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	 "Then hold it at its base near the knee joint, where if moved will be visible, and press on that part.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	 "And do not move it from the base or exit point, but let it stay in its place as small.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	 "Then tighten the rope on the thigh, feeling for the joint as you apply pressure to remove it.
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 "This is how, small and large, acute and dull, long or short, they all have wounds.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 "It seems like you need to determine what the issue is.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 "And if you do not bleed, if the blood vessel is broken and you hold it steady for an hour until it stops bleeding.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	 After that comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like, "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output and nothing else:
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	 And let the vein swell and strain to harden its walls and veins as much as possible.
puis cure la plaie.	 Then treat the wound
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	 "And when the abscess is opened and pus flows out, then come back to this chapter as you prepare for your work, so that nothing moves while cutting into any stone or similar things.
de hernie carnouse	 Hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	 Ramie is nothing but a mixture of moisture and white sap, which contains iron;
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	 And it's called syfac, and sometimes is pure in the cloth of the blood.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	 It is the iron between the white sap that we have mentioned;
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	 "And when this happens,
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	 "The swelling of this vein is so great that it causes pain.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	 If there is a blow to the chest area, and if there is much moisture present as well
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	 or it may be a black, white, or blue bruise, which comes with greater severity.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 These are the signs of a broken bone, as when they are white and we have heard that it is a rib fracture, if there are ribs exposed but not opened because of all the moisture present.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	 And if there is water in the blood itself, it may be another bone that has broken off.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	 And if the moisture is between the skin of the chest and its white part, then there will be a significant amount of pain.
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 And once you know the color of the moisture, if it appears to be on the inside between the ribs and chest wall, which indicates that this is indeed another bone that has broken off.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	 "Once you know what is happening inside, judge how bad it is.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	 And when we cleanse it with fire as long as you keep its hairs even and hold the eyes steady until they grow.
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	 Then stretch their upper arm a little higher and cover them with strips of cloth;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	 Then stretch their left shoulder as shown and instruct the minister to stretch one of the two veins on that side.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	 Then take the spatula and carefully scrape the skin of the veins until you reach their base, making sure to gently pull them free as they are white, being careful not to cut your fingers.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	 Then stretch it from both ends as much as possible and extract all of it, then put on your thumb and pull the skin up.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	 And do not touch the veins themselves, but only their skin.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	 "Please refrain from causing harm to yourself or others, even if it seems necessary. If you come back in the same condition again...
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	 "...if you cannot complete your task within that timeframe.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "After cutting open the abdomen and gathering the intestines into one piece, treat them as you would other wounds, until they are healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	 "If another disease overtakes the body and it is necessary to drain the abscesses...
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	 "...then treat the abscess as you would any other wound.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	 "And if it is divided into two parts...
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	 "...then treat the other part in the same way you treated the first one. Apply a moist poultice with oil to soothe the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 And apply another layer of wool soaked in wine and oil, and bind the edges with doubled cloth strips; then bind them closely to form this shape.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	 Then take the second layer of wool and arrange them in this manner to match with the first and bind together at the top edge using twine as mentioned earlier.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	 And tie off the other end of the second layer in a loop similar to the first one.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	 Do not perform a fire cautery on this area in place of shaving the hair off, but rather use a gentle skin-colored cautery to remove the hairs from the skin.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 If you perform this type of cautery and prick it with a needle, then gently scrape off with the soft cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	 And you shall act as directed with all the methods that I provide.
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	 and remember not to touch the fire itself
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	 And be aware that this method is more dangerous.
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	 And remember to avoid any unnecessary pain, and also that the wounds will heal slowly.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 And do nothing contrary to this method or its precepts, and avoid any additional pain or injury, unless otherwise indicated by the physician present.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	 And the patient should be fearful and avoid this method due to its danger, unless instructed otherwise by a physician present.
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	 Pierce at or through the abscess with long rods to prevent leakage of pus from the abscess itself.
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	 And if it is necessary, make them large so that all the pus leaks out completely.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	 "And then apply a cold compress to the affected area, continuing as long as the wound is clean.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	 "And do not let the bandage touch the mouth of the wound if you also use a tube to treat it. Make sure that where they meet there is no contact.
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 "Enlarged the wound and waited for it to heal completely, which usually takes 6 months or more; then when healed cover any remaining sores.
de l’aposteme des coions	 "from the base of the arm
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	 "I believe that leaving this section of the text untranslated is appropriate as it seems to be an error or addition.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 "And I will tell you about the rest of the chapter and its similar things to the appendix.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	 "I say that many apostles come or go, and most often these are.
et c’est par mout de cas.	 And this happens from time to time.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	 This is what occurs through excess heat and cold, which causes expansion or contraction;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	 And the color of the base depends on that of the surrounding areas;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	 There is no pain and the affected area becomes painful;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 And it often causes severe fear, and the patient feels like their veins are about to burst or become inflamed;
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	 If it is due to blood flow, then you apply pressure at the base of your hand when squeezing with both hands.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 And it must not be touched.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	 This is done through the use of expression with both hands and doing everything in a similar way to how it was described.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 And you release the excess fluid by squeezing and then applying cold to stop it; the vein will be white as it heals, removing any remaining swelling from all parts of the affected area.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	 "Separate the affected limb from rest if necessary.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 And when it is at arm's length or in any case where the veins are difficult to reach, if necessary, then deliver all that you have and go back again.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	 And when the birth of a vein is behind it, if you wish to bind all of it securely, and extract it as we have described.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the wounds are finished, if you apply a poultice of wool and oil to the wound and rub it gently as much as possible; then treat other sores with further remedies until they heal completely.
de l’aposteme des coions	 "from the base of the arm
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	 This is similar to the dislocation of a shoulder joint, with the relaxation of the muscles and stiffness as it was.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 The treatment for this disease is similar to that described earlier and should be followed by all who wish to know about it as it was done before.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	 It is necessary to put the affected limb in a sling and rest it with your hands above your head at all times, on top of the pillow that you hold tightly against your chest, extending upwards.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	 "In the case of a vein that is exposed when removing an abscess, or in the extraction of arteries from the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	 "The needle pierces through either one or two layers of tissue and is fixed to the first layer where it entered, and tied securely in the other.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	 "Afterwards, tie tightly with thread along both sides of the incision following its length, and apply wet compresses to the surrounding area;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	 "Then treat the wound as you would other wounds, if no veins are visible through one of them;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	 "But in any case there should be no harm and the veins will come out as they want to, if you treat all wounds identically;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 "And in case the arteries are not visible through the incision and veins do not follow their course and cannot be aided.
de la routure dou syfac	 "Of the way that you make
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	 The veins of this artery branch off as it approaches or extends in the abdomen area near the kidneys.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	 These two ways come about due to the incision of either the artery or its extension; and these methods are often the cause
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	 Or from striking, jumping, beating, or lifting heavy weights, through similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	 And the signs if it is due to extension of either the artery or its branch, are that there will be a slow and gradual increase in pain, which does not suddenly come on all at once.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 And the arms become pale due to pressing against the abdomen;
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	 "The signs are when it is from the cautery section, and they cause sudden severe pain, and there are various symptoms such as rashes appearing on the skin, or tearing of the flesh near where the arrow entered.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	 "In no case are any veins or arteries damaged with the arrow, and they remain intact until pressed upon.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	 "In these treatments of fire, it is advisable to withdraw.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	 The manner of the treatment is that you command or encourage the patient to gently hold onto their intestine with both hands while applying pressure in order to return it into place if possible.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	 Then place your hand between them, gently pull them apart
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	 And stretch the cord tight around both ends
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	 Then remove the sutures of the incision as required to open the wound and ensure it heals properly.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	 And wash your hands thoroughly after handling the cord around both ends until all dirt is removed from them
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	 Then place your thumb on one end of the cord between your white finger and the second, between the outer and inner fingers.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	 And hold tightly the cord in your left hand with the outer fingers between them, and have the white finger on top of your right hand as you gently pull it away from the body towards the side.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	 "Instruct the minister to stretch out his arm above him and remove anything that might be behind it.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	 "And to ask whether there is any pain when the abdomen is pressed or white when it feels soft and smooth.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	 "Then take a long needle made of the same thread as before and put it into his back part which is after the skin of the arm.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	 "After the stitches have been completed, gently prick any remaining threads as long as there are four.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	 "Then assemble them one next to the other in a cross-like manner and tie off this part of the skin which we have mentioned that is at the back of the arm with strong thread.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	 "Then sew up the stitches of threads and tie off these two parts if no blood vessels that run through them cannot enter into the holes, so as not to disturb their flow.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	 And then move his arm in the direction of the first line and leave it there for a while.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	 After all that, turn to face where you want him to go.
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	 Then grip the arm in the part that is near the shoulder joint, which should not bend or turn, as we have explained earlier.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 After that, wet your hands with oil and apply them gently to the arm where you want him to go, and then hold his hand as we have said earlier.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	 "And no one has burned their hands since we have spoken after incision due to doubt of cure.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	 Because it happens often, leave the hand there until he finishes with it;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	 and if you hold his head at that time, apply hot water to the place where we have said so until he finishes.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 And after all of this, treat another wound as needed, ensuring it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	 Hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	 In this chapter it is forbidden to anyone who does not know how to perform the treatment with fire.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	 And they said that it was done just like the root which is assembled with a vein, in such manner as you tie the vessels after cutting them gently.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	 Then close it up, and treat the abscess where it occurs while the vessels are tied.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And do so as we have said, until he is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	 There should be no cutting of the veins unless you are absolutely certain, and open them only.
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	 And do not cut any intestines accidentally, but if one does, quickly repair it with all haste;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	 and whenever he moves too much in this place, whether the wound or the infection is severe, until the intestines are recovered.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	 and in stretching of the veins that are too narrow, which is what we have said, because it may be narrowed or blocked, then you must stretch them gently, after they have been relaxed.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	 And if he feels pain at its base, hold his eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	 There is no cure for this in that manner
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	 And if the limb gets stuck between your hands, release it gently with three strong pulls to free it from the wound.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	 And then apply a poultice made of linen soaked in wine, and wrap it around the wound to draw out pus.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	 And press firmly on the abdomen, then remove the two eyes that are attached to the poultice from the wound and cut them off.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	 And then extract the head of the poultice and do not apply anything else after that as I told you in the treatment for cleaning out the intestines.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 After that, apply a wound dressing.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you remove the stitches, if there's an abscess or wound that needs treatment, as long as it is fresh
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	 The elbow is constrained, it has no appearance on injury, the cauteries are increased in this area, and further injuries may occur.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	 To loosen the joint of the arm
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	 Many times I find the ears of birds in some bushes. Because their feathers are soft and light, it's easy to see
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	 And better still, when you look closely at the ear itself, you can gently touch it with your finger and feel the soft skin underneath.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	 And then join together two layers to make a seam, and when you're done, use three or four stitches firmly.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	 And then sew around the stitches as with other wounds, and make sure it is secure, until it heals.
dou chastrement	 severely
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	 These things that I mention are forbidden by our law and for this reason I ask you to not speak about them in this book.
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	 And there is no need for two ways
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	 one way is to look at it and answer when asked about it, and in its own way to treat it.
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 And another thing, because we have learned much from each other through time and effort, as well as with cattle and sheep and various others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	 The methods are done in two ways
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 Or through traction or by freezing (?).
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	 In the method we do through traction, we make our patient sit on a heated pad until their veins are warm and open.
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 Then gently hold them in your hand as long as they stay still and you don't feel any more.
Du chastrement de taille:	 In the process of extraction, it must be done with great care.
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	 It is necessary that you warm the pad and press the vein against your hand gently, then tie it down firmly to avoid any movement as soon as they are well charred.
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	 And I leave no part of them that is small or subtle which is not seared through the veins.
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	 And this manner of chastisement is more severe than that which occurs by attraction, because when there's no movement from the touch, it causes great pain and injury.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 After healing a wound as much as possible.
des hermofrodites	 Hermaphrodite
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	 Hermodielly is according to the second manner:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 The one who has between the two openings as described in the first manner may have hair and never urinate.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 And another way to do it is by stabbing through the skin with a sharp object two times
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	 And the cure for a sore throat and fever is to apply cold compresses all over, and treat it as you would other wounds.
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 In the second manner, those whose urine flows through their pores will have no cure.
de la tentigene	 with a needle
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	 A blister caused on that part of the body is as severe as it is too late to see.
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 And no woman has this affliction like a hand and it's cured.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	 It is advisable to remove any excess skin tension from your hand or finger, and gently stretch it.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And do not apply too much pressure that could harm the treatment or make you bleed;
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 And another charm that is used in the mouth of the doctor, and its application, through time may bring relief, similar to the taste of a poison, hence it was called "the old disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If you follow what I have said regarding the treatment, then perform it as often as we mentioned above.
de erratique	 evacuation
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	 If the nature of the woman is not pleasing or her breast small.
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	 And through birth or accident that happens to it is;
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	 Or by anointing with a subtle or sharp oil, and is applied to the breast, or in covering, or on the belly button, anywhere.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	 And prevent conception, and the growth of children, and by chance have flowers to bloom.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 And by knowing this which is done through the application of heat.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 The symptoms appear when standing up quickly, whether it is two or three times in succession.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	 If it's very subtle, and you are prone to convulsions if you eat too much or drink hot things like wine
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	 And when you put on your shoes, make sure both of your feet go into it evenly.
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	 Then the convulsions will stop as long as the subtlety is maintained, and so will be the cessation of seizures.
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 Then wash with oil and vinegar, put it on the chest, and bind her to bed so she cannot move around if she is unable to stand up.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 "And you must apply gentle pressure to a small area of skin near the wound.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	 If the convulsions are due to fever, let them run for a while and try to cool her with wet cloths;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	 And apply any other remedies available such as burning herbs like dragon's blood, incense, and plenty of oil.
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	 "And bind a bandage tightly around their chest if they cannot hold it together.
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	 "Keep it tight and apply a linen cloth.
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And continue with other treatments until he recovers.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 And when the burn is coming or has already occurred, then treat it as follows: first wash and cool the burn with water; next cover it gently but firmly to protect it from infection; if blisters form, do not burst them unless there is a risk of infection spreading.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 The patient with the abscess must not be touched or moved around too much.
des emorroides	 hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	 "But sometimes veins become hardened and can no longer be used for treatment.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 "And I will explain in the following chapter those who are cured of abscesses and signs.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 "The hemorrhoids and the anus should be left as they are when in a sitting position, and they cannot feel pain unless cured with fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 "Those at the mouth of the anus can not feel it when it is inflamed; those that are can not be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	 "It is advisable to put the patient in a cold house and heat them with warm cloths, wrap their head with cords, and powder on the medicine restraining the abscess, as well as curing dragons and incense, and similar things.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	 "And put them in cold water for an hour then wrap them with ice-cold cloths.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 "And when the abscess is cured if it can be made to sit in a decoction of sumac and wild rose hips and valerian and similar things; and then grind oats into a paste with honey and put it on their back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if burned, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	 "If not, let him lie prone on his back with his arms extended at the sides.
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 "Then put liniment made from fresh pineapple or ginger juice mixed with vinegar on it.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 "And when the abscess is healed, so that it will no longer ooze as long as it is intact;
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	 "and the one called 'albathir' is red, and is similar in shape to the arrowhead, if it suits you like what I have said;
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "so that its healing will be complete.
des apostemes de la marris	 "Aposteme" could mean "abscess".
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 The various types of abscesses include fistulae (fistulous abscesses), hemorrhoids (hemorrhoidal abscesses), chancres and pus-filled abscesses, herpes, and other similar conditions; I have listed some examples in the passage above.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	 "It is advisable for the patient to have a physician who understands when it comes in marriage, someone who only cuts into their own veins.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 "And if you know how to do this, when you see the veins and at the beginning of their appearance, try to keep them cool and calm, and if they turn red, then look for help.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	 "Do not worry too much about pleasing him as long as his pain is controlled.
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	 "And place the pad on both sides of his back, and hold his hands so that they are steady against his chest.
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	 "Then spread out his legs and tie them to the knees with a strong knot.
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	 "Then blow into the instrument which fits over one ear opening of a horse's bridle to show him.
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	 "Make sure that when you see him use the instrument, first touch his ear opening to know how far it reaches. If anything is sticking out of the instrument, then he must not try and pull it back in or damage the pad.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	 "And if the instrument is longer than the ear opening, it must be covered to prevent damage.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 And he puts a cork to the instrument, and tightens it
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	 And when the abscesses are opened, if you hold tightly as before.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	 and when they are wounded, if it is convenient that you apply wet compresses with rose water or green dry oil.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	 and put the cloth on top of the wound with the front facing inward towards your arm, and put some more on both sides of the wrist to keep it moist either hot or cold as needed.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And then treat after two hours of bleeding while continuing to do so
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	 and never remove the cloth or dressing from the wound unless it is burned, and then use only cold water to wash off any roots of ash.
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 Then bandage the wound.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 "The wound is stitched closed after cleaning it with a needle if you want to keep from burning the flesh but treat it as we have described in the section.
de l’enfantement	 It's unclear what 'de l'enfantement'
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	 The mother is holding back her breath while looking at the newborn baby and expressing great love for it
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	 until she has taken a good look at the baby
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	 after examining it carefully from all sides to see its natural form and considering its features, and noticing its head shape as well
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	 when you see these signs, gently squeezing her belly so that the baby can breathe easily right away.
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	 because as soon as they notice its head shape and consider its features, and see that it has many problems in relation to its growth, they realize how much love is needed for such a small creature.
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 And those who do not come naturally are not suitable.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	 Because it comes at any time on its wounds and the knees or hands, or it comes on the belly or belly button, or from other bad places;
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 "The patient should be gentle in their approach and cautious with the procedure, so as to avoid any injury or harm, and I will show you all of the steps that need to be taken.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	 "If his head is dislocated as a result of an accident and the child screams, or if they have injured their own shoulder joint when trying to touch it, in either case,...
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	 "...the blood vessels between the two small bones near their shoulder joint become inflamed and damaged.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	 "And if it is dislocated for a long time due to moisture being applied frequently...
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	 "...hold the woman's belly tightly while it is dislocated and if it stays dislocated, you should gently massage her back with sesame oil...
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	 "Then slowly bring them back into position, hold their mouth and nose for one hour:
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 "Now put an end to this.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	 And as the two hands are freed, if it is convenient for you to gently and slowly loosen them.
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	 When they cannot enter on their own, have her place herself in front of the opening, and lightly support her feet above.
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	 Then lower the opening onto the ground, and take the woman by holding her upright, so that she does not stumble when standing up.
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 And the hands are unable to enter and the flesh remains tight as they grip tightly around the heel that is in front of them, and hold onto their child, gently releasing one at a time.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 The child had fallen
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	 When his hands come loose from his feet, if it is convenient to raise him up.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	 And then gradually lower him gently and steadily as he becomes lighter.
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 Then stretch out his legs slowly and steadily.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	 "Cannot he stand the heat if the command is present, and the fire will burn until it is extinguished.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 If it burns, extinguish it immediately
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	 And if they are not so as we have said, if he is lowered gently and steadily until it reaches its natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	 Because of this, the patient will die.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	 And if it does not burn as we have seen, then apply cold compresses, oil and vinegar, and gum paste, and grind everything into a powder.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	 and apply the nature of the woman's skin to burn away this stain, then make it smooth until it is dry so that you can wash your hands.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	 and when she is moist from washing her hands, apply a mirror, then dry them off, and leave one hour.
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 Then make her sit in a clean place, then extinguish and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press the belly because it hurts now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	 "The child has dislocated its shoulder joint.
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	 When it starts to burn like this, put out each hand slowly and slowly.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	 Then let them rest their neck, and lift the upper arm up, and either support with your left hand.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	 Then fold their hands in a small circle, then place them on the belly of the patient, and support their chest down gently as much as they can.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	 Then straighten their arms if they are able to do so, and lift them up towards the belly of the patient, then support their hands.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	 And you will gently lower the child slowly.
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 Instruct the woman to lie still as long as her baby is quiet.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	 "When the child dislocates its shoulder joint outwards with one arm extended.
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	 I recommend that you gently lower your hand in order to:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	 If it cannot be lowered without disturbing the woman and her baby.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	 if she cannot lift up, then lower both legs gently onto the floor.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	 Then tell your servant what you have commanded me to do.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	 "And if she does not rest until her face is pressed to it (the bandage), then try pressing down with your hand.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 "She should apply it gently to her face as nature intended, and let it heal while commanding it to stop swelling.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	 "The child cried for its mother's breast, spreading its arms wide open.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	 "It is advised that she should gently hold onto the hand, then release it slowly and softly.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	 "And when it is itchy, if she presses on the natural muscle of the thumb and forefinger as we have said, then tell her to release slowly.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	 "And when you've done that, if she presses it into the bandage, and command her to press gently down on it.
et la fai esternuer.	 "Let it heal.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	 "This method is all there is in the matter
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	 "When this happens in every way on the second line, if you see a blister forming at the edge of your finger, as long as there is moisture present.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	 "Hold onto your face and head tightly if you see a blow, so that it cannot be held fast in place.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	 "Hold onto the child tightly while you have put it down and command the woman to please never let go once.
adonques si istra legierement.	 If gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	 of joints
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	 Wounds that frequently occur and never come to three or four.
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	 And this is not an extraction of anything else either, it's already done.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	 Because there are extractions and they die immediately afterwards.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	 I know that if they are multiple, you will shave them off with the blade which is tied to the blow.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 And never naturally come out of their own accord, as we have mentioned earlier.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	 If they are tightly bound, if the cure is like what we have mentioned and there's a subtle touch that does quick and gentle work.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 And face down as it hurts me
de plusors enfans	 the little ones
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	 No time has been given for form I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, and no more than fifteen times in the form of a child by measuring it carefully with its sharp edge.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 Do as necessary
de l’enfant mort	 of a dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	 When you cure the dead woman or belly of a child, as I said in the section on division, and it does not move, and you are restrained from further treatment with your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	 if necessary that you should kill the healthy woman without any accident or fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	 if it is necessary for the woman to be lying on her back with her arms outstretched downwards and her legs raised;
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	 And the minister of two blows, or she is lying in bed if she is not treated with the blow to her abdomen from the child.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	 Then gently press the mouth of a patient with wet compresses and apply it to their face, arms, and legs.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	 Then place them gently on the patient's forehead and secure it with adhesive.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	 If placed on the eyes or nose, head, or cheeks, forehead, face, chin, chest, or back of the neck, secure them gently in place and remove with tweezers.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	 And consider placing the bandage on your right hand and holding it between your left elbow and right forearm. Gently place it on your arm and secure it in any of these areas mentioned above as long as you continue to use gauze as needed for vision.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 The bandage is placed here
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	 Then come another one, or it may be worse if they are longer.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 They will move constantly in opposite directions, causing pain and injury.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	 If one side is torn from its socket or dislocated in half, hold the remaining part and treat it.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 If none of them can be separated or if one is lost entirely, do everything you can until it falls off.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	 If one hand comes in front of the other and cannot be returned due to swelling or any other reason, then wrap it tightly so that it stays put.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 Then apply the poultice to the palm or wrist, and if necessary, also to the other hand; it will be applied until done.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	 "And if the child's dislocation is severe and it follows directly after childbirth, then you should gently separate your thighs apart so that they are not touching one another and straighten out the joint.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	 "And you use an instrument called 'almidach', which comes with the physician's kit, after childbirth.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	 "After childbirth, gently let it naturally return to its original position;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	 "Then slowly and gently stretch the bones like tendons, so that the dislocation is gradually pulled back while applying force as necessary until the moisture has passed or the injury occurs.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	 "If it does not come out even if you try to pull on both sides at once;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 "And if the dislocation occurs in the abdomen or chest area, then gently squeeze as tightly as necessary while applying force.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	 "And when the patient presses on their toes lightly, causing them to stretch towards the mouth of the mare.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	 And if it is inflamed in the belly or groin, then you should extract it with forceps placed on your hand
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	 until the inflammation subsides.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	 And if any other member becomes inflamed and itches due to moisture, then you should gently squeeze the finger with a thumb, or cut off its tip at the mouth of the wound.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	 Then the third one or two, and treat accordingly.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	 And the mouth of the wound is treated with a piece that has been washed and prepared to prevent infection from moisture.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 They treat wounds with plasters, and apply ointments made of honey or water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	 And when the flesh is cut through to the bone, you must press in tightly if instructed as we have advised for a fresh wound.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 "And if it does not stay put by itself, then do not let any of the subsequent ones be left.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	 When you have done this, treat it as we said earlier.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 And if the abscess comes back with inflammation and pain, then apply other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	 And a woman was in whose belly seven months had passed away before her, but after that she died of another cause
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	 After the patient tied on tightly with the bandage, and began to bleed heavily, and soon experienced great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	 I went to seek treatment, but it did not help at all; my wound would not heal.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	 I applied a strong adhesive, and there was an eye, after some time another one came out as well.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	 I became sick in my belly because it had no bone.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	 I thought that this was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	 I wanted to heal a wound, and by means of hands on it, as long as they are healed better than before.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	 And with the passing of time, there came some pain from my hand to you
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 I don't remember this chapter being used when the master practitioner needs help with something that he cannot do by himself, then it is suggested to give him aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	 To take away one's doubts (marbles).
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	 After you have come to realize its power, be prepared for what will happen as it seizes the books.
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	 And after it has seized two of them, then there is an ending to this matter.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	 "Everywhere it may be more subtle or restrictive, either do good things or bad.
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	 "The mouth should be moist and the edges of the lips smooth and the length one and a half palms.
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	 "And both limbs should have joints close together on one side and open on the other. The length of each palm.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 And when opening the two lips, they should be parted in order to open them as much as possible.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	 "Another form, its subtlety and lightness being greater, is made of good or bad things according to the likeness of the tendons.
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	 "And when holding both together like that you see, one palm long and two palms wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	 "And when opening fully and closing all the way, tie both arms together in front of her [the woman's] face, hold the head of the instrument between her breasts and lift up her legs. Then bring the two joints together at the top as you close them.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 "In order to perform the task you have been performing, if you have done so consistently over time, such that every time you open your mouth, as long as it does not cause any harm or discomfort.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	 "The instrument is often accompanied by many similar things;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	 "And when the matter occurs frequently, it gets more frequent and severe in proportion to its quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	 If the instrument is not properly applied you cannot excuse your need for it.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	 "When the matter is held in check and it is considered that you command to the matter its opposite, then do make sure his hand remains steady at rest, and restrain your hands from moving towards the mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 "And if she happens upon this, so be it.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	 "If not, then if you happen to catch it and do manage to remove it or cut off its head so that the mouth of the mare can no longer be opened, as gently, slowly, with caution, chamomile and centaury.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	 All of these herbs or none may be cooked or raw over fire
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	 And mix a coarse herb with the fine one in the mouth of the patient and hold it there until they both become numb.
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 Then stop after saying this as we have advised you to do so.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	 "If he swallows something else.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	 And when she returns after this treatment and does not get better, if the doctor commands him to make his hand soft with oil or mustard seeds, then apply it externally, and later wash off.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	 And when she has gotten used to the treatment gradually, if the pain and tension decrease steadily as the blisters do not break on extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	 But it is convenient to move gently from front to back and then lie down.
si venra et se desaerdra.	 If he comes and heals.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	 And when it comes to the mouth of the patient is tight, we have advised the cure of steaming and fumigating herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	 And if you don't believe what we say, remember to not betray it
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	 But if you're at the mouth of the patient, lie it in the vagina of a woman and then apply tetrafarmac ointment.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	 If it becomes inflamed and returns, it will come back on its own.
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 But in all cases, if she perspires heavily and smells foul from the stomach and head, and blisters the skin.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	 If you consider fumigating to be effective on this matter
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	 None of the ancients have found fumigation effective against dry weeds and figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	 The shape of the instrument is such that when you apply it to the woman, you hold back her flowers and the second line;
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	 And it is like a dog, puting gently in the ear with fire, and making dislocations large under heat
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 "And may fumigation occur through the chimneys, continuing until it is done, and another one starts.
de percier lou fondement	 to prick at its base
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	 "The child born with no foundation to support itself will try in vain to stand up on its own feet:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	 "If it is convenient to the bailiff who has seized this person should not touch anything fragile or break it; and guard against touching its lace:
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Then he applies a poultice of wine and oil to the wound, then curing until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	 If you are doubtful it will not heal if it is pricked with a sharp needle and the hands held still while it grows inward toward an opening.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	 "And no time comes when it is inflamed or swollen from an abscess:
si covient coper celui soudement:	 "If convenient to cover the one who is suddenly:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	 "Cure it if possible, like we have advised in the chapter on leeches.
de la fistule dou fondement	 from the base of the abscess
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	 "The fistulas that come from the base are solid and grow to fill the cavity, or in the space between two parts if there is a fistula of more than one part:
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	 "When dislocation occurs suddenly or with great force, especially if the moisture is abundant and subtle, and no time passes over them, they will burst with pus.
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 "And it is cured by the fact that when the abscess is evacuated or broken open, and a wound occurs suddenly, they burst.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	 "If a fistula in the vein occurs or bursts because of the moisture near it, it is also caused by inflammation of the skin around it.
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	 "Also if a fistula forms from a vein or artery and bursts because of the formation of a knot in the skin, they also burst due to inflammation.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	 "And it is cured when one knows where the fistula occurs at its base, but not that...
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 "And it is cured when one knows the exact place where the fistula occurs at its base and applies a needle made of iron or steel near the fistula to prevent twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	 "And if there is twisting or slight pulling on it, as long as you hold onto the thread or hair with your hand.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	 And if you don't feel anything and there is no movement, just as we have stated.
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	 "And so long as the hair does not prick or cause any damage.
si te haste dou curer.	 "If you hold onto it tightly.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	 And when the fistula is at the base of a vein or urinary tract, if it touches urine and cannot be cured by medicine alone.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	 And if the hair is pinched at its base near the joint of the shoulder.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	 "If there is no twisting or movement and it does not cause any pain at all, but if you hold on tightly with your hand, do not let go suddenly.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 "And in these fistulas that burst forth there is no cure available; and the wounds may fester if they break open.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	 "And in the fistulas that are not bleeding and only bursting, there is hope for healing by fire if you have experienced it and know how to hold onto them with your hands on their back.
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	 And let his legs lie down on its belly.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 Then cover him with a cloth, or place it on a surface if he is injured in some way so that the wound does not move until it heals.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	 If his hairs touch their base, you should pinch off your second finger so that the wound does not move.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	 And cover it over with something soft like a handkerchief or gauze, and make sure you press on to ensure the wound is covered properly.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 If he bleeds heavily, do not try to bandage him yourself as this may cause more harm than good.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	 You will always have trouble treating any injury, but that's just the way it is.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	 And help him when you can, if there are no other injuries to attend to first, and gently apply the cautery according to its size as directed.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	 And he instructs to squeeze tightly all around the fistula as long as it remains within its base.
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	 Do this for two or three times until you make the hairs to be as hard and stiff as feathers.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 And then apply a poultice of wet wool on the patient until it stings and swells as much as possible, then apply an incision at that spot to draw out the arrow or thorn.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 "If you succeed in healing them.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	 If this does not work, there must be something else wrong.
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	 And place it between the two and cover it with a thick layer of wool or flax, so you can see into the fistula what hides the covering.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	 When placing on the beginning of the fistula and closing it before doing so, but after covering with a poultice as long as you remain in front of the covering.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	 And will deliver he seeks
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 Then the remaining hairs should be shaved short and evenly, leaving no trace of hair
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	 "And if you bleed between your elbow and the rib cage, whether from fire cautery or medical treatment.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	 Because there is another aspect to fire cautery
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	 It's about knowing how to apply the fire cautery and incision into wounds and blood evacuation.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	 Then treat with care burns or bruises on the skin so that no infection occurs and the hairs are not pulled out.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 And then treat with fire cautery wounds caused by hot things such as flames or embers and ensure cleanliness of medicine.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	 "After restoration, it is safe and no longer moves.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	 "And the fistula comes out at the base of a vein or artery, if it is squeezed tightly from the back.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	 If there is doubt and fear you must seek assistance from the healer using one of three methods.
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	 Burn or cautery as if I showed you earlier, cut off the bleeding with a sharp object so that it stops immediately, or seek immediate help.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	 And do not move it too much, so that you do not shake the foundation on which it stands.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	 then treat it as we have described
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	 either with the forceps or another instrument pointed out by chance.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	 And make sure to cut off all the superfluous hairs as you do so.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	 Then study how to repair the wound and remove the fistula in the area beneath the foundation.
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If it is a lighter matter,
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	 Fistulas are never formed this way.
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 And when you cut the tent into a fistula and it fits under the skin as described in this way, if pressed with force at its base.
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	 "And when you pull out thread two, and tighten the thread all the way into the fistula up to where it is at its head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	 If it is placed on the edge of the foundation deep and then pulled towards you, when you cut through its base.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	 "And tie one to another, leaving them either side free.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	 And hold it steady while the fibers between two are cut.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 Then treat the wound as long as it is wet and clean.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	 "If the fistula does not pierce through in all manners that you tried, do not force it too hard.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Do not touch it lightly or you may hurt yourself," translates to "It is important to gently place your hand on the object.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	 The shape of the fistula that was created from a single piece, or two pieces, and so forth;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 And on another hand not, as long as one cannot do what the other should do, in order to avoid any confusion;
des emorroydes	 "of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	 The wounds are treated two different ways.
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	 Or they are treated with a deep incision as if using pitch and in small and large pieces, and for each one or more, and remove the foundation and top of the foundation.
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	 But those that are treated so have a little moisture or one drop of water or one piece of dirt and the skin is discolored.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	 And the treatment of these wounds when they come to their base, if you command it not to be removed until its roots are exposed, and as long as its foundations remain intact, and the hairs continue to grow.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	 If you have doubts, or if someone has cut into the vein, then remove it from its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	 If they cannot hold due to moisture, if they pull at the skin, or from a part of the cameltoe.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	 And extract it with both hands, then remove all the powders that may be used for the cautery.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Or if you cauterize as dictated by the surgeon, then apply other treatments until it is healed.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	 And the roots cannot be exposed if you cauterize with a burning and sharp instrument to remove what is at its base, unless it can be removed directly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	 "The hairs cannot grow long enough,
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 "You must cut them off at their root or burn them until they are burned through and treated with care as we have described.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	 If you want to perform the procedure this way,
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	 "Take one hair and tie it to a needle. Then pull the thread through and pierce another hole on the other end of the needle. Cut off both ends of the thread as close as possible to the needle, then take the two ends of the thread away from the needle.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	 "Hold onto the thread while you pull it through and then pierce the needle. After that, remove the needle from between them and leave any excess of blood.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	 "Then place it on the base that you want to treat. And command the patient as they lie there.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then let it go until they are healed, if there is a healing of wounds and other cures as long as he stays sane.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	 "Remove any excess thread from the foundation or base
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	 Many times occur from things in the intestine, and by constriction of nature, and as long as the illness is old and medicine doesn't help
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	 If it's necessary to reset at the tip of a needle or in removing pus, which does not allow moisture.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	 And then treat as long as he is sane and if necessary.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	 And if it cannot be reset due to a recurrence of the dislocation, as long as he stays sane and is still in pain, continue to hold him steady.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then treat as long as he is sane
dou fremit	 This sentence does not have a clear meaning
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	 Lice are a small animal that live in the bowels and can be very harmful to the body.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 And they enter into the blood vessels and are known as a cause of death or can enter all over the body more than any other place.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	 And the treatment is to take a stick of ash or a very sharp one, and place it into the fire until its purple flames reach the target.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 Then take your hand away from the stick as soon as you have completely encircled it and hold it steady until its roots are burned off.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	 And if you see this with a thorn from iron or steel in that shape and do it subtly and cautiously;
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	 No mistake; press firmly while holding two fingers together.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	 And if you see the fire doctor applying the cautery, it depends on where he is performing the cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	 Of the fire cautery
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	 Never apply silver or steel to an abscess, wound that has been exposed for a long time, or a deep wound.
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	 And never use these poisonous and sharp instruments.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	 So that it may be applied in the treatment of children who are fragile and painful, they should be treated gently.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	 The form of fire cautery is as follows:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	 If there is a danger or the veins are blocked, as you see it and try to treat it without delay;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	 The first thing to note is that the text appears to be describing medical treatments or procedures.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	 And if they are inserted into a vein or artery, and pierce through any small vessels, then the abdomen will be filled with fine fibers that quickly spread out in all directions, and fill up each vessel individually, until it becomes swollen like a boil.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	 And when the medicines are dense, if the instrument is being held by a strong thread, then clamp down tightly;
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 This is the form of the circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	 And if the medicines are not too hot nor too cold, then apply a clamp made of oil or any other substance lightly.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	 And the surgeon holds his two hands together until it is done, then removes the clamp and gently pulls on both sides of his legs to stretch them out, while also removing the medicine as soon as possible if the pain becomes too severe.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 And if he stays still all night long, then greater help is needed
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if you have a stomachache from a cold compress on the belly, then quickly apply the medicine to relieve it as soon as possible.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	 And if the bones or veins are damaged in any way, whether it's the elbow vein or something else as small as a fingertip.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 This is how to apply pressure when pressing on the skin where the needle is inserted
des plaies	 wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	 We have spoken about treating wounds in the previous chapter.
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	 Or we will discuss treatments for hands and feet, according to their condition.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	 "The wounds are diverse depending on how they were made, and depending on the way in which they were made, and by what they were made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	 The wounds are treated with pressure on the base of the wound, and size and shape and length or width or height, of needle or sword or arrow, or similar things.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	 Or they are made according to the legs of the torso, if there is a wound on the neck or the head or the chest, or the abdomen or liver and similar parts.
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 "I will tell you how to treat any wound," he says, "and I shall instruct on the treatment of simple wounds because they are more familiar.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	 "I tell you that when a simple wound comes or severe one, and it is not broken, if you gently touch the base of it, your finger will hold steady until the wound heals.
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	 "If you gently touch a part of the head that is nearby but far from the wound, and it hurts in contrast to another part.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 "And if you fill them with wine and large pieces of meat.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	 "If it does not heal," he says, "if you force its meat and do not drink wine or take no medicine.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	 "And put it on the wound," he says, "pressing with olive oil gently or rubbing with strong wine.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	 And if it doesn't touch the skin immediately and is fresh throughout its extent, I will speak after a short time.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When hairs grow to their limit, if it touches any part of the body, they stay that way until healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	 And if the wound is large like a spear or similar, and cannot be closed together due to tendons, then it should be sutured separately, just as I say for belly wounds, of the stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	 If the wound is uncovered and open for longer than a short time, if it touches anything
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 then treat the wound with medicines and put a bandage on it to heal the skin, command the hair to grow big vegetables if they are tested and prove true as we know them, thus like cows, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	 And if it is covered with dirt, do not let go of the skin when covering it entirely and wiping it off, then treat it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	 and if there is a vein in the wound or flesh that cannot be healed by medicines, if you see it detached from a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 And do no harm if he receives a fire cure
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	 If the wounds are small and simple, it can be treated lightly
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	 And put on this powder that will cause them to move when they come into contact with fire.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	 The method of the powder is as follows:
pren encens une partie;	 Take a part of incense
sanc de dragon II parties;	 A mixture of dragon's teeth with two parts.
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	 Mix three parts water and add the powder, and gently apply to the wound until it is well seated in its place.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	 Then bind tightly, and leave it loose as much as possible, if it doesn't bleed.
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 Only apply the medicine until it is well-seated, unless there is bleeding.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	 And once it has been done that is when no longer the incense nor the abscess of dragons have moved, but only the wound has healed
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	 And if the wound has moved the place only slightly and still bleeds, don't apply powder anymore.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	 But put some food into your stomach or eat honey and eggs as well.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then apply other treatments as long as the patient is stable.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	 If the bones break with a small wound and it is treated gently.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 I will tell you after the bones are broken
de la plaie dou col	 Of the wound two columns
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	 The wound comes and it is simple, if there is no difference between the two columns but if the artery has been cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	 If it is only healing that should be done and nothing else needs to be held back because the bones will heal more slowly.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	 Do not put anything cold on the wound as the substance of bones is cold and its continuation depends upon the brain which is located in the head.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 But if you have vinegar or any other sour substance as cold as vinegar and mix it with rose oil and cooking vinegar in the same way along with other spices according to this method, and moisten your wounds.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And if the wound is large, as long as it remains healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	 And the wounds are full of pus and it is swollen and swollen all over if the incision or lower part.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	 And the arteries are blocked, and blood flow is interrupted if the vein is severed, or a clot forms, and the cautery fails.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	 And if the voice box is cut off or torn, and its nerve supply is severed, as a result of which the meat will spoil when it is cut near the throat without touching the throat itself but resets to its natural position.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And then he must be restrained and left alone for a while, after which the treatment of wounds should start.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	 And if there is a swelling in the bone,
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	 and if there are pieces of bone, if the threads burst through them, you will not have any left if they leave as long as the wound persists, and it is swollen and inflamed.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 "The wound is fresh, as you have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	 "And if there is a piece of bone in the wound and it has a fistula forming, then cauterization will be done as described earlier.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	 of a burn wound
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	 This sentence means that if a stroke occurs or a blow is delivered to the wound, and it is deep, then look at its base as you align your nails.
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	 when the wound becomes mortal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	 If it is not deep but fresh throughout its extent and you don't want to apply powder immediately but instead wait until the first hour has passed so that blood does not clot excessively or cause injury.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	 but if there is a charming appeal, then apply two times later on.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	 And if there is no charm, apply a cloth soaked in powder to absorb the moisture and allow it to heal by day three or four.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	 If spasms do not occur, then there should be no trembling of the limb that affects others.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 And when you see their bone positions if they seem to show a saving wound.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Cure all wounds, whether large or small
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	 And if it cannot be cured and there is an abscess, then cut into the abscess.
si la cure si com on doit.	 If the cure seems impossible.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	 And if the wound is a spear or arrow, and it's simple to cut into it, whether on the front or back, but only do so where there should be.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	 If it's large, then bandaging is necessary.
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	 And if it's small then powder is used, and if it is deep into the bone or has become infected with pus then cover it with stitches.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	 And if it becomes infected you must leave open the wound, and if there are extractions necessary.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 And other wounds on other limbs are similar to what we have described.
dou derrompement dou ventre	 "The dislocation of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	 The diaphragm is large and movable,
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	 No major wound shall ever enter the intestines or stomach unless it enters through an opening in one of them.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	 And the skin is more fragile and can be torn in smaller wounds than large ones, because one may tear an intestine if it is not properly closed up after minor cuts.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	 Because the intestines swell so much when they sense the fruit that they may burst open if they enter through more openings, and because large wounds are worse than small ones for fear of rupturing an intestine in its place or anywhere else inside it.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	 The opening into the belly is done through certain ways that may be difficult to follow,
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	 The common wounds in the belly are treated by cutting into it and treating other wounds on the chest and other parts of the body are also treated similarly.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 And all wounds are cleaner with a stitch over the belly, I'll say one more thing and declare it
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	 I said that when a wound is small, and nothing from the intestine is involved, it is recommended to remove it with one of these two methods
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 Either by cutting through the wound if you've advised that way or by sucking up the intestines because they are inflamed due to frostbite.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	 And when it is cold, remove with one of these two methods
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	 moisten a cloth or soak it in cold water and then wipe it gently or you could squeeze it and pinch it until the intestines are no longer inflamed
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 And after doing this there will be no more pain relief, but he may still suffer.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	 And when you see the inflammation departing if you moisten it with cold water or cloth and make sure both are wet thoroughly because through this way it is blocked from entering things;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	 "And if it cannot enter, then apply some ointment to help alleviate the swelling.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	 The first cure is to make sure that the affected area is kept clean and not allowed to become dirty.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	 This involves cutting into it.
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 If the veins are torn and they bleed but not too much, then this is the shape to follow
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 And when the wound is enlarged, and intestines are loosened if he resets them back to their natural form in their own place, you may do so because it's good for him
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	 If the wound is in a private part of the body and it's necessary to do so, then you should lie the patient on their back, with their legs above their head.
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	 If it is in the abdominal area then lie them with their head and buttocks above the other parts of the body, or if one side needs to be higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 And I prescribe that you follow what I have written in large and painful wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	 "When you see small cuts that open up, put your hands over the wound and apply pressure so as to stop it from spreading.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	 "This is the usual way to treat wounds of this kind. If you apply a larger needle or more than one depending on the size of the wound, leave it in place and fix an additional stitch.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	 "Secure both ends of the suture with two stitches on either side. This is done in order to make sure that none of them comes loose.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	 "After tying off both ends of the needle and stitching two stitches on either side, then secure the stitches in place, and finally apply another stitch.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	 "Then tie off the second thread in the same way you did on the first stitch. Do not stop doing so until the wound is secure.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	 "The arrows are thin or thick; the thin ones pierce right through the heart, while the thicker ones can't even enter.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	 "Therefore, they should be short.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	 "It's not advisable to cut the arrows too close to the heart or body because they may cause injury and enter before being removed.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	 "Then pull the arrows out gently but firmly, so that they do not tear and are held securely until the wound is treated.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	 "This method of cutting arrows is more convenient in small wounds because it minimizes the risk of injuring or killing an arrow.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	 "The second method is common, and it involves cutting both the top and bottom arrows together with any remaining ones to make one arrow or use up the excess length.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	 "And when you have arranged these dislocations in this way," if the needle is inserted into the place where you have started it, then do so carefully and steadily.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	 And put some space between any two cuts that are closer together than a fingerbreadth.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 This incision will cut through the skin, and cause a wound in one's abdomen that is about as large as a palm of great size, and it involves well two palms of great size, and it will create an ulcer within the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I removed his intestine then he lived for 40 more hours and the wound healed in 15 days, but he recovered
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	 They knew he was going to die, but it was a miracle that...
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	 there were no treatments available, except for the ointments found in the last place where they couldn't find any more.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 and he held tightly to it with two hands for as long as the pain was bearable
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	 Here are two alternative ways to cure a fever:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	 Take the needle and prick it at the center of the palm.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	 If the vein is hard to find in its correct location, if you prick it on both sides of the central point.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 And the purpose of this procedure is to make it so that when you prick once on one side and then again on the other, as long as it continues until the vein has been found entirely.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	 The second way to cure this is when you pierce both sides together naturally, and then apply one of the needles onto the other needle.
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	 If a vein or artery is hidden, pierce it only on that side and leave the two points of the needles.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	 Then remove it from its place, causing dislocation.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	 Next, pierce both sides of the joint that is dislocated from below towards above.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 And this method to suture and bind it together more firmly.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	 If you want to ensure that the stomach is held securely in place by stitches alone, you must pierce two holes through it.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	 You should pierce the first hole from one side and the second hole from the other, in the manner of those who sew together wounds.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 And it is necessary to be careful when suturing through the stomach, as stitching through this area may cause more severe pain than stitching through other areas of the abdomen.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	 The people of a wound are like those with other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	 And when you cleanse all the sores with fresh water, so that they heal, if reset in this way, and sew up the wound.
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	 And then apply fresh powder right away, so that they heal, unless there is an opening for discharge which should be treated with ointment until the wound heals.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	 And straighten them out and make sure to clean them up
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Treat the wound as you would any other, until it is healed.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 And if you have no medicine, then apply it as many times as necessary to make them heal properly, once each time until they are healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	 But if you do not have any other medicines in your possession that could treat the sores,
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	 and if you suspect that the wound is causing some internal injury to the members of your body, it would be advisable for you to apply gentle heat or oil with a soothing fragrance.
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	 And if the pain or injury is severe and frequent, it may occur when the blister bursts in the mouth, and especially it causes the injury to reach one's intestines.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 And with large intestines, if it is severe, healing will be easier than from small intestines.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The small intestine is called "new" and cannot heal when it is inflamed; this is due to the inflammation of the veins that feed into it, and by its proximity to other organs.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	 If the blister bursts and goes into the intestine, while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	 If it is severe and blackened or blackish, then you should apply the leech that is black, so as to stop further bleeding because it has veins.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 Then apply it in between the vein and put the blisters on the affected part of the wound until bleeding stops, then extract them when they burst or heal naturally.
de la routure dou boueil	 From the passage provided: "Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	 When the intestines are short and the wound is small, if one cannot restore them with any treatment, for this reason I suggest that you resort to some remedy involving a lance.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	 The ailment was on the right side of the stomach, it became inflamed and became a fistula, from which there were discharges and wounds.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 I applied the treatment until he was healthy, making no mistake in it.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	 And when I saw him stand up straight again, I doubted if his wounds would heal properly within his stomach.
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	 However, he was in better health afterwards, eating and drinking normally.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	 No one advised that when there is a small injury to the intestine, it should be treated in the same way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	 Press hard on the large testicles first, and then tie off the veins of the wound. If he pricks his mouth while doing so, make sure to tie it up with the two ligatures as well.
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	 Then tighten it up firmly so that he can't undo it. After that, tie off the second testicle in the same way as before until all the wounds are closed.
et cout la plaie.	 And let the wound heal
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	 If the intestines are obstructed by a narrow tube that connects to another part of the intestine, it can cause no harm and is generally tolerated.
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	 Remove the tube connecting to another part of the intestine if it becomes twisted or kinked. Then reattach the tube securely in place and remove the obstruction by cutting into the intestine and suturing closed the incision.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	 This manner of stitching is not used when following a different route or opening another way.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 And the wound is large and deep when it occurs in one of the major intestines, unless there are no medical treatments available to heal it, then severity may increase
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	 "from a fistula
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 Wounds that occur on or near the abscess and when it is healed, if they are closed properly without bursting open again.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	 Fistulas are usually very painful and severe, unless there is no pain present or it can be covered with a flap of skin.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	 And once clear and bright
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	 no times short, and another time long enough
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	 And when discussing the treatment of wounds, it is stated that all wounds should be cleaned properly and only then can they be treated effectively through one of seven methods.
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	 It means knowing how to clean wounds with water or by using corrosive substances.
ou por sa malice;	 Or using corrosive substances.
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	 And when there is no blood clot present, and when cutting into the veins, so as to prevent bleeding.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	 Or if it has too much swelling or swelling in the limbs, so that they do not move until they subside.
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	 And if the patient is poor and the material of poor quality,
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	 or that the treatment itself is inadequate in curing.
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	 Or if there is a contamination and it has become infected.
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	 For proper digestion, late health, and come with nature.
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	 he has pains or sores
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 I have tried all these remedies and signs, the medical treatments in this section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	 "It is advisable for you to learn about the treatment of fistula, which is performed by skilled hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	 abscesses that arise in both legs.
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	 because it has fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, nerves, or the spleen, or in the intestines, or the bladder, any of these areas.
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 and if it occurs at the place where the principal member is located, causing pain to that limb also.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	 All the fistulas that are of this sort are from pain and sickness, without there being any cure for it or understanding.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	 and if there is no fistula that comes out through the place I mentioned earlier, but you have tried a remedy or treatment before, it seems like this one could work too.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	 "and it is torn if one tries to force a search for a subtle vein, as the veins tend to split and become tortuous.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	 "and if one tries to forcefully search for the vein and does not move carefully when piercing through, as moisture from one cut can cause another, and it makes the area muddy.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	 "Then the patient should know if it is in his hand or shoulder, and feel for any pain it may cause when pressed with your hand, noting where it hurts.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	 "Once you truly know where it is and if it's a joint, nerve, artery, vein or any of the other things I have mentioned, use that knowledge to treat accordingly with the proper remedies for each.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	 "And when the fistula is well-formed and located correctly, if you cure it immediately, as soon as possible, and then apply moist heat to the fistula's base, so that the excess moisture drains away.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 "And keep the hands clean with warm water, as long as it is clean.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 "If not cleaned properly, if you burn it like we said, and the fistula's pores are damaged, then treat.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	 "Either your arm or leg is misaligned as we have stated;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	 "the eyes are blinded and they become corrupted if the blood flow is blocked entirely, then treat them with warm compresses as long as they remain clean.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	 "If not clean, and you want to remove the impurities; then wash your hands before performing any action:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	 When you find yourself at your lowest point, and everything seems lost, then seek restoration.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If it's in its proper place, that is good news.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	 If not, seek another way to move forward.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	 if there is no other way but by force of will.
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	 and if the small part is corrupted, and you pull it out by its roots, as long as there's an instrument convenient for this purpose, or if all else fails, then don't leave yourself without one.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 and if moisture does not agree with you, but fear and pain, until the end of time, endure it or die.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	 and if you cannot endure it for one hour more, and then you cut through the wound, leaving it open until the wounds are healed.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	 And if it is a large bone, like the leg or arm, then only straighten it as much as possible until it's healed, and then continue with the treatment.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	 And if there is a large part of corruption that comes out through the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	 If it's necessary to remove and clean all the corruption, then continue treating until it is cured.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 And I will tell you about a fistula that appeared in his leg if you would like an example and help with your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	 He was a young man of around 20 years old who had pain in his leg due to dense scarring that extended down into the calf.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	 But he tried to stretch it out so that the sores and moisture in his calf would heal first.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	 And another year and no improvement was found in the art of healing hands, as long as I continued to call upon you and using your remedies that were prescribed for me.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 They became red with age but had a yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 I put a tent on one of these stakes, and then I tested the stake by thrusting it into the ground; and found that some were equally well-placed with respect to each other across all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	 I was trying to heal my hand but found a part of the bone and saw that it had been corrupted and injured, and there were signs of corruption at its denser parts.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	 I was trying to heal the corrupted bone but found that there was no more corruption elsewhere in the bone.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	 And continuing with healing remedies on top of each other, I could not hold it together anymore.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	 And then I continued and saw the bone in detail, finding that the corruption had spread to it and was continuing, and it was spreading, and I gave up on trying to hold it together any longer.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	 "I cannot move my arm at all because of a lump on its side, it keeps swelling and I keep getting worse.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 "He was healed and became strong again; however he still had difficulty speaking due to the lump on his side, which could not be suffered with, and from fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 For the evacuation of blood, it was entirely healed, and came out from beneath the bone a hard lump, and was in good condition without any injury or damage to all parts, except for the artery which arrived.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	 "And if you want it done in this manner:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	 "Bind its hand to the top of the arm where it opens and command none that they stretch it upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	 "And put another tie on a larger one first and bind it under the arm where it opens, and stretch the hand towards you, such that when you pull the arm backwards, and find its lower end beneath your eye, it should not loosen the tie;
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	 "And if he gets a bruise on his elbow, it swells quickly.
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 And they should also be careful to see and feel the injury, and even more times than that.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	 And if it gets infected, it won't open up, and the infection is in a place or a part of it as soon as you discover the wound.
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	 And then spread to another part of it and cause the infection from there if you become infected in one place as we have mentioned.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	 And the infections spread to the joint, when a joint is infected and it causes infection in another part of the body.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	 And if there are no other wounds except those that we have mentioned.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	 And if the infection is on a finger or an elbow, you should cover it to prevent spreading and make sure that when it opens up you treat it.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	 "And make it clear in all ways you know how to do so but your voice or nerve may not contradict that.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	 "And cutting into veins and the wounds by closing them are many, considering their location and appearance, their size and subtlety, their grandeur and smallness, their durability.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	 "And to ensure that the instrument matches in shape with the opening of the body.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	 "And after using the instrument you will show it to him who has mastered this skill, considering his knowledge of medicine and the manner in which he treats diseases.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 "If you are using an instrument that is best for this task.
dou feu	 fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	 "The dislocations may occur due to internal swelling or external heat.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	 "And when you have healed the burn with medical treatment and it does not benefit at all if you wait until it reaches one end or the other where the corrosion starts, which is more grievous than a limb's defect.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	 "The signs indicate that the limbs become black and it seems as if they are burning, after which there is a chain reaction of member to member injuries occurring throughout the body.
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 "If you apply a fire treatment and it is through the percussion of certain venom glands, such as scorpion stings and poison ivy, then the corrosion occurs at the base of two, if applied, and there will not be space to come near enough for grasping.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	 "If it is brought close by the hand if the incision has been made, but if the incision has not been made, then the corrosion will not spread to the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	 "If it comes near the arm if the cut occurs, or if the treatment is applied to an existing cut, but if there is no incision, then the corrosion will only affect the limb.
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	 "If it passes through the body, that means death and there is no remedy for those who do not have a cure.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	 "And if the corrosion comes or touches.
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	 When it comes to the first joint, after the second.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	 If it touches or comes in contact with all parts of the body.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	 And when it rises up into the leg if it contacts the knee joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	 If it comes from the shoulder, and there is no other way to stop its spread than by removing all of its venom.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	 If you want to restrain it or stop the movement of any limb, bind the affected limb tightly, and spread out some strips on top to create a barrier between them.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 Then cover it or bandage the wound with gauze, so that no other infection spreads and you do not get another abscess on top of it.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	 When you prick it, if you apply fire treatment or put any powders restraining its movement.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 After the treatment is complete, tie the member to something stable and treat it until it heals.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	 And you will hear that he arrived at home safely.
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	 it had a pain that seemed to be burning, and the first step in treatment was to apply fire.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	 And when they felt the burn, if they covered their eyes, it healed quickly.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	 Then after they felt the burn and removed their hands, it came to me, and I put on something that helped stop the burning afterwards.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	 And he says I will not succeed if I do not have hope for what comes next.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	 And if he loses his grip on it, because its strength is weak.
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	 He loosened his grip and fell to the ground, and struggled to get up, and was saved.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	 And I don't have any further concerns as long as this continues to be treated appropriately.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	 No time has come for me to leave the court, and it seems much longer than I expected there was a lot of work done.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	 And then he ran and jumped up onto the bow, and demanded to be shown the ways of his people like a servant does.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	 And his skin which is of the type we described before, and are not covered with sores or ulcers, but rather have a disease called fistulas; this is healthy, but may also be called fistula.
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	 "It is so long it grows towards your arm bone. It causes 'pinch' or pain.
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	 "When cooked and cooled down, remove the outer layer gently as you would a bandage.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 "It is not to be eaten raw because it spoils easily.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	 "If the herbs spoil or become spoiled while cooking, and their skin becomes tough when cooked to a certain point, then the treatment for blistering should be:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	 "Look at their skin is large and has a pus-like odor. Then apply blistering cream made from Egyptian magic.
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	 "Take it, put it on a hot surface and cook until the medicine turns red. Then continue cooking in water as if you were boiling eggs.
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	 "Then apply it according to your need and do so in hot water as if you were boiling eggs. And then hold the head still.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	 And let them heal within two hours by stretching gently
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	 Do this method as often as necessary, until the swelling has subsided and the pain subsides.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	 And you should not use fire cautery if the medicine is present and you are applying it on wounds or sores, wait until the ointment has dried, then blister, while holding steady so the blisters do not move until they are well healed.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	 And the blisters will not suffer pain, nor will the Egyptian ointment of fire and sulfur if you blister with fire or water, or have a slight touch of cold.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	 Or you may blister with honey and wine mixed, as the honey has the property to soften and heal, and the wine drives away sin.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	 And when you have done this and find that the skin is well healed, if blistering with these things brings blisters to it, or if you see new blisters appearing, then treat them gently, using rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	 Or you could try to diagnose and treat injuries or wounds.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	 And if the patient's ear is pierced and cannot close it properly, use a bandage to cover the piercing until it heals.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	 And if the wound is too large that only closing it allows some blood to escape or there are many injuries nearby which require immediate attention and treatment.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	 But when a vein is opened without proper preparation, do not let the bleeding continue unchecked;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	 And if you cannot control the bleeding or it is flowing in a way that the vein runs to its lowest point, do not let the bleeding continue unchecked and apply pressure to stop the bleeding as quickly as possible.
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	 The arm or limb must remain still without any movement.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	 And take conservative treatments to get the skin back to health and make sure all wounds are healed properly.
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	 Then apply the bandages tightly to support and align the arm properly while keeping it still. After applying them regularly for a certain period of time, remove the bandages once more to ensure all wounds are healed properly.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	 And the patient with an arm injury should avoid using that arm and seek medical advice if there is any pain or discomfort in doing so.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	 And if the patient feels pain or discomfort when doing so, and whether it is acute or not, and as the medicines are administered in different ways you notice how each one affects the arm after applying bandages, then approach the wounds.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 Then close it gently morning or evening, when you dress the wound if another bandage is needed and reapply the dressing
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	 "And after a long time sitting still they get stiff.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 "And the veins become thin after prolonged sitting and risk closing off circulation as the blood gets closer to it.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	 As well as those who treat their wounds with care, there are others who do otherwise.
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	 And after eating they vomit up from within themselves in the morning, such that their insides do not empty out completely.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	 And they feel sick to their stomach, and it becomes painful when excessive medications are taken in wet or dry forms if the wounds do not heal, for there is much blood and this is the best remedy.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	 When treating a wound that has finished healing, they apply oil with salt and vinegar in wet form.
puis le confit et en use;	 Then they anoint it and apply it.
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	 And when the healing is done but not present or you take mirror and aloe and incense, and grind them up, and powder it over honey as it burns.
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	 And then, in the end of his life, a healer may be called upon to heal the soul.
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	 with simple or complex remedies
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	 bruise them, and powder them, and put on the honey that I have mentioned, and apply it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	 then the cure is finished, and no further cure is performed by this method, unless there are signs of corruption present, causing inflammation in the bone, or joints.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 if the cure for a fistula has been done as we have mentioned before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	 arm
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	 Panic is an abscess that arises from the fist or palm, or through accident, and may be in other parts.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	 and when it is swollen, and one does not hold onto it if the abscess bursts, and continue to bleed profusely until they reach the base of the fist or palm.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 A dislocation occurs when the joint moves out of its place, causing intense pain in the affected area and misalignment of both limbs.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 When treating as we have mentioned in the previous paragraph, and if it is necessary to do so, then cauterize the wound after that.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	 The fire cautery is useful for joints that are healthy, and the patient's eyes should be healthy as well.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	 And when the eyes are pressed, and closed tightly with a bandage, if it is necessary to massage the eyelid gently but firmly in order to open them wide without any damage or pain.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Finally, for treating ailments of the eyes as long as they are healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	 And when there is a dislocation in the bone, if it occurs and becomes fixed, as long as the joint is healthy, so that it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if there are two dislocations, but they are not fixed together and can be seen separately, then the treatment is as long as both joints remain healthy.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	 And if it is severed, and bruised, and great pain occurs, then you must first cleanse.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	 And hold the stump tightly with a cloth while cutting through it, and be sure not to cut into the artery as the pain would be too great.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 And if there is bleeding from an injury.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	 "The pain in the arm
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 "The two joints that are missing from the hands due to accidents occur often, and in some cases one is missing at the root of the joint or both.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	 Do not move it unless you must, and for any dislocation or joint separation, that will come later.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	 The size of the one who is harsh should be light in nature.
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 Cut it off at its base with a wide cloth.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	 The one at the root of the joint must be treated carefully:
si te tien dou coper.	 If you are uncertain about it.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 In that case, it's recommended to first correct the dislocation at its base repeatedly and then apply pressure to stabilize the joint as much as possible, followed by treating it until it becomes stable
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	 The neighbors come together through birth or injury, or the result of fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	 If it is convenient to treat that sore place in the way of its natural shape:
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	 And let it lie still.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 Or, you can put something like this: "Or, place a thin strip of cloth between two slippery surfaces as long as they are smooth; if necessary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	 If the neighbors come together with only one hand, then apply pressure to the dislocated shoulder as much as possible.
des vils	 The bad ones
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	 If the veins swell with melancholy-filled fluids and come to fill both arms;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 And for those that go upwards to the feet and work and carry things; others also.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	 It is important that you do not give any enemas without consulting a doctor first, and then wash the stomach lining afterwards.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	 The treatment of fire is done in two ways
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	 One way is to burn the abscess and drain the black pus;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 The other method is to tie off the vein tightly so as to stop the flow of blood;
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	 Cutting is done in two ways:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	 First cut the arm of a very hot person deeply so that no hair is left, and then sew up the wound at its base near to where the elbow joins it.
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	 Then apply the wound with black soot to one hand, and then to the other, as much as possible from each side of the abscess, so that it may heal quickly.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	 Then tie a black ribbon around his neck to keep him quiet while you attend to him
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 And start the evacuation and healing process once veins are clear, and no longer apply any medication.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	 The attendants will do it as follows
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	 Stretch the leg with an abscess if there is some hair growth, and then submerge it in hot water until it turns red, and heat the veins.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	 If there is no boil at the fire's end, and then you apply the cautery to the vein near its base with the same mixture of soot or from the part towards the shoulder.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	 As you apply heat to the skin, gently cleanse the affected area as much as possible.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	 It turns red and black, like a bruise turning white
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	 Then apply the ointment, keeping it level on the skin, and then gently press at the affected point with three fingers.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	 Then gently cleanse the skin at the affected point until it stops, and then apply cool compresses if you have done so already, and press on another part just like before.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	 Then apply another piece, or more if you have more, and gently press it at the second point, then remove and cool just like before.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	 Then take off each piece in turn until all are removed, and press on.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	 And if you cannot remove and press as described above, prick the whole thread with two needles very strongly, then tie it tightly and cut off that hand.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	 "And let it remain still, for if it moves at all, you cannot hold or lift it, and when that happens there is great harm.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	 "And once the wound has been treated, if you apply a mixture of fine wine and oil to the healing area.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And it should be applied until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	 "And if the veins are contorted and torn, and the skin is torn together with them, but it does not move straight away as we have said, then you must stretch it gently but do not pull it straight.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 "As long as what has been mentioned previously remains unchanged.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	 "The form of the fire that is applied to the vein should be burned without any interruption so as not to cut through the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 "And it is a large burn because if it were subtle, then you would have burned through the vein. But rather, as we mentioned earlier and this is how it should be done.
de la voinne civile	 "from the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	 This sentence means "This vein is straight through legs, without branches or roots, in the earth where there is no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 And on the other hand, there is another part that occurs in the legs and it comes from a source near the skin if you go between the skin and the fur;
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 And when the beginning of this vein becomes inflamed and begins to swell, and as if a root of a plant is growing
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	 When the dislocation occurs, it is advisable to wrap one end of a piece of leather around a finger and leave it on the leg, making sure that each time it does not come off until both ends are together.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	 If too long, if you cut a part of it off and wrap the remaining around your finger, and do not put it back on until both ends are together.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	 Because if you cut through it, it will enter into the artery or vein and cause harm to the body.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	 For each of these things, it is necessary to treat them one by one, carefully and gradually.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	 And in no case should this vein be treated when it has been damaged or cut into, as once it is treated the wrong way to the point of causing pain and suffering.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 And when dealing with materials that are dense or heavy, apply the treatment to the affected area and use gentle medications in order not to cause any harm, then treat as you would an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	 And in no case should the vein be treated when it is trapped or entangled with the joint of flesh, or within a fist and causes pain to move around, but does not cause any movement.
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 Treat as you would have previously advised.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 Between flesh and bone
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	 This illness is known in our land as "flesh disease," because it often appears between the skin and bone, and moves up and down through every part of the body, causing pain to each member equally until they touch the skin or it retreats.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	 And there are discharges of certain humours, whether they come from wounds or burns or bruises or abscesses in the belly.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	 And doubts arise about its evil influence because when it passes through the body and rises to the head, it comes back down in oil form, destroying the oils.
et ceu avient maintes fois.	 This often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	 When you cure and bind it tightly, if not done properly will cause the patient to become worse as time goes on.
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	 When you loosen the ends of a thick and straight thread, then tie it tightly in its own loop, and do not remove it until it burns to the bone.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	 And there are more serious damages that occur when oil comes out of them, as we have mentioned earlier.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	 If you see it coming or at the top of its oil form, hold tight on them and then tie it.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 And it is advisable to use a remedy of gentle and soft foods for the sick person, so that their body can recover better from illness.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 Of the pain that comes from ventsite
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	 This disease is called "waker" in our land and it comes to any member of the body, causing them to move around like a snake.
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 I understand that you want me to do this too.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	 I called upon a female healer and she revealed in my hands, and saw a small tumor on the vein of both arms.
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	 And afterwards, it grew like a thorn in my shoulder, more quickly than nothing, as if made of silver when I cut through the vein.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	 The pain left my arm and settled in my shoulder, then spread throughout the body, reaching to the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 She told me that she would tear apart the body if I continued like this.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	 I was amazed at how it spread from joint to joint because I had never seen such a disease spread in this way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	 For every ailment I've ever encountered, except for this one here that you mentioned, but I cannot help if I see it in her.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	 I thought this was because the woman had a weak heart and veins were exposed, which seemed to put pressure on her chest.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 But they didn't seem to notice that as the reason for these who are healthy and have plump veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	 When you saw the cure for this ailment and felt that pain as we have mentioned, if it opens up and puts pressure on your chest repeatedly until the veins are weakened.
et cauterize le leu;	 Cauterize her arm.
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 If you can't see it in your eyes, if the cure for what causes veins to burst, if you use fatty pills and pills of serine, and other similar things.
des saiettes	 arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	 Arrows are various depending on their likeness and where they enter the body.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	 The limbs are diverse because they have different lengths, sizes, shapes, and qualities.
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	 And those that have two ends or two points of the same length, like fingers and toes,
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	 those who only exist in one member by different methods.
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 Or on the principle of a single body part, such as the arm or leg, if necessary, but otherwise all members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	 When she is dislocated without any of these parts and the sign of death will be told to you later on, pay attention.
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	 if it is advisable for you to extract this arrow, as many die after multiple attempts.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 And when the sign does not show and the arrow is not visible to you, if necessary, take it out of your body, and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	 And when the sight is hurt and pierces the eye, and sits on top of the brain, causing blindness and swelling and redness around the eyes, and inflammation and pain in the tongue, and spasms and mixing of thoughts, and vomiting of bile.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	 and there is also no feeling or sensation in the nose, or the ears
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	 and through it passes speech and voice
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	 And after leaving the white pus-like substance runs out of control causing great burning pain.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 Once it appears that a cure has failed, and the abscess is too late to be treated
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	 The sight of the abscess when it cuts or pierces is close to the sternum bone, and feels like being pinched in a hard place.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	 And through this sight runs out of control causing great burning pain, and the black blood chills, and brings cold and fear, and fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 "Many are likely to die.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	 The sign of the sixth day is when no relief can be felt from the itch and swelling of sores; the throat swells up, and the hairs turn white and cold; those who doubt will die.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	 And if they prick at their base, hold the eyelids steady so they do not move until they grow.
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	 and there is great pain and suffering.
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	 and the limb moves out of place.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	 The sixth day is when the sore covers both thighs or stomach; by chance there is no relief from eating food that would normally be digestible.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	 And if it enters the abdomen or any other part of the body through the intestines and there is no hope in its treatment, nor in extracting the arrow
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	 And if they prick at their base in a vein, urine is forced out rapidly, causing great pain to the patient.
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	 The wound has become mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	 The other limb, such as the arm and collarbone, the mouth, the shoulder blade, the elbow, the spine of the neck, the buttocks, the thigh, the leg, and the similar limbs are held in place by their respective joints, unless otherwise specified.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	 When the arrow enters into a nerve or artery and does not enter immediately, as you may ask me to explain what I mean by this, that is, unless otherwise specified
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	 He found it at the root of his nose, causing him to bleed badly from there.
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 I tried this, and was blinded by the fat in the ear and became insane as a result.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	 And he tried to put on the shoulder a dislocation that caused him to prick in the fat of his ear and the paper was torn. The dislocation was reset but did not stop moving, causing great pain as it moved around in circles, touching all parts of the face.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 "Then he was cured
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	 He placed a gag in the patient's mouth and covered their ears
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 I shaved his beard, keeping it close-shaven as closely to my liking, and he was cured of the disease.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	 He placed a gag over his mouth so that only his throat could be seen or heard, thinking that he would die.
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	 And when it was passed through the anus without his permission,
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 I removed the gag and pulled him out, but no more harm occurred, and he was cured.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	 If a gag is placed over his mouth or nose, then there will be sores on the place where it came off from.
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 When he removed the gag and released his natural disposition, there was no more harm to any of his body's organs.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	 And another man, whose face was disfigured by a wound, suffered greatly.
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	 and he felt great pain for the rest of his life.
et mout d’autres semblans.	 similar things (dislocations).
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	 And he took an arrow to his left side and it entered into his brain and was descending towards the right part.
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	 And he survived the wound.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 I went to seek out cures after she had been seen for three years.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 If many wounds are caused
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	 I questioned her about everything but the mystery.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 and he felt a stabbing pain in his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	 I thought it was from the arrow wound so I applied a plaster made of wheat flour and water to try to stop it.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 But the wound kept worsening
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	 "I cleanse the wound with clean water and remove any foreign matter that may have entered it. Let the hair grow long as much as possible, so the arrow does not move.
et il le me dist.	 It is reset (or: "put back" or "made whole again").
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	 I cleanse the wound with corrosive medicine on hands gently, until it is burned off completely and then try to hold down the head of the arrow that is protruding out.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	 After cleansing the wound with corrosive medicine and closing it up quickly to prevent any dislocation of the arrowhead.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	 And afterwards bind the wound with four ropes for four months, and then tie them tightly on both sides to prevent any escape.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 Until the arrowhead is completely removed and the wound heals, continue to tie it tightly with ropes according to this method that I described in this chapter; as long as you keep the stitches well made until the shape of the arrowhead comes out at the end of this chapter, so long as you hold onto it and stay by the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	 And they say that his eyesight cannot recover
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 He recovered and was cured of the disease
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	 You have described the quality of extraction from any kind of arrow, as long as you use your technique and I do not object
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 But the master of the course will not approve or follow this strange and dangerous method that involves harmful things
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	 I say that arrows do not enter into any member unless they are guided in one of these ways.
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	 Or through the left side or through another way.
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 The one that passes by the left side enters into the lung and never again;
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	 If she does not pass now if she is allowed to stay with her hair standing up and without any obstruction in its path.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	 And if it is fixed into the bone, then it cannot move unless you loosen it a little.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 And when it jumps and does not jump, if you gently pull on the edge with great force, then stretch it out slowly.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	 And if the arrow is fixed into one of the ventricles or brain, and no other injury was mentioned earlier to the patient...
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 unless you cut it off immediately because if the arrow enters into the brain, that is death
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 And the dislocation only occurred in that bone and does not occur elsewhere, leading to serious injury if it occurs without holding steady; it's important to keep it still for a moment or two.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	 And if she remains fixed in place and cannot be removed unless you immediately administer a treatment as I mentioned earlier...
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then treat the wound while it is bleeding.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	 And if the arrow is shot through and cannot be seen by you unless you try to remove it...
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	 "And if you understand, without any available instrument.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	 "And if you are unable to feel the depth of the wound or the hardness of the arrowhead and cannot move your arm, as long as the injury is large.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	 "And if you touch the arrowhead and it touches your ear, causing you to hear a loud noise when removing or moving it, until you can hold them steady.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 "And gently remind yourself not to break the arrowhead, as you try to remove it more firmly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	 And if you fail once when trying to extract it because it is too hard to remove
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	 "And if any of these contraindications occur that contradict what we have said in our chapter on this subject:
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	 "And remember to cut the nerves and vein carefully, making sure you do not cause any movement in the ear while removing it quickly or slowly.
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 And put the dressing as it was when the sutures were removed, because that is where the greatest help comes from, and if you do not use it then there will be no effect at all, since what it shows cannot go away.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	 The dressing that comes from elsewhere, or if there is nothing to be found, or the wound is swollen and inflamed in any place where it can be seen or felt.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	 until the stitches are taken out, then remove
si saut fuer maintenant.	 if done now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	 If it is held in the bone, if you tightly grasp around it as it enters into the bone and enlarges the space inside, then extract it later on.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	 If she cannot stand it any longer, and continues the extraction until it is done.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	 And when he removes the dressing from the wound, he covers it with everything.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	 And when the dressing is tight and you want to administer something inside it (throughout), if he administers the instrument which fits, or the needle of the dressing penetrates into the vein.
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 And then come forth, and let it go through an instrument to remove what is stuck inside.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 "And if the arrow is embedded in a vein, you should treat the wound as necessary.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	 And if the abscess is in the belly or bladder area, it causes pain and one may have difficulty coping with it.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	 And keep from touching veins and nerves, then remove the abscess, please be gentle.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And the cure as long as it is well done.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	 The shape of stitches used for removing arrows is similar to that of a bird's beak.
Et en sont mout de manieres:	 And there are many ways to do this
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	 Many small ones or fewer larger ones depending on the size of the abscess.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The shape when bending occurs similarly to how it happens with the tip of a needle, by touching at the tip of the wound.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	 The shape of veins while cutting and checking if there is one:
des voinnes dou cors communes	 common veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	 Some veins that are not stiff are XXXI and some may be flexible enough to remove; it is important to know this.
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	 The second ones after the ears which are attached by a small piece of skin connecting them;
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	 And the two arteries that are in the temples appear;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	 "And both ears that are pierced with the same arrow, which are called 'aspires'.
et li voine que est emmi le front;	 "The ear on the forehead.
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	 "The outer ear near the nose.
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	 "And two ridges, which are called 'columella.'
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	 "The upper and lower teeth, which are also called the 'ague-cheriche'.
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 "And the back of the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	 "The teeth that are commonly considered to be 'V' shaped, in this sense.
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	 "One is the frontal tooth, which lies near the cheek and they are called the 'upper front teeth'.
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	 "The middle one is called 'fascia', and it's composed of the frontal tooth and the lower teeth, and they are called the 'middle teeth'.
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 "The base of the thumb and little finger are often positioned in opposition to one another, and they may be bent such that their knuckles touch; this causes pain.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	 "The upper arm is between the ear and the nose. If there are two tears.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	 "In the leg and foot there are three bones:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	 "The first bone is the sesamoid bone between the big toe and small toe. The second bone is the tarsal bone at the ankle.
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	 "And the third bone is the navicular bone in the other ankle, as it is called 'the lesser'.
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 "The same thing applies to the other leg.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	 "Those bones are after the ears and nose, which help in hearing and balance.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	 "The quality of the bones that I mentioned before, like how you would say, and it is that your head moves in a way which makes them feel rough.
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	 "The muscles surrounding the eye are relaxed until they see something behind their ears.
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	 When you know that there is someone else in your room, and if you sense them even from afar.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	 Then take the needle and prick it into your vein just at the elbow, then gently pull your hand all along the vein up to the shoulder, and clip off any hair that might get in the way, and make sure there are no sores or cuts on your arm as you go.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 Then tighten it and hold tightly until it is straight;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 And I have mentioned the incision and fire cure in this chapter first.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	 The veins inside the temples are severed when going to an elderly person or priestess, and so on. And they become blind with tears as eyes.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	 "You must give first aid as soon as possible
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	 And if the pain worsens when moving your arm or leg.
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	 You must keep your other hand steady and calm.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	 Then gently stretch the arm up towards your other index finger and withdraw it gently, then straighten the elbow, just like you did with the other hand.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	 After that, put your other arm around the patient's shoulder and hold it for an hour then cover them both.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 And leave it in place as long as you can keep it still.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 And we have spoken of their beginning and end, and the extraction; this is what I meant to translate.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	 The pain of the front arm is equal to that of the upper arm and shoulder, and migraines and bruises.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	 "And if it strays from its course when turning,
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 The instrument called a "forearm stretcher" whose shape is
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	 With the point against the vein and firmly against your hand or any other thing, so that they may be drawn out in accordance with the quantity you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 Then release from around the vein and hold it steady until it is completely removed without any pain or injury.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	 Therefore, only keep them short enough so that they do not flare up again.
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	 And in the end of course because it is pressed tight and by chance breaks the hairs when it is subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	 The veins of the second arm are in two parts if help is given to them, and towards their end, and towards their root, and towards their origin inside the body, and diseases of the flesh.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	 And when the qualities of their health fail them as they grow strange to themselves, tearing off any links
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 Then their health worsens, and eventually they lose the ability to see clearly, because there is no cure for it.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	 And when its flames are subtle, often breaking through even a small opening.
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	 Then they make corrections to the wound as much as necessary, and then treat with their own skin, and apply ointment well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	 The quality of their vein is worth much, and they have many benefits, and there are various diseases that arise as it ages, such as migraines and tumors.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	 And their quality of health is such that the veins become strange to themselves, and they tighten them with gentle force on their own, and hold out a subtle flame long enough, until there is space between the two nostrils, because it does not open completely, and therefore it starts to correct itself now.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	 And do not force it too much, make corrections according to its need, then tie a bandage on it, for it is most likely to heal quickly.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 It has the form of a burn
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	 This remedy is used to treat second-degree burns, and for the start of ulcers, and many diseases, and it heals wounds and blisters;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	 The quality of this remedy is that the hairs are removed from both sides together, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	 And if the main burn is on the head and the second one on the chest, then first treat the main burn with a large amount of water, and then apply cold compresses immediately, or as much as necessary.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	 And afterwards treat the second burn on another part of the body, then bandage it up immediately, so that the hairs do not stick.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 And leave it so that there is no pain in the morning.
de la sainie des leivres	 The liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	 The bile of the liver is harmful to both the mouth and the eyes, causing corrosion or ulcers in it.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	 And you will see how healthy his leg looks when he stands before you and holds it steady as I said earlier.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	 Then roll the leg and look at what happens when one is lifted to your right and the other to your left; by doing this you can see that they are both black veins.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 If one or the other is not seen and you are in doubt, if the larger of these two parts is to be examined first and all others should be done as well because that's a common way to do it.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 The bile of the liver is harmful to both the mouth and the eyes; if one ulcer appears in
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	 The health of the veins that are on one's leg is checked after the health of the head and throat, which is at its very top and diseases in the ears, and diseases in the mouth.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	 And the quality of staying still is that your fingers should stay between your hands in front of the sun, gently touch it and look for a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 And when both are still and not pressed too hard, then you're touching the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	 The veins that are commonly seen share these two characteristics:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	 or when you prick them anywhere on the face, and if they're small and close together, then it's called "anezyl".
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 And are large and subtle depending on their size and closeness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	 The form of cautery that is being described here is a fiery one.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	 And when opening large, obvious deep wounds, or those containing large lumps and troubles;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 it's the form of olive-colored vein.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	 It is more subtle and recommended for treating finer hairs, where there are smaller sores or lesions.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	 The veins from the elbow, which is one of them, helps with ailments that are in the throat and nose, chest and belly.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 And it is advisable for him to rest his arm
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	 And if he pierces the artery, and many wounds come, as I said earlier.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 do not let it burn him, but rather when ever possible.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	 And if the lower limb does not open clearly, if you wish to remove it, and then cut another one instead.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	 You can either drain him completely or remove his arm;
elle apert manifestement;	 it opens clearly.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 and you hold the flame steady if possible.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	 And if the lower limb is injured and you wish to remove it, then cut off his arm at this point as well.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	 After removing the lower limb, tie up the arm with a bandage and hold the vein steady.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	 "Do not break it when you see it bent, as it is an artery:
eschui la donques.	 "The latter part of that sentence does not translate into English.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	 "And if you see it as in a child's urine, which is red and subtle, this means it is from an artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	 "And if you find that the artery was injured, leave your hand in place and hold your other hand steady until it stops bleeding:
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	 "Hold both arms still, and let them go slowly, but do not move the hairs on them;
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And if there is fear of movement, it will not stop until it has healed completely:
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	 "And if the artery is injured and reopened, you must apply pressure to stop it from bleeding again. The doctor will come when they arrive:
et estainche li sans.	 The
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	 Take a piece of flesh, and then hold it in place with the other finger.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	 If done correctly.
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	 Then it doesn't work and causes wounds to bleed;
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 And the bleeding becomes too strong due to little movements of the wound or both arms.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	 The vein's health deteriorates if it is treated with harsh methods that affect both the upper and lower veins because they are composed of the base and the head.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	 It is advisable to gently massage the nerve that runs from the eye to avoid too much pressure and prevent injury or bruising.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	 And do this nerve gently many times if it doesn't open in any way because of its subtlety.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 "And then, gently push your arm.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	 And if there is a vein between them, as long as it takes hold.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	 The surgeon for the cerebral palsy should try to straighten the affected limb and assist with the eyes.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 It is advisable to burn only the affected limb or the affected ear because this is the safest option as it does not damage any nerves or arteries.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	 However, if you wish to make it easier for him (the patient), and do nothing if the first attempt fails;
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 And in case of swelling or bruising, only apply ice packs during the first few hours after the procedure, but there is no need for anything else
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	 The quality of the vein is as follows:
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	 The first thing you should know when healing from surgery is that recovery will take time to ensure health and prevent future complications.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	 And if the operation was done on one of the three veins mentioned below;
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	 It's important to know, quickly, firmly, and decisively
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	 And when it is necessary to start feeding them again after weaning, and gradually increase their intake as they grow older.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 Feed them the first time in the morning or afternoon; wait two hours or three hours later to feed again.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	 The treatment does not have a specific duration, but when you are feeding them or giving medicine, in all hours and at any time.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 And do not feed the infants until they are 4 years old, but only from every four months after that up to seven years.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	 Do not repeat the remedy for those who have been treated previously.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	 And when any one is to be fed, in whatever manner it seems fitting, if necessary you may purge the bowels with a light enema, so that no excess of poison from outside enters through the intestines into the main part of the body.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	 "Do not touch those parts of the body which are too sensitive to touch, nor is there any difference between them, so that if they are injured, do nothing.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	 "After colic and vomiting, and pain in the stomach, and multiple times of defecation, and multiple times of intercourse with women or men, and excessive sleep, wakefulness, and joy, until virtue is exhausted.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	 "Then subtlety of humors, by foods and beverages and by medicines, you will find relief.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	 "Then between a bath and a cold, if nothing else is available to soothe the pain in your veins, then hold the cloth tightly over the third wound as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	 "And keep the work from your hand and from your head, and luxury, and similar things.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	 "And let it rest and be quiet, and make sure the injuries are higher than what has been healed before, apply a second or third bandage to hold in place until it is too swollen or painful, then you must remove it gently.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	 And hold tight to your hand while holding it steady with your other hand.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 Then apply a small amount of oil to the burn site and instruct them to hold their hand steady while holding it still with the other hand until they want to stop burning, as long as they do not move or feel pain
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	 Then there are times when the pain is like threads on the finger, and if any of these veins become inflamed, should they try to hold still their hand while removing the fire, as long as they do not move it or feel pain.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 And if their hand swells excessively due to a too severe burn, then they should seek medical attention immediately in these situations.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	 If the hand swells for the first time it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	 However if this continues even after a short while or becomes intense, then they should seek medical attention immediately.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	 And if he loses his breath or goes into shock
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	 through any accident
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	 do not enter wounds again until the patient regains consciousness.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	 and if the pulse is weak or difficult to feel, but you doubt whether he has not lost so much blood as you have seen, then tighten the tourniquet all at once.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	 and if it is weak or there is no pulse, do this: put a tourniquet on quickly.
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 because this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	 If you see the wound bleeding profusely and cannot re-start the pulse, put a small amount of olive oil on it, as it helps seal the artery and is more effective than other oils.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	 And apply a small amount of olive oil to all wounds that you know how to clean the veins, in order to close the wound properly.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	 "And when it is placed back onto its place.
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 It becomes too heavy and splits apart if there's too much weight put upon it.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	 And if it comes across a large stone frequently when opening a vein, even though the cut is small and clean, but holds onto the joint for one hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	 And after the treatment of a vein injury, you should check that it does not dislocate afterwards or move irregularly.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 You must ensure nothing is placed onto the joint or mirror that has been cleaned gently and calmly, causing it to move around excessively, or something similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	 And frequently the abscess appears on the elbow area.
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	 When you place your hand upon it and observe its appearance carefully while applying light pressure to the hand if an abnormal appearance is seen.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	 "Do not touch anything of what we have said" is the correct translation.
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The patient should rest as much as possible while recovering from another injury or illness.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	 And apply some cold water according to the quantity of the abscess, and the color of it.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	 If the wound is black when it is opened up until it becomes red.
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	 And if you see a large one, let it be as small as possible.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	 If the wound is too deep, cool it down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	 And for one who knows how to extract the abscess, and has mastered the art of making wounds larger, so that flames spread more widely.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	 And for one who is weak, do the opposite, and should rather make it heal quickly and steadily, and he must strengthen himself by crossing over, not injuring.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 This manner of healing is saved from burning sores and swelling nerves, and it is good that the healing should not be too long or too wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	 And to one who needs rest from their wounds, it is advisable to give them sour oranges juice.
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 If the fire is intense or there are four times, it is advisable to apply cold compresses and soothe them with honey syrup, either plain or aromatic with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, as well as a fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 And if you apply it to the skin after a burn injury, after removing any pus, it is advisable to cool with a poultice made from fragrant syrup, and use other things we mentioned in the previous chapter for blood evacuation.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	 And if it is necessary to apply more times and the wound continues to heal, as long as its virtue continues to work steadily according to the amount of its power.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	 And if it is necessary to apply more times after the first wound and you have strong arms, if healing occurs within 7 hours after the first wound or immediately after a new hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	 And who will become healthier from another point of view, if he must heal his second wound or the third one.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	 Because the wound is inflamed from intense heat, it will cause fever.
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	 if it's necessary to apply a large amount and stretch the patch as much as possible.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	 then apply the cure to all of them and put your hand over their eyes when they see it so that death does not come from a distance.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	 and do not worry if you see other wounds in the same arm and perform another incision so that the wound is closed tightly by pressing down on it.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	 If he becomes weary, let him extend his arms because it would not be good
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	 And leave them as long as the second time passes.
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 Or if you prick at the base of his finger, as long as he holds steady and does not move until it grows, and presses gently to make it firm
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	 If his body is weak and you leave the incision open without closing it gently, as long as the abscess remains calm.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	 And if a second attempt is needed, either to remove the stone that was dislodged or another vein/arm/leg as necessary.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	 The arm that is affected must be immobilized in order for it to heal properly due to the complexity of its composition
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	 And the manner of doing this is that he holds his hand in hot water until all its nails are red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	 Then let him wash gently as if to pierce it well, then cleanse it now through and across, without making it too wide or long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	 And let him prick large and press well on the joint of his arm, and he cannot remove it if he resets his hand in hot water, and leave it in there until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	 And when it is done, if you do not remove your hand from the hot surface because you put more burn in it than you would have had.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 The veins of this vein are more valuable than all other veins, as there is no artery or nerve in it.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	 This vein from the hand's right side can heal all diseases of the liver, and that is its way (to cure).
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	 Hold tight to the hand and keep it in hot water as long as the vein is closed, if you want to use this method.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	 And when finished, and if there is nothing wrong with all things, then do it again.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 Do not apply too much heat, as the nerve endings are very sensitive to touch, and then remove your hand from the hot surface so that it does not freeze in the wound, and cannot be removed.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	 "And when you have treated the sore as much as possible, if it is still painful and stubborn, then take a second application.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	 "He will cure himself of the ailment in his own hand if it is a disease of the flesh; and do everything as I have already told you to do on your right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 "He will cure himself of any ailment that affects the body if it is a flesh disease; and do everything as I have already told you to do on your right.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	 And the quality of his sanity is such that the veins beneath him become hot and tighten around the base of the vein.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	 The arm becomes swollen at the shoulder, and the veins there grow tight with pain.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 If it is in his head or above the shoulder where it hurts more, then that part swells up significantly.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	 And if you hold onto his veins while he writhes in pain as much as possible and continue to apply pressure steadily.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	 Or if the flames ignite during this process.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	 If they cannot be corrected immediately after repositioning, leave them undisturbed while seeking medical help.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	 And when you first apply pressure, remember to reapply after a short time because of the pain involved in doing so.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 Do not doubt yourself if we have said it before, and when you do this to any other part gently.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	 Sciatic vein pain is in the calf and shoulder area, and it's often caused by inflammation.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	 And the quality of his sanity is such that if he has an abscess between or below the shoulder, you must twist it to extract him because otherwise the vein will not open.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	 "And if you open it up such that all its parts are exposed to view,
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 "...and then be gentle with it as it is in pain and may require support.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	 "If you do not use it gently, for fear of causing further injury or pain when opening or removing it.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	 "...and then do as much damage control as you can, and remove the link while keeping it steady and holding tight,
ele est maintenant sanee.	 "It is now safe.
des sainies de ventouse	 The veins
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	 "The veins are cut through bone or sinew;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	 "...and the extraction is made in two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	 "Or by cutting and drawing out the vein, or piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	 "...the extraction made by piercing is done in two ways:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	 "Either it is heated up or the heat is applied;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	 "And separation which is made by cutting or extraction of abscesses should be done in four pieces to prevent the joint from being dislocated.
et li autres est emmi le col;	 "And other separations are made through the neck.
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	 "The second separation is made through two holes in the neck.
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	 "And the exit of the abscesses from the nose.
et li ventouse des II espaules;	 "And the exit of the second space.
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	 "And the exit of the sores.
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	 "The exits are made through both arms.
et les ventouses des II jambes;	 "The exits are made through both legs.
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	 "The exits are made through the two heels.
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	 "The separation cannot treat abscesses that are sparse in the cloth, and therefore it is not forbidden to do the same with veins.
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 "It should be used only for a short time and does not cause any harm, in no illness that comes from excess, as long as the skin is healed.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	 And it is necessary to perform these procedures either before or after the month has ended, at dawn and in the evening, every day until you finish.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	 because when one knows how to sew properly, if he is patient enough;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	 and if the fire gets too hot in their face or head, or at the ears, and blind them.
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	 and those who get a burning sensation in their mouth, lose their tongue, and start to bleed.
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 And if one is unlucky enough, they feel, see, hear, and sense pain; or death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	 This sentence translates to: "And when we see these signs, and especially after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	 The patient who receives help with the fire treatment... which comes after the evacuation of all the limbs.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	 and this evacuation should be in the absence of a cerebral stroke, or those with a cold constitution should avoid it, as it causes great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 And because he is to cover it with ice
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	 And those who are well advised to do so should place their head slightly lower in order to prevent dislocation
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	 He is vomiting because of the severity and depth of injury in his chest and abdomen.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 And it's important to breathe slowly but deeply if she holds her breath too long, as this may cause damage to the esophagus or stomach
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	 The vomiting is severe and painful in the chest, causing constriction of the esophagus, and may cause damage to the intestines.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 It is important that he commands his stomach to release and hold off on vomiting, not covering the artery, so as not to cause damage from bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	 Vomiting may occur in the mouth and is accompanied by oral lesions, such as oral ulcers.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	 And it is from this level of veins.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	 The dislocations of joints are an illness caused by heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	 Dissections are as dangerous as those in the upper arm because they cut through large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 Instruct the patient not to press too hard as it may cause damage to organs and blood vessels.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	 The dissection which is into the shoulder has two purposes - to remove any abscesses and to ensure that it's done correctly without damaging blood vessels.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	 And if they are subtle, there would be a rupture.
et i fai grans plaies.	 This could result in large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	 Dissections of the legs should not be done too quickly because they can cut through all of your veins and arteries, causing severe pain from the neck down to the feet.
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	 They are in the area of the second vein and second calf, causing them to weaken your body after a long time, leading to fainting spells more often.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	 Here is the translation: The method to apply a bandage is to put it on first as quickly and smoothly as possible, and then fasten it firmly, and remove it gently, repeating this process continuously until you reach your target color of red and fade out.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	 Then after that, apply more bandages and take care to arrange them properly on the body because they are essential for support; in particular for wounds.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	 If you only want one bandage then make sure it's wide enough to cover a large area or many small ones.
et suce legierement.	 And gently squeeze them in place.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	 If the first bandage is not strong enough then you should apply another one as well.
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	 The first time to make it smaller and tighter around the wound.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	 If the second bandage is still not strong enough then apply another one as well.
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	 And when we want to draw out a small piece at a time and only once if we simply use one bandage.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	 And if we want to cure the illness, then let's begin.
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	 And if his heart is strong and steady, then let's begin.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	 It could be with rose oil or almond oil, or seed of cucumber oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 Or if it is from lavender oil, or lilies, or chamomile, or any similar oil.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	 "And if you apply excessive amounts of fat, cold, or oil-based substances such as balsamite, or other oils which may freeze,
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 "And when you apply a soothing char and wide pores, it is not advisable to put oil on them; instead, wash after applying cold or hot water, or egg yolk, or mullein, or porcelain, or similar substances.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	 "And those who have issues with moisture, such as itching, or abscesses, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	 Those with excessive fluids may be treated with wine vinegar or sweet vinegar, or a tea of anise or chamomile, or others.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	 Do not sit in the bath before washing it off, but after washing it off wait one to two hours;
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 Do not sleep right away afterwards, and you must rest when you should shave, as well as when it is shaved off.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	 And beware of those who are colic (suffering from) colic, and whose anus is too inflamed.
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	 If it's advisable to eat cold foods, such as spinach, lettuce and cucumber, among others.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 And drink ale (beer)
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	 And those with a cold complexion should drink honey syrup and musty wine which is between old and new, eat some food, eat bread, cheese, oil, fish, eggs, and poultry.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	 And those who are about to vomit should drink more than they eat (to prevent vomiting).
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	 And it is advisable not to scratch or itch in front of the mirror when you are about to vomit, or afterwards, so as to maintain the alignment of the limbs.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 And be gentle with those who are hungry, but do not advise those who are already full.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	 The wounds that are being made to bleed are those that have been placed upon the liver and spleen, and abdomen, and buttocks and thighs and head and neck, because this member cannot withstand the stabbing of another part of the body, nor will it occur if one tries to stab a wound from a wound on the same side;
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	 Because of the viscosity inside the member, as we place wounds upon the belly and buttocks to hinder movement.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	 And pain when it has an ulcer or stone, either by its attractive nature to attract the extraction, or by removing the source of the ulcer.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	 And it is done when we place upon the liver and spleen as they retain the moisture only.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 It is always done together with fire, and never alone unless it has been burned for herbs, or to remove stones in that way.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	 The form of venesection (venipuncture) administered is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	 And the patient must put his hand wide and half palm forward, so that it may strike a thorn without fear, or of rain, for if he does not hold back from striking at an arrow,
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	 and in cases of injury by fire or iron, for putting a tourniquet on, and there are large and small according to the severity and nature of those who take them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 as the veins of children are different from adults, and thin ones from fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	 And so it is necessary to put this tourniquet on the limb
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	 by using either a tourniquet made of linen or another material, and place it around the vein at its furthest point away from where you want to apply pressure.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	 and then place it around the limb, making sure that where you apply pressure matches what we've said, if when you see it, or its gone wrong, and remove it.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 "And fasten it down firmly while facing forward, and repeat until you feel sore.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	 "In the treatment of pleurisy where there is often no coughing or difficulty in breathing, and it is mild only when the chest is opened up gently, and held only on one side.
et c’est li forme:	 "This means:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	 "No stitches are necessary if there is no difficulty breathing in the body parts or when ventilating them gently and smoothly.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	 "And in the eyes you must close them tightly so they do not move until they grow.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	 "The quality of the user is that whenever you remove stitches which are soft and neat from the opening, if they are pricked.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	 "And after removal hold them gently until they become closed up tightly without any leakage anywhere.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	 "And please hold down the arm and wrist until it is red.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 And when they are smooth and hard, you may then apply pressure, as this is recommended afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	 If not, if the joint becomes loose again, gently stretch it and hold for a moment to release tension.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	 And if the joint becomes too loose after an extended stretch in cold water, gently squeeze it and hold until it is fixed.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	 And if the joint becomes swollen or inflamed due to bruising, or from swelling and similar things, hold it fixed until it stabilizes.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	 Or if you put heat on the joint as it becomes stiff and releases tension over time until it has completely released.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 And if you have a second injury to your joint.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	 "When the veins are pricked and cause bleeding, hold down the affected area to prevent further injury.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 "When the hairs prick at their base, either hold them down gently or tie a strip around to prevent further injury.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	 The book begins with an introduction about injuries
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	 Injuries are often necessary in the art of medicine and their healing is restoration.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	 "When the patient receives this treatment for the first time and does not find anything in any of their previous books or letters.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	 "This is also strange to us here because we found nothing related in our own works.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	 "I have studied and practiced medicine for a long time, through the books of my predecessors, I tried experiments myself, and by following the customs of life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 "In this chapter I have described what is contained in it and laid out its contents at the end; I explicitly explained the forms of the remedies to be practiced as we do in these two preceding chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	 Here is the translation line by line: "The prologue of this book introduces the speakers and explains their role in it, and proceeds to teach them how to use it well, if they are skilled enough and have learned its noble art.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	 I say that if there is a break or dislocation or sprain comes from any of the joints in the body, it should be treated immediately by supporting one end and holding the other firmly, so nothing else happens, even if the limb is bent forward or backward.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	 or if there are excessive swelling or stiffness
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	 and if there is excessive swelling or stiffness, it's important to have cold compresses on the affected areas, and avoid applying heat as much as possible, do not fill your wounds with raw meat unless you are absolutely sure that this is necessary for treating the wound.
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 if the hair of the affected area becomes very long and tangled, it should be trimmed gently to prevent injury.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	 And when the blisters begin to heal, if it is convenient that one narrows the vein causing large swelling, or viscosity, if accompanied by itching and redness, sores, pain, fever, and pus discharge, and in the fish flesh, and boils, and similar things occur
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	 When a part swells up very quickly, it may indicate that there is an infection present.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	 And it should be noted that broken veins and capillaries are unable to heal properly after the fact due to their nature as soft tissues. Additionally, if they are too tender themselves.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	 "And it will come undone when the bone is broken or dislocated.
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 "It should be left to heal naturally and not forced with large amounts of force as mentioned earlier.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	 And that blisters come in many forms.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	 The first sentence does not translate directly into English but rather gives a clue as to the meaning of future sentences.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	 There was a dislocation that had gone too far and caused great pain when trying to straighten it as the joint size made it difficult to do so
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	 If there is a dislocation accompanied by an injury, or if the dislocation is very small.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	 And that way the engine was repaired properly and its instrument cleaned according to what it had instructed.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	 "And when a bone is broken then the process of healing begins and if it is properly treated with force.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	 "And when there is no twisting or misalignment of the bones and the patient experiences little to no pain, then there will be no break.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 "However, even though healing can still occur with slight twists or fractures but it may heal stronger than before.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	 If only you move your arm now with the medicine that comes after, and then hold it gently now
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	 "And if the fracture is in the shoulder area and involves both joints, it should now be treated with great care as the previous text suggested.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	 "And hold your arms steady if they prick at their base.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	 "Then, gently and slowly remove the bandage, as repairs are usually easier than those that come with scars.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 "Hold steady if necessary afterward.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	 "If the joint is broken in two parts, hold tight with your hands or both wrists, and do not move the arm.
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	 "And hold the member to its natural shape as much as possible when the broken parts of a joint are healed, by making sure that your actions in healing do not cause further harm.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 "And gently and carefully align both joints back to their original positions.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	 "Hold tightly if it seems necessary:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	 "If there is too much swelling and the restraint cannot be maintained, do not press excessively as those who come from their wounds with heat and contraction in the limb, if we want to.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	 "And when the limbs are at rest and the pain is good and they do not move, nor watching nor sleeping, nor turning or any other way.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 "And be sure that the limbs feel no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	 "But when there is no more pain, and it's time to put in place the necessary arrangements so that no more pain occurs.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	 "And keep them properly positioned as you straighten out any twisting and turning as they come back into place.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 "Qualify each broken member according to what I've said.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	 The dislocated limbs may vary in size, shape, and length.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	 "If there are many members such as the brain and two others like these:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	 "And gently remove any loose or small ones.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	 And if they are large enough to reach your wrist and thigh.
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	 If you need to remove a very large and hard one, as the larger ones can pierce through all of your arm or leg, and hold it tight so that it cannot move at all.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	 Then loosen the smaller ones in three or four passes depending on which limb it is in, and tighten your hand around it after each pass until you reach its end, then release some of the tension as you go towards where the break occurs.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	 And gently loosen it a little at a time as you approach the greater part of its length, then release another one and repeat this process until you reach the end of the break.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	 Then return to the part above the break and hold it gently but not too tightly nor loosely as we said in our previous answer.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 When you put pressure on the eyes of a cloth or linen as long and even as possible, hold them steady until they prick at their base.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	 If there is bleeding or bruising, do not press on the eye but rather leave it alone and allow any injury to heal naturally.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 Then hold the eyes steady and ensure they are at least as wide as a finger's breadth if possible; or from which you may see threads of cloth or veins in them, so that it is clear.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	 But it is advisable to make the eye with which you are making the incision larger and more wide than others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	 And so long as possible, just like when treating any other part of the body.
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	 Then hold them steady just like you did in the previous incision and tie a thread gently around it if possible.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	 In the beginning of a dislocation
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	 And it is desirable that the bones be soft and not too hard or too soft, but at an appropriate size.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 If the bones are too large, if you want to make the wounds heal faster and it's a good thing because there will be no healing if it is too delicate, but it should have between two and two spans of space
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	 After the dislocation has been reset and is properly aligned, if you apply heat to them after being cut or bruised, they will be still, unless there is some other cause for concern.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	 If the wound is with frostbite and the ears are torn off, I will tell you the treatment after that.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	 And if it's necessary to restrain those members from being separated immediately.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	 Because when the limbs are large, it is not advisable to put them at a time of less than seven or eight days or more depending on their size.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	 And for the plastering of any fracture, dislocation, and torsion
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 And it is that you take from the flour which holds well to the millstone and mix with plenty of oil, and put this mixture so thin but not too thin or too thick, and use, as it is a common method for plastering fractures in different places, most especially women and children because there is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	 Another way to correct dislocations, fractures, and twists is...
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	 ... apply ice packs, bandages, and adhesive tape.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	 mirror and mirrors;
alechil VIIII З.;	 until VIIII
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	 add powder to it and mix well with water.
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	 if the face is warm, then apply this ointment; as it has good composition and heals broken bones quickly, worth its price.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	 Another way to correct twists...
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	 apply ice packs;
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	 mirror and mirrors;
acaice VI З.;	 until VI hours;
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 with oil or water and apply it well, and mix it properly.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	 Another way to relieve sprains and bruises on the bones is...
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 "Leave it as is,
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 "The arm cannot remain still, but it is good to put pressure on the base of the abscess, and then release slowly.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	 "Another way to splint the broken bones.
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	 Take dried figs and dry soil, grind them together, and make plaster bandages for wounds.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 "Another way to splint an injured bone is to prevent further injury while the bone heals.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	 Take the root of a medicinal herb, chamomile flowers, violet petals, flower of violets, flour of wheat and chickweed together:
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 grind it up, mix with wine, and apply to the affected parts with moist ginger paste or similar things, and apply often.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 "Another way to splint more than once is when an abscess comes back during bone restoration.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	 Take the root of a medicinal herb, flaxseed, balm, mallow and chickweed, and violet flowers and chamomile together:
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 grind it up, mix with salt water or honey water as needed based on the condition of the member and rest period,
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	 "Here is the translation
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	 "And it seems strange that one must put the joint back in place for restoring; use heat gently as you would with oil and incense, and similar things, if we have mentioned.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	 Another way to heal is by removing the pain
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	 break the flesh into pieces, or pierce the eye, and blindfold oneself, and so on, and it is inflamed, and he bleeds easily, and it causes damage, and there is no cure for this
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	 After a little while, and you take care to keep the eye from causing any pain, do not move the eyelids.
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	 Do not remove it by hand.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	 The pain comes back to the place where the itching was, or from a scratch that itches, if you itch, and remove it now, heal with this.
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	 And apply something wet to soothe the itchiness and cleanse it gently, and plunge in cold water until the itching stops, then stop the pain.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	 Then leave the limb to rest for an hour, then apply a dry cloth, wet it in cold water or oil and tie around tightly until you're sure of the bandage.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	 "The swelling of a limb occurs, bringing pain with it. Gradually increase the heat and compress gently, without restraining too much because you are afraid to cause more harm.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Gradually decrease the warmth until it is just right.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	 And if you see that the arm is heavy and painful, swelling occurs when it comes back to its place again, so make sure everything is in order, whether you have done it right or wrong, once only.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	 "And if nothing of what we have said comes to mind in the next three or four days or seven days.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	 "After every twenty days, as long as the patient is improving and getting closer to recovery.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	 "Don't hold it back more than before, increase its strength. As I mentioned earlier.
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	 "If you see the joint becomes worse and still not improving then seek help immediately.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	 "Always gently heat up the dressing whenever you dress it and every time it becomes sore or burns a bit.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	 Because of this injury to the member, it is painful for the patient when they move it in any way, and they suffer greatly from restoring the limb.
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 It is bad, and if there are many wounds then it causes great pain, and I will do nothing else but remove the limb directly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	 "of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	 There are various types of injuries with different causes,
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	 because there are fractures caused by blows from a sword, and collarbones that break through the bone to where it is below the shoulder, if they have done much or few;
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 And for this injury of breaking the "collarbone
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	 Or they may have broken the bone from an external blow to the shoulder, and it is called a complete break;
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	 There are large and small injuries with this type of fracture
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	 "And if there is a blow from the side, or from behind, against the heel of the foot, or in any other manner.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	 "And if there is a fracture that occurs in the skin over the bone or under it, and the resulting wound can be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	 And if there is a fracture that has been put into the bone in such a small place as to be called "clavicular,
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	 and if the injury was made by a blow to the bone or by a sharp object, or in any similar way, and it enters into the bone, and you hold onto them as tightly as when you put on your gloves.
si entre li piere dedens.	 If between the bones
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	 and if they have more swelling in their arms or legs compared to when as an infant.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	 and the bone breaks into pieces, which heal quickly as soon as they are separated.
et je em parlerai en son leu.	 And I will speak to him in his native language.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	 And we know all the ways of fractures by dragging them back to their place, and through the questioning that is there; and through the cutting that is done with it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	 Capillary fracture occurs when one uncovers the bone, and feels for any break inside of it, if there is one black one.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	 In the treatment of a fracture: be cautious when handling any broken bone; if you see a serious accident such as vomiting or loss of consciousness, immediately seek medical attention and call for help; the eyes should stay still until the healing is complete and the wounds are healed.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	 And if you do not see a serious accident happen, but seek immediate medical attention anyway as treatment begins.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	 And when the limb is first dislocated and continues to be so after repositioning it as necessary, you should hold the bone firmly in place while applying the fourth splint.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	 And if you apply the seventh splint but it is displaced again, be sure to hold it firmly in place while seeking medical attention as there could still be an accident that we mentioned earlier.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	 And if the bone fractures come out when you pull off their clothes; if it is convenient for you to hold onto the separated part.
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	 And when you find the cause of the swelling in all its forms that you know, put ice to it, and dress the wound more gently than usual, and be careful not to damage any other part as a result.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	 And keep applying ice until the pain subsides, and then you can move on with treating it
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	 Then start to open up the wound in any of these ways
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 One way is to make a narrow slit directly before it, which would be this form
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	 And then comes another thing more great than this one
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	 The second way is to cut out a number of pieces, some narrow and some broad, with points if you have them, so they are made of iron.
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	 Gently applying ice, make sure not to damage the wound.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	 "And the joints are stiff and painful. If you gently press on them with your fingers, make sure not to cross over their center, otherwise they will not move.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	 "It's important to have more than one way of testing the joint, for example if you apply pressure on it from different sides.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	 "One method is pressing gently from both sides; another method is applying pressure with your fingers. The third method involves tapping or striking against something hard.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	 "The quality of testing the joint is that you hold it and then release your fingers. The joint should move when released.
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	 "After releasing the joint for a moment and then hold it again gently. Do this until you see the space between your fingers where the joint is located, and do it more subtly if possible, smoothly.
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	 "And remember to avoid touching either the forehead or the side of the face.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	 "When the arm is dislocated and twisted, it should be reset gently using an instrument similar to one used for cutting but with more gentle and subtle movements.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	 "If nothing comes out of the wrist bones or fingers, gently remove any surrounding tissue if it is necessary to do so.
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 After treating and cleansing wounds as we have previously described.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	 "Another way to perform surgery is when a patient becomes sicker, which is more dangerous.
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	 "And the last method of treatment is very harsh and not recommended by anyone.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	 "It is first advisable to cut off a portion of the bone and let it heal if the fracture appears immediately. If after discovering that part you find the need for a longitudinal incision in addition.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	 "Do not bend either side or arm at a sharp angle if it causes the dislocation to occur in the shoulder.
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	 "After applying gentle pressure on a small area of skin where the bone is exposed, you must gently hold onto it so that it does not move.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 "The pain will lessen over time if applied gently because the bone is held in place and prevents movement, causing less discomfort.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	 "The bone cracks should only be treated externally and through gentle pressure, allowing the fracture to heal naturally over time as much as possible, considering its location and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	 "If you have a large fracture or one that is more delicate, do not stop applying gentle pressure as long as it remains comfortable.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	 "For other hairstyles and subtle breaks, make sure you adjust their direction accordingly;
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	 "And this is the advice of one who has mastered his craft.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	 "And if the abscess is opened, make sure you apply a dressing soaked in oil and gently press it against the wound;
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	 "Then apply another bandage with two or three layers, moistened in vinegar and oil, and place it over the first dressing;
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	 And do this more gently than before, so that you don't hurt the patient as much as possible.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	 And let it heal for as long as the abscess is open, and then gently remove it, and administer medicines if necessary.
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	 And from these things make powder, and put on the wound, and apply other medicines for killing the infection.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	 And keep the wound clean, do not let it open up again, and don't leave it exposed to flies, because when flies gather on the cloth around the heart, they spread disease and cause great harm.
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 Because when you put on a bitter substance, be prepared for pain.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	 When a wound occurs on any part of the body, whether it is small or large, if it seems doubtful, there will be doubt and fear.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	 And the pain will lessen only by the medication put on, and its value has decreased if you add a part of honey, and three parts of oil, spread it all over the wound.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "The method of treatment is such that it may vary depending on various factors.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	 "The veins are not easily broken when only one of them is cut, since they are two parts;
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	 "Their walls are thin and do not break easily, unless they are torn or bent.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	 "If one of the two parts is broken, if it's convenient to cut both or straighten them out so that they are aligned with their natural shape according to their figure;
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 "And do this lightly and carefully as the pain will not come from here.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	 "And [the patient's] arms become powerless to move it if it is in the part below his eyes and cannot come out of place, as long as you gently touch its head with a little bit of force.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	 "If both parts are broken, if you cannot fix it right away and need to restore the first joint, then do so.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 "After the ninth or tenth incision, when the abscess is healed and the wounds are dressed, then cut through both of them with a knife.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	 "Or you break another bone,
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	 And the fractures will be so large that they fill both ends of your body
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 "No recovery could be expected; and one joint would die.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	 I believe this is best done with wet bandages and a mixture of flour powder.
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 And leave the bandage in place as long as they are fresh, until the bruising subsides.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	 And do not ever remove the bandage in place of fresh ones, and if they burn your skin instead, hold tight to it, cover your face with it.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	 If you make a mistake
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	 And when you take the pulse or put cold water on it to cool down, or in case of a burn, do not touch it with your hands unless necessary
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	 And after that bind with small stitches lightly, and do not tie the corners too tight.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	 And the fractures will be small and broken into smaller pieces if they are to heal properly, then mend it with bandages or glue, and when you finish stitching things together, let it dry.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if he has no such pain, then let him take the cure and hold tight to his nails, as long as they are healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	 of opening the mouth
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	 When the mouth is opened without any injury occurring inside, and it does not cause a tear in two halves only, but instead it breaks as easily if one applies force gently.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	 If there is a fracture in the right arm, you should bite your thumb with your left hand.
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	 If the fracture is in the front of the jaw, bite your right thumb with your left hand and hold it lightly while you use the other hand to straighten it out gently, and then apply ice to the other hand for relief.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	 And if the tear in the jaw occurs twice, then it is advisable to stretch two parts as long as possible until they are well healed.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	 And if it is moving or rolling due to a broken tooth or wire of gold, silver, or silk, place the broken bone in a double bandage and put on the affected jaw.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	 And place the bandage securely in one piece or with some leather long and wide along the jawline, keeping it tight so he rests on it, commanding him to lay off any heavy foods and light meals only.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	 And if you notice that the limb changes shape as it is dislocated, then reset to its original position.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	 and apply plaster soaked in flour or bran meal after you have heated the cautery.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	 and apply a light plaster to hold the eye steady, and leave it in place as long as possible.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	 It is done every third time.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	 "And if you have already tried what we've mentioned many times before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	 And if there is a broken bone or wound, take one small piece of the bone and treat it immediately.
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	 If subtlety of the illness is common to this ailment
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	 "If the wound is severe, burn off any remaining flesh as necessary.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "When you have treated all these pieces and there is no more bleeding, if the wound is severe, apply some conventional remedies as necessary to stop any further bleeding.
de la forcele	 from the fire
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	 The fracture often occurs in the shoulder and can happen three times.
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	 Or if it is broken and severe enough to require surgery, then it requires more serious treatment
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	 "It has a fracture with an injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	 When there is a fracture combined with an injury, you must take more measures, as the broken arm may require additional support.
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	 and spread it towards the affected part
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	 Then place the fracture on your back if necessary, so that its shape is as straight as possible and does not appear bent.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	 If you need to treat it further, wrap the shoulder in a bandage tightly enough that when extended, it makes contact with the wall or floor and is large enough according to your needs.
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And gently press against the affected part while keeping it steady in your hand if you place the fracture there and as necessary.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	 And if you are unable to reduce the swelling on your own due to its severity, it is recommended that a healthcare professional applies pressure at both ends of the shoulder blade area and wraps them securely with bandages so as to immobilize the shoulder blade in order to prevent further injury from occurring.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	 Then fix the fracture to both sides, so that when loose, it stays in its position;
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	 "Keep them loose and they won't come together. If one of the incisions is bleeding, stop using it.
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	 "If you drop the tool while using it, use a towel to soak up any blood:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	 "Use the size of a spoon and don't forget to wipe it clean, using as much cloth as you need depending on the size of your wound and how much blood there is.
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	 "If the dislocation occurs like you see it and is large or small depending on how deep your wound was when you treated the bone.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 "When you're resetting the dislocation and it is small or if there are doubts about the dislocation, apply a bandage and try to stabilize it, depending on its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	 "After you have stitched him up, if he is still in pain after applying oil and ice, and it feels hot when touched, make sure to put a bandage on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	 "When resetting the bone, when there are wounds and how large they are, you put a powder mill in it and any other type of powder, then put light bandages on top, and place one or two sheets over that to make sure nothing else touches it.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	 After applying a very wide strip of adhesive tape over their mouth, you gently place it over their nose as well.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	 Then take a very thin strip of adhesive tape that is three inches wide and long, and gently apply it over the mouth.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	 And place the strip over their nose, turn it under their chin and gently hold both ends tight.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	 And release the other end of the strip when you see that their lips are loose and can no longer hold it, at which point you will clearly see that the strip is not moving off of the bone if released.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	 And hold tightly to their side as they lie down on a small pillow placed under the shoulder, to raise and support their arm.
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	 When the biceps is strained through the shoulder's joint or if you tie it tightly around the arm, and then release your grip without causing any harm to yourself, that should prevent a sprain from occurring.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	 Next, hold the elbow and release it gently as long as it is healed.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 It should be restored in about 28 days, or less than that depending on the situation.
de la brisure de l’espaule	 dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	 When the shoulder breaks or becomes dislocated, and not by any other means
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	 If you follow the shape of the dislocation and align it with its natural form in all ways that you can do.
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	 Then apply some powder from a mill mixed with a bit of water, gently and in layers, covering the affected area double.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	 "Then stretch the arm as far as possible along and above the shoulder, hold it in that position for a moment longer,
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	 "Then firmly hold the arm still as can be done, so that it does not move from its place and look at your wrist.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	 "Repeat as many times as needed, firmly holding it and placing the arm at a spot just above its shoulder, feeling for the wrist.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	 The shoulder is rested after 20 or 25 repetitions.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 "And when the exercise is completed, slowly release and allow it to move again.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	 "And when the arm bone protrudes forward and touches one of its ends against a wall or surface,
de la brisure dou pis	 "from both sides
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	 "The shoulder will not dislocate in a relaxed state but may slightly separate with movement.
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 It breaks easily when it is forced to move.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 "And when it is broken into two parts,
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	 And after you have restored the dislocation as it is between its two bones, place your hands gently on both sides of the joint and carefully apply pressure evenly until the bone alignment is correct.
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	 Then apply an ice pack and wrap it tightly with a bandage to immobilize the joint if necessary.
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	 Then firmly put your hand back on the joint again and hold it still until you are ready to release.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	 And if it is advisable to further drain the pus or urine that has come from wounds, or pain or abscess, as you may need, and drain this whatever came from methods of treatment.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then release it gently holding still until the joint is stable again.
de la brisure des costes	 of the costal ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	 The patient's veins will not be pricked at their base and instead of piercing the vein, you should aim for areas that are hollowed out after the shoulder.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	 And remember to inspect it carefully.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And if someone breaks a rib when performing the procedure as described, then that would be appropriate.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 Then place it on fire and hold tightly with an eyelid closed until you are done
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	 If the veins are declining and the patient experiences severe pain and discomfort as a result of this, then they should lose consciousness.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	 They will be experiencing pain and suffering, and it can lead to great injury
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	 And if someone says that the procedure involves administering foods which will burn fat and release the rib; it should be performed after warming up.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	 "We are not afraid of this, as long as we have no doubts or fears.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	 If there is doubt and fear, many die.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	 They won't have any use for the veins because they become infected and similar things.
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	 In all cases, there is doubt that the vein will not be able to withstand the strength of the infection.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	 And they say that no one should cover the vein with oil or any other liquid substance; rather, you must apply cold compresses between the hands to numb them and then treat for swelling of the veins, meat, and other injuries.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	 And if the patient experiences great pain that they cannot bear through their own strength and there is doubt in breaking into the vein from beneath it, then you should use external instruments to prevent this.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And when the bone must be cut and treated gently if it is large, and then apply plasters as long as it's healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	 "And when the arrow hits the skin, if you wrap in oiled linen and put a bandage on top.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And when it comes to the treatment of this arrow wound, do so as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure dou col	 From the phrase "the break of the neck" (which in Old
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	 "There will be a break in the joint if the bones are pulled apart.
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	 "And also for dislocations of this type.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And if there is no fracture and you are unsure whether it will be fatal or not, then gently touch them with a needle to see
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 The patient is very likely to die from this situation and if the wounds are not treated quickly it can lead to death
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	 "And for dislocations of this type, you will know whether it is healthy or not. If the limbs are paralyzed and the accident occurs in both hands, and the dislocation is causing pain or injury, then try to hold them steady with support.
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 And when one has fallen from its place within the belly, if it suddenly goes out,
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 "And when he moves his legs and wants to sit up
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	 It is fatal
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 If they do not work in their treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	 And if an accident occurs and it is a light matter
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	 And if the cure is to apply it to the abscess and pierce or burn fat or oil of vinegar on the eyelid until it is healed.
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	 Then put on soothing unguents and lotions, bind with lint, and command to the patient to rest
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	 And do not sleep in that part where it feels pain until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	 If any of the eyes turn aside, then cover them with gauze.
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And tie the eyelid and put on a stitch if it is large, then treat it with a hot compress until it is healed.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	 "The shoulder dislocation occurs when the joint moves out of place, and it is called 'shoulder dislocation.' To treat this injury, hold onto your hand with the injured arm in front, put the other arm around to support you, then cross over them both.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 "You must hold it in place, and if it is dislocated by injury or surgery, fix it, and then treat the wound while it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	 The break of the arm bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	 "When the arm is dislocated, there may be some pain at first.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	 "And then hold it firmly and gently, to reduce the pain in the arm, swelling, and prevent further injury.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	 "The reset is done when you have your hand supporting yourself while holding it in place through a brace.
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	 "Identify the dislocation and its location.
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	 "The dislocation occurs at its primary site when the bones of the joint are moved significantly.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	 If the bone breaks twice and declines towards the belly if you press on it with your abdomen; until the healing of these breaks is complete.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	 "When you have reset the dislocation back into its proper place and hold it tightly with a splint or brace to prevent further movement.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	 "Apply ice packs to the affected area while keeping it immobilized to reduce swelling.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	 "And tell the patient to lie on their back or side.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	 "Hold tightly onto your arm or leg when dislocated so as not to cause further injury and immobilize it while you wait for medical assistance.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	 "Then come back to restoration and hold tightly as necessary, without any further accidents occurring.
et c’est li maniere.	 "And that is how it should be done.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	 "The dislocation of the shoulder.
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	 "The doctors' method is when the dislocation occurs in between the shoulder blade and the head of the shoulder, or if it is dislocated; then you must restore according to one of these two ways:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	 One is to take care of your knees, like this fashion:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	 And keep the second joint straight and bent upward, and if you prick it with a needle.
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	 Then the patient should squeeze both fists tightly for as long as they ache, and hold back any movement or sensation in their fingertips.
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	 Then the patient should open their eyes wide while holding both fists together as long as the headache returns.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	 And another way it is that one takes the arrow from its head and ties it to his hand, then commands two servants each to hold tight what is on fire with their hands, and others tightly at everything else as well, and stretches them all at once.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 And if the extraction is more painful, it restrains them from moving when over the fire, and under the fire, and stretches all of the ministers to their parts.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	 And if the dislocation is caused by a blow to the shoulder, you should hold it down while moving your other arm downward.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	 And if it is toward the side, you should gently move the arm away from that direction while keeping your other hand still and holding onto the shoulder.
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 "Hold tight to any broken bone if necessary, and make sure it stays still.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	 "And hold it steady until the bone is properly aligned.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	 "Then hold it firmly while realigning the bone if necessary, and place your hand on the shoulder or chest.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	 "And hold it tightly while holding the shoulder and arms in place to ensure that nothing moves during this process.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	 "And if you doubt that nothing moves during this process, apply a larger and stronger bandage to the broken bone, between two other bones on either side of it, or one bone is enough if needed. And make sure not to cover any parts beyond the shoulder.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	 After restraining the eyelids as I instructed at the beginning of this chapter while exposing the patient to a strong breeze, firmer and less gently.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	 And if you see the eyelids moving and the closing of them as instructed earlier, in which case you should hold tightly to the arm while keeping your eyes steady until they are closed.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 Then look at the other three joints linked together; if any of them loosen up and do not hold tight anymore to the arm or they stop coming closer to the limb because it is too stiff,
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 If you have been given instructions to do something specific, like "Do this," or "Follow these steps.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	 And if no such accidents occur and they loosen up after the third joint or more, then let their eyelids rest on their back, and hold their hands on their stomach;
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	 And if you see that the arm joint loosens up and the figure of the member moves or becomes stiffened,
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	 "Having applied virtue of medicine, I shall order that the meat be made as tender as we have prepared it in such a way that it is well cooked through.
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 And when he comes to remove (it), if it is large.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	 It is custom that the shoulder and arm should be taken out in one piece as a whole.
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 And once it has been removed, you must suture (stitches) it and administer water and remedies for the affected area.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 And if you have been given instructions to reset the dislocation only once or twice months:
de la brisure du bras	 of the arm's fracture
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	 The arm is composed of two bones: one of which we call the humerus bone as it's at the top and the elbow.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	 The other bone is large, and that one is the radius bone on the lower arm.
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	 Because only the humerus breaks alone or in two pieces, depending on where it breaks.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	 If the humerus bone breaks into smaller pieces, the restoration is light and healing occurs quickly.
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 And when large joints are dislocated, if it is a severe dislocation, then there will be more pain than when smaller joints were dislocated together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 When only the short bone breaks off, if it is convenient to stretch gently and put an ice pack on it.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	 And in case of a large fracture, if stronger traction should be applied
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	 And the hands should be raised higher than others and pulled closer to the head, so that they do not lower themselves further down.
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 Then extend both arms outward from the body toward their sides or to one another and other ministers towards others in that way.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 And then place a bandage on each of the eyes gently
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	 If the break occurs in half, if it is to the left side of the body and causes pain that makes you want to go and touch it with your finger, do not try to restore it back into place by force, but wait until it has healed over time as we have advised before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	 And I heard about this cure mentioned by the single practitioner.
si pren la cure.	 Take the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	 And when starting the restoration method is applied by the practitioner with a cotton bandage soaked in rose oil and beeswax wax that is neither too soft nor too hard.
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 "And if you gently pull on it while keeping them steady, as long as they are still able to stay.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	 And then apply the fire cautery with a powder mill mixed with some oil, put on the eyelids and let it dry until it is stiff, so that the eyelashes are bigger than before, slightly larger than others.
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	 And if he has six eyes or arms in greater numbers
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	 whether the eyelid is on one of the bones, or two.
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	 and hold it steady more than in another place, and less when gently applied as I stated at the beginning of this chapter.
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	 And make sure the eyelids are soft and wet, and not too dry or too tight.
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 and those hairs that are restrained should be neither too thick nor too thin as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 After removing any loose member after a certain period of time.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	 And if any swelling occurs on the limb, whether due to itching or otherwise, you should warm up that limb as much as possible until the swelling subsides.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 Let the limb rest in a comfortable position.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 After the extraction, hold tightly onto the member and support its alignment as much as possible; and similar things if necessary.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	 And if the member cannot come out of place due to its stiffness, then you must gently stretch it and let it go back into place, and hold onto it tightly once more after that.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 And of these things we have mentioned do not come to harm the member, unless they are applied at certain times.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	 If he is restless or wriggles his arms and legs, put both hands on the chest (sternum), hold them steady and try to calm him down.
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 The remedy is restored every 3 days or every 5 days depending on the composition and complexion of the virtues being treated.
de la brisure de la main	 "The break of the arm
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	 The hand is swollen on both sides and if you try to straighten it again, there will be no relief but rather more frequent breaks.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	 And if a finger breaks or swells, make sure to hold it steady and treat it immediately in front of the patient.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	 Then place your hand on a flat surface (table or board) and extend both fingers out.
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	 And then apply the plaster and straps, put on a bandage accordingly to how much of your body is affected by it.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	 "And if you prick it with a needle.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	 "And if it breaks through to the belly of the body, when you prick it with a needle, and command the patient to grip tightly on his broken part.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	 "Then bind it with a long bandage, and if the blood flow is severe like that of an arm, and hold tightly until necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	 And tie the right hand to his left
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	 "And if it comes out through any or both of the wounds, tie it securely when you put it in to stop it.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	 "And hold tight with your hand, and if you see a small bandage right away to cover the wound, don't let it move.
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	 "And if there are two wounds, if you put the bandage over one or the other, and tie with both hands that come after.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	 "And hold it steady there, or if you put a strap on it as needed.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	 And fix the dislocation and reposition the arm bone as needed, and care for whatever comes next, just as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	 Of the vein is broken
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	 The ears of the hawk often break off, and well it shows when they turn in front or back.
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	 And the restoration is done by removing the bandage if necessary, and another way as needed.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	 The arrows go through his arm, extending close to their base on each side;
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	 It is when the fracture occurs in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 And if they prick at their base, hold the eye steady so it does not move until it grows.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	 And if it comes from within the bone itself, and whether it comes directly from inside or outside of it, then its extension is downward.
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 Then hold the arm bone steady with both hands as much as it is naturally shaped and then attach the bandage, tying securely so that nothing moves.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	 "And if it is on an abscess, if you let it heal first, then come back to your treatment.
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	 The loosening must be done in one manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	 It is recommended that you loosen the strap and knee brace in one or two turns of three to four, then repeat this process for as long as the toes wiggle at the base of the nail.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	 Then loosen the leg and knee brace, then put on a splint on the shin bone.
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	 Then use the gauze to wrap around from the knee to the ankle to put on the splint, then start tightening it with three or four turns on the brace.
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	 And as you tighten the brace further and further, loosen its tightness.
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	 When the dislocation of the upper arm occurs between the elbow and shoulder joint, proceed to isolate the affected area by checking it separately.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 If he does not move from its place after restraint, then let it be alone, do not disturb him with any other movement except for medical examination.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	 If he occurs as mentioned before, if the dislocation takes place and you follow what has been previously said:
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	 And if it causes pain in the bones when necessary, then do so.
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	 If you cannot do otherwise, and consider breaking or cutting into bone as needed.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	 And treat it with what has been previously said, regardless of its severity.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	 Never let the dislocation occur in a way that causes damage to the elbow or shoulder joint.
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	 In restoration of dislocation, all movements cease immediately.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	 And joints that have been restored will vary in their recovery depending on how much or little they have moved before the restoration is made.
de la ruelle dou genoil	 from the wheel of birth
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 If there are fractures in the road to birth, it often happens frequently.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 And if she is broken, just as in the case of a fracture, or torn, and has many wounds, all wounds, with much pain.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	 The restoration must be done with utmost care and attention while ensuring the patient's two limbs remain still until it is complete.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	 Then apply the plaster and secure it well with bandages so that you hold tightly while ensuring all precautions we have taken are still in place, as stated previously.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If an injury occurs which requires attention, continue holding the patient's limb until necessary.
de la brisure de la jambe	 "Broken leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	 The right leg has two bones called the tibia and fibula;
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 When the right leg has two bones broken like those in the arm and throughout the rest of the body; or when both lower leg bones are broken simultaneously on one side.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	 "If the smaller bones are also broken, then you should pay attention to them first.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	 "And if their big bone is broken, there will be great pain, and they see it well.
et torne desoz.	 And then the end of
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	 After treatment, straighten the joint while keeping them gently aligned;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	 but at all times, it is necessary to make sure there are no fractures or wounds, and the stretching should be gentler.
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 And let it rest according to its nature.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	 And when you have completed your task, if there are two wounds that pain the leg from one side to the other and stretch right up to the bone itself.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	 Then straighten the joint as well and hold it so that it does not collapse to one side or the other, making sure the leg remains stable.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	 And no treatment should be administered to the end of the leg itself, and you must prevent any movement in it, making sure that when there is a fracture or wound.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	 And remove any broken limb from view to avoid further injury.
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 until it is healed
de la brisure des os dou piet	 "The breakage of both arms
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	 The arm joint does not break, but the other two joints never break and rarely do so, unless there are more serious conditions present.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	 And if a bone breaks while doing the procedure and you see one of them moving on its own, stop immediately, press it back down to where they should be, then release their tension once their movements slow down.
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	 Then apply the plaster and straps to prevent movement of the abdomen, with a little belt at waist level two fingers' width apart, then hold it in place tightly before removing any more dressings or other things you have applied.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	 And once three or four joints are passed, if one of them goes bad because it has already broken and is misaligned, then you will find the bones are broken, either by themselves breaking off or from being pulled out.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	 And if there are two broken bones, and they are restored but one is still moving, exactly like we said for both hands.
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	 Then apply an elbow support at the length of both bones and a little more width across it, then hold it in place tightly.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	 "If there are two or three, or more, breaks it off at the first sign of weakness, so that one part does not interfere with another.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	 "If it is in the belly button area and it's very sensitive.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	 "And make sure you only break up other things that I mentioned before, just like what we have already said.
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	 "If there is an accident and it should be treated accordingly.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	 bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	 "When the body of the female patient is dislocated due to the natural course, if she wants to straighten it out and align it with her back, hold it by the lower part.
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	 "Then, place the body of the female patient on a board as flat as possible and make sure there is no movement at all.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	 "Then gently lower the female patient and support her back gently while supporting each other's arms until she returns to her natural position.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	 "And when it is sicker, if the blood flows strongly, and when it has sicked, she resets herself, and in every place there are seven joints or entrances:
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	 "If the stroke is restored, and you see it, take a vessel of medicine, apply it to the wound with a bandage, and put all the medicine into its natural state:
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	 "Then blow gently on the wound while the vessel is closed:
la nature si revenra li brisure;	 "The nature will restore the stroke if it has been good enough:
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "Then wrap in cotton and leave it undisturbed until its safe to remove:
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	 "And if the arm or leg is dislocated, as it happens in the treatment of a sprain, then you know how to treat it:
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 "These dislocations are hidden from one who has not studied medicine and its practice, and does not know my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	 For dislocations to occur means there is a disturbance of the joint, which prevents it from returning to its normal position.
enten le donques.	 And therefore
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	 In a fall, when the arm is broken, take a strip of cloth and bind it around the break.
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	 Then wrap it with strips of cloth tightly, leaving enough room for movement in case there is any, and he will be saved from such an injury.
de brisure avec plaie	 For breaks accompanied by wounds
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	 It is advisable for those who have a break with wounds to be healthy now, if the remedies we have said prove effective.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 And if the wound is healthy but there's nothing else to treat it, then resume treating the dislocation in the same way as before, or at any other time
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	 And if the joint is corrected gently with care as soon as it becomes calm and still, so that no further injury occurs or damage to the limb, for fear of a bad accident occurring
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	 And if you break it gently and carefully when you feel that the joint is loose but not yet detached from its surroundings, then you should gently remove it using short extensions.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	 And do not leave the extensions to move around when putting it in your hands if the instrument that is used for fire has seven or eight holes and its length is proportional to the size of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	 but for this one it is better to apply three or four times according to the size of the wound, depending on which one has been applied in the treatment.
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	 And if there is not enough, he will not be able to compress the limb against its place, and may fall forward or backward depending on that.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	 And the dislocation is called "Palinch," because when it occurs, there should be a fracture at or near the end of the affected bone.
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 Once the dislocation occurs, it will continue to happen repeatedly and affect both sides.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 And if it is a slight dislocation and the bone cannot be easily taken hold of as you try to grip the joint, then until the muscle strength has returned that should suffice.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	 And if the bone cannot be restored as we have stated, then you may incision or traction to correct it.
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	 Then proceed with a procedure that involves breaking and closing of the bone.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 Once the joint has been re-aligned and there is no more pain afterwards it is back to its normal state of operation.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	 If it is in its place, then soak it in black vinegar solution for a while and properly clean the area.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	 And do not apply anything other than vinegar or oil to the wound as it will only bring contamination and damage.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	 After you have restored the bone and expose the wound, cover it completely with a layer of gauze based on its size, making sure there is no restriction due to the fracture.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	 And many times have this occurred, and they brought death or harm to others on several occasions.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 And so the injuries of others may also be more severe.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	 And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that an accident has occurred as we have said, and you feel pain at your site where it should be treated;
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 But to prevent this, instead of the above, use a hard bandage and bind them tightly.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And when you see after the first or second attempt to stop bleeding has not been successful if everything else that you have tried is exhausted and it's time for tetanus treatment; if it's time to start tetanuses treatment and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	 And you should massage the limb twice a day morning and evening as long as it is swollen and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	 And make sure to apply the limb in such a way that the bandage fits tightly but not too tight, allowing for comfortable movement of the limbs.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	 And after each swelling continues and it cannot hold but relaxes in and out with the bandage if there are small stones causing pain as you want to treat the wound all these pieces need to be cleaned so that they do not bring more pain
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And a fistula comes to light, or another manner of corruption, if you treat it according to what you did in your previous chapter
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	 And when the bone is broken and opened up to the limb or shoulder, as with the elbow joint or other large joints, if it does not heal itself, because many times comes death, but leave it as long as it resists.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	 By chance this may happen after 20 days or more, then treat the wound if you can;
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 And you must leave if it lets go
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	 Of those who come from the disorder
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	 After experiencing pain due to frostbite, especially close to the joints, and damage is visible on one or both limbs.
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	 And as a result they are unable to move their extremities normally.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	 If you know what it means
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	 If the patient is prescribed specific medications, such as ointments containing camphor, incense, and myrrh, or sarcoline, aloe vera, or similar substances, if you do not have any of these substances, or all together, mix them with a small amount of alcohol or oil.
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	 And put it on the nose in drops, and hold steady, do not let go until you see improvement.
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	 And repeat this process as needed, until the symptoms subside.
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	 "You must hold tightly to a well-made piece of rope.
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	 "If you let go of the rope, it will cause all the joints in your body to dislocate.
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	 "And if one dislocation occurs more severely than the others, it is best to seek medical attention.
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 "You should hold on tightly until relief comes, whether from a sharp pain or a dull one.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	 after the dislocation
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	 "Once the bone is reset and after treating any fragile and sensitive parts of your body, if necessary:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	 "If one joint is held too tightly or not properly, it may cause damage to the joint.
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	 "Or if there were too many people trying to touch your body parts and they couldn't come back together.
ou por multitude d’arosement;	 "Or for excessive friction.
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	 "Or if too much movement occurs, do not let him move at all.
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	 "And for when the patient has little strength in their arm/hand, they are weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	 "Treat them so that you gently massage the affected area and make the body relax as much as possible.
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	 "Give them a bath to soften the skin and remove impurities.
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	 "Then apply cold compress on the affected area if there is much swelling and the pain worsens until the swelling recedes to the member.
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	 "Then return to their natural position.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	 After a torn muscle
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	 "After the restoration of a joint and you break the ice with fresh water to massage it gently, but be sure that no part moves.
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	 "Don't believe everything you hear about breaking the member in new ways and many people do this everywhere.
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	 And its effects are severe, and from there on come great harm.
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	 Wherever there is a burning pain or soft herbs are cooked, if the veins and roots of the body are done with, then all the tortures cease.
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	 And the soothing salve is beneficial if well done, and you take the bruising from veins, and cook with bacon fat or oil of sesame, and make a salve then.
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	 Or if you use figs, and grind them with fine flour, and some medicines that calm the inflammation quickly.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 And never let the dislocation continue and repeat for an extended period with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 And if you observe that it is moving again, stop immediately.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	 And the tortures are relieved and eased, as with stones, and needs to be treated with fire if it is necessary to cut through very finely.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	 And apply a soothing ointment, and study in treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	 "In this chapter...
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	 "... are caused by the dislocation of a joint that prevents it from moving and causes misalignment in the limb.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	 "When there is no solution for this type of dislocation, you should try to realign its position gently.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	 "When tied, if it gets loose, then when they try to loosen it up, there will be some pain at the joint.
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	 "Because of this, you should avoid moving your arm while it is bound:
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	 "It often brings on pain and other injuries;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	 "In every case where this happens, when you make a wound by the abscess, then let it rest while the pain subsides;
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 "Then gently move your arm back into place and apply a compress to the wound when it arrives in its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	 "I ordered the physicians to check for any dislocations, including those of the shoulder.
des mandibules	 jaw
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	 "Occasionally the jaw may be dislocated as well, with similar treatment:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	 "Or if they are somewhat loose in their joints, and softens a little;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	 "Or if they are completely dislocated and pressed against their palate, then the saliva cannot hold them closed, they cannot close their mouth, and lift their tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	 When a dislocation is small, there are repeated attempts to correct or reset it.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	 And if it is complete and perfect, you must reset its position gently without causing any harm.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	 And in this manner you can gently touch the base of the dislocated jawbone with one hand near its root while pulling on the other side to dislocate it.
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	 The other two hands should be free for support and balance.
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 Instruct the patient to gently stretch his jaw muscles, and move them around in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	 "And he shall make his limbs equal to what they lose
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	 And while holding it tightly, make sure the two jaw muscles are aligned well if there is enough heat and oil to lubricate them gently.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	 Do not cause any harm when removing or resetting it as we have advised.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	 And when the jaw is reset gently and securely, if you lubricate the lips with honey, oil, or candle wax then wrap it loosely to make sure it does not move.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	 "Let the hairs on his arms grow long and even. If he pricks at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 "Continue to instruct him gently and do not force his mouth open with a needle or thread, as long as his jaw is well closed.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	 "And the two lower jawbones cannot be reset to their original position within an hour, and they are bent towards each other's lower jaws if there is a feverish state or accustomedness, and through adventure vomiting and purging.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	 "When you see this, know that it is a mistake.
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	 Many times will die those who have this misfortune, in eight days
de la forcelle	 The shackles
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	 Chains cannot be released due to the density of its contents and difficulty in doing so; it is never released by fire, but one can feel how strong it is.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	 The restoration is when the hairs on his arms grow smooth and extend his arms.
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	 Press down firmly with your hand at its base, and it will return to normal position.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	 Then put on the bandage and hold tight.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	 And when the dislocation occurs from below downward, it cannot be reduced.
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	 No, and if it dislocates repeatedly even after resetting in its original place as we have said earlier.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	 After the splint and bandage are applied, hold steady so that they stay in place.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 And then you must reset the shoulder dislocation when it has been pulled from its socket.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	 "The dislocation of the shoulder.
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	 It will not be dislocated if done in three ways
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	 One way is to dislocate it from the upper part of the arm downward.
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	 The second way is at the lower part.
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	 And if it dislocates to this last part and there is still movement,
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	 you may not recline your head or neck.
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	 And every time it dislocates, immediately goes towards the shoulder.
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 When there is enough strength, it pops straight back to its place.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	 "And sometimes there may be a concussion or fracture of the shoulder blade, and it becomes dislocated due to this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	 It's important that you reset as often as necessary until you are certain.
et adonques encomence la cure.	 And when the treatment is complete.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	 It indicates that the dislocation occurred when it moves towards the shoulder and contrasts with a healthy one.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	 And you will find the dislocation at the head of the shoulder and sometimes in the arm opposite it.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	 The dislocated part cannot bring its hand back to where it should be, or make any movement.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	 And if it is dislocated high up but not hidden, you will notice immediately at the shoulder.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 "This manner of dislocation cannot be restored once it occurs, unless there is an immediate relief from pain.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	 "The method involves gently massaging the sore area with your hand first, and then applying ice packs to reduce swelling in the affected area.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	 "Afterwards, they massage their hand lightly, and then wrap it in a cloth for warmth or support.
si venra hastanment.	 "If there is any improvement, continue with the method as prescribed.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	 "However, if no improvement occurs after several attempts and you wish to try a warm compress instead of ice packs.
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	 "Gentle and soothing massages can be performed with warm compresses made from herbs like chamomile or mallow.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	 "After massaging the sore area gently and soothingly, hold an ice pack to it for about ten minutes each time, not too hard or too soft, then wrap your hand around it and gently massage the shoulder joint.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	 And another minister of the same vein if it does not move away
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	 Now the arm returns completely and you will find yourself in this manner
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	 And if you do it properly, make sure that the arm is larger than the hairs;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	 And throw it away from the edge, and bring down the arm above the shoulder of the patient, and lightly lift at the top as the hairs begin to come off in that area.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 And another minister takes hold of the arm below the belly downward towards the belly
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 "And if it is too rigid to move at all, then the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	 And you can reset it in a different manner:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	 And if you do this properly, the joint should remain loose but not too soft or too stiff.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	 Then put it away from the arm as much as possible while still holding onto the skin and making sure the hairs are attached to the base of the shaft.
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	 The hand will stretch to another point, then return to its original position.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	 If this treatment does not succeed as we have described it
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 To straighten the arms of a great width and four inches in length, which have been bent at their ends towards each other as described in this way.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	 First hold the hand of one fist with the other fist so that the fist does not grasp around the bandage, then place it on the arm where the wound is.
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	 Extend one arm to the other fist and hold the elbow with it, then place the hand on top of the forearm. Place both arms on a board-like surface so they are extended away from each other.
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	 The joint will be reset now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	 In case the dislocation occurs on the right shoulder, first apply gentle pressure from below to try and reset it back into place; then gently massage the area with powder of molin (a type of coarse flour), along with incense and saffron, all over the shoulder and arm; repeat this process until the joint is repositioned correctly.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	 It is advisable to hold it gently as long as the limbs are comfortable because he will heal faster.
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	 And then move after three or seven days, it moves again;
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	 If the veins are firm and not relaxed, if there is swelling.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 If the dislocation is caused by moisture or any other reason, it may be necessary to apply heat using cautery at three points: where the joint is about to come loose (if moist), and on either side of the surgeon performing the cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	 If you do all this and it doesn't stay in place after seven days, the joint cannot be held up by the arms alone, because the nerve at the top of the shoulder is stretched or pulled tight.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	 And you will never see a dislocated joint go back into place on its own.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	 The dislocation that occurs in the hip, and the arms or back if it is forced by pushing down with both hands, and only another physician may assist.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And treat until swelling subsides.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	 After the healing process comes gentle stretching of the limb to prevent further dislocations as long as it is healed and returns to its original position
de la dislocation dou coute	 The treatment for a dislocation can be painful
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	 You will see that the dislocation is damaged in some way and there are repeated dislocations.
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	 And it will be torn apart from all sides, most commonly at the front and back, but they never go back together because you see them clearly and feel them.
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	 The arm/limb becomes misaligned causing great pain and injury to the patient.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 And when you join the fire with water, if it is seen immediately
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 The injury is severe and cannot be repaired; no damage was done to the shoulder.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	 It is important that you reset it as soon as possible because if it continues to dislocate frequently, the patient may face additional pain and injury.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	 And eventually if nothing can be done quickly enough at all times when it occurs behind somewhere else
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	 If there are other dislocations as well and they cause even greater pain, then in some cases the patient may die.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	 And if it is successful when done correctly you should hold onto its arm with both hands to ensure proper reattachment
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	 And the arms should be spread wide and both hands pressed tightly against it towards its head or back, or holding onto its base or root until it regains its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	 The dislocation is in front of you when it doubles its own hand and reaches for the palm's base which is inflamed.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	 If it does not return to its place after a strong stretch.
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	 And if you lift up your arm, and it doesn't move when extending.
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	 Then turn the arm in such a way that one sleeve is pulled over to cover the other shoulder.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	 And when you see that one side of the joint is stuck with oil preventing movement, then apply pressure to release it.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 And when you are at the top and apply a wet cloth on both sides of the wound, hold it in place, and put your arm over the affected area, and release gently.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	 And if the joint is firm at its top, you let go of it, and it releases on its own.
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	 And if you see that the joint is not working well, repeat the cloth and link it securely while holding firmly.
puis le deslie.	 Then remove
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	 After the removal of a joint and it stops moving, if the bone and muscle are very tight and pressing hard against each other.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	 Or you can apply a poultice of greasy wool over the joint and leave it on for one night then wash off the poultice after bathing.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	 And when you use it, tightly bind the joint with the poultice and leave it on, then wash off the poultice after bathing.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 You may apply it two or three times as long as they stay healthy.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	 If you see swelling with moist, smelly pus oozing out and the limb is becoming inflamed then tightly bind it immediately.
si revenra a sa disposition.	 It will return to its normal position.
li dislocation de la main	 "Dislocation of the arm
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	 The hand's joint is weaker and the recovery is light compared to other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	 "In any case, it's advisable to return the patient to their previous condition as soon as possible, either they are inflamed or if there is a wound.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	 "And if you put your hand on an abscess and extend it to the ministers of its length and make sure that you look for a vein beneath; until you see the appearance of a joint, then stop there.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	 "In any case, make sure they are well to their previous state;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 "Take the abscess with two fingers and stretch it out while pulling; as you reach for its length.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 The dislocation occurs at the back of the hand if they dislocate their shoulder blade, and puts their arm on the table and looks at its appearance from the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	 "Now that it's done correctly, it is well.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 "If not, if the vein ruptures and you feel pain when pressing on the artery, release your grip immediately.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	 "And if they cannot suffer it or do not let go of their previous state after a short time, then the dislocation is done.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	 "And do not move or touch the patient's hands while they are bound so that no harm can come to any part.
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	 "If it is broken and the artery is severed,
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 "if there's no other remedy than fire cautery, then nothing else remains.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	 When the hands are loose and if you put it on as we have instructed, then stretch it out gently for a while, loosen it up and let go of it afterwards.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it cannot move properly, but has no pain, and the skin is torn as soon as it becomes cold, and frostbite begins to form.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	 The dislocation of both arms
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	 "Do not ever bind the patient's hands to any part of their body,
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	 "until the joint is set properly and held in place, then hold it tightly with both hands towards where it should be aligned.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	 "then let go of one hand and put the other on,
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	 "and bind it gently as instructed, tying it securely with both hands.
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 "and do this until it is stable and safe to release the hand from around it.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 "And so on, when it is dislocated from another place.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	 The dislocation of both shoulders
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	 When the left and right shoulder or collarbones are dislocated, if there is no treatment available, then many die prematurely.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	 "And the signs show that it has become loose and cannot be held still, many times causing damage to one or more members (limbs) including the arms or legs.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	 "Many times, they are unable to straighten themselves back out.
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	 "the one that becomes loose at the back is called 'girbrosoise'.
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	 "The treatment consists in reattaching it, which must be done as soon as possible.
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 "There is no cure or healing for this.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	 "And those that come from beating, blows, or similar things, the old ways of treatment are given in great words, or there is no benefit at all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 "But I have explained it according to my intention, and formed the understanding through various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	 I say that when there is blood flow to the penis before it becomes erect, no one can sustain life.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	 And such things that come directly from the second rib and cannot be cured unless they are properly treated at the back as I say.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	 And that the veins should remain stiff on its left side and be restrained from moving when it is injured.
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	 Then fix the shoulder in place by tying it to something else and holding its base securely, and another one tightly, and anchor both of them well together with a rope or string.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	 And the minister should bind the right arm to the shoulder and the left arm tightly, among the two sleeves.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 And be well fixed as we have said and keep its hands stretched out with palms facing the sky until it is erect.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	 And if it does not come back by this cure, bind three long ropes around the arm and tie them off so they are even with each other, then place a board over the shoulder.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	 And hold tight to the other end of the board as it pulls back towards you.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 If that happens when turning the handle, let go and turn the handle again with your free hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	 And bind the other end of one arm's strap to another strap and keep them equal in length with a long finger.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	 And make sure the other end of that strap is firmly on the ground so it does not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	 And between the two straps tie a strap from one hand to another with a long finger so you can turn it.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 And then take the link that is among the axles towards one direction and the other towards the opposite direction, and each of these members takes their own turn around this link, as we have explained before
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And when it is healed, the incision will be made with a great deal of fire and then the ulcers, and then the extraction of a tablet of three days in length that purges the liver from its bile and the part of the healthy spine, and the link of one vein as we have explained before, until he stops moving;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	 And if nothing happens at the end of the healing, then it is necessary to administer soothing and stimulating medicines as we have mentioned before;
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	 And if nothing happens when a portion of flesh is cut off and no appearance appears behind the spine or in both places, then it should be checked for dislocations.
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	 "And this is what happens when one opens it without thinking:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 This would inevitably result in death.
des dislocations de la hainche	 "Dislocation of the arm
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	 Only dislocations of the arm and shoulder occur when someone opens them without thinking.
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	 And the dislocation of the arm is caused by two things.
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	 Dense and diffuse, in front and behind
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	 The denser the dislocation, the more severe it is in front or behind it.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	 And the knowledge of its dislocation is that when one combines a bad leg with a good arm, it is longer and more painful than the good limb alone.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 And it is the eye that is inflamed from above which causes the dislocation to occur.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	 "The sign of such an injury is that it usually happens unexpectedly.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	 And the sign of this person in front is that their leg is perfect according to completion.
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	 "In all cases where pain is severe and cannot be endured, he must hold still until the bleeding stops.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	 "The sign of such an injury is that it will not be able to extend its limb properly and can only move the arm opposite; the leg becomes more stiff than the other, and its muscles relax, and there are tears in the back from where the muscle was cut.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	 "The limbs of a dislocated shoulder can be reduced when they are correctly realigned and the joints return to their normal position without treatment.
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	 "It is not advisable that there should be any doubt.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	 "And in the case of a recent dislocation and such cases as these, if you promptly realign the joint, bind it securely with lint, and have it treated by a surgeon.
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	 "But otherwise there is no other treatment available.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	 "And if it does not come back this way, it is advisable to set the leg in two parts and hold them together with strong adhesive.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	 "And then he performs a slight twist on the fingers near his wrist.
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	 He then takes hold of the patient's forefinger.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 They extend upwards and downwards once until the finger is raised from the ground again, and then let go while it remains up in the air.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	 "This method of traction is commonly used if the dislocation has been repositioned already; that's correct.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	 If not, if there are no other treatments available for this condition.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	 Once the dislocation is corrected, if possible, you should fix it so that the shoulder blade comes back into alignment with the arm, then straighten the joint towards the force.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	 Then perform other treatments on his arms and bind the larger part of the dislocated arm to stretch it out in this way.
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	 If he returns to its place now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 This manner of dislocation is less severe than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	 If you do not press in this manner as we have advised, if it is advisable that you lock the big toe and little toes together, and also lock the big finger and small fingers together.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	 And hold the head of a fist in place while holding both arms down for long
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 Then command one minister to grasp the wrist of the hand, and hold another minister's arm down with it while grasping his fist; this binds them together in place as they were before.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	 And when the dislocation is complete if you grasp the toes, as we advised in one who has gilibots and strange limbs, and straighten his leg as well;
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	 then put the thumb and other finger together, place the thumb in between the fists of both hands so that they are joined in position.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 "And let him put his arm around her, and then extend one of the arms towards her, and hold onto it with both hands.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 "If it happens again, it's okay.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If not, place on the affected limb as we have seen in those who experienced it before and apply firm pressure until you feel everything is back in place.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	 "When a dislocation occurs, you should straighten out the affected limb as quickly as possible, according to what I said earlier.
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	 "Hold onto the affected limb tightly with one hand, and extend your other arm towards it.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	 "If it's dislocated at the end, if straightening out the limb isn't possible, don't attempt to lift up the limb or put it on the ground. Instead, leave it as is and take care of the injury elsewhere.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	 "Place it flat against something like you said earlier. Then press down on the joint as I suggested before and hold onto that.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	 And will be when the legs extend themselves, they will be even.
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	 unless he holds tightly with both hands and pulls on a tendon, if it does not move
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	 and rests in three joints or four joints then releases, and applies the remedy.
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	 And you see that they are even if the tendon is released, as long as it is seen clearly, and then he lets them rest in three joints.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 Then releases him, and lightly stimulates him, while ensuring that his limbs are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	 The arm is misaligned due to a dislocation.
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	 The eyes will be treated in three ways.
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	 This is to know, darken and light, and back.
et ne desalue point devant.	 And no treatment should ever follow up from it.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	 And if you command the patient to bend his leg towards his shoulder, and it does not straighten out with its own force, then he is treated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	 And when you restore the limb in its right position and extend it if possible, and put your back against its face, and put your chest against its feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	 Then take the string in your hands, pull it between your fingers, then fold both edges over towards each other
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	 And when the limb is extended, as long as it remains in its place and signs show that it's firmly attached to the socket.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	 And put on an splint, and fix the limb into place securely, and tie it with strong cords, then release it.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 Do not force the dislocated joint to move, as long as the limbs are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 "And as for limbs that are unable to move due to severe treatment in healing the ache, until they become whole.
de la dislocation dou talon	 of the shoulder
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	 The arms cannot move at all or fully extend and straighten out completely.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	 And if it is suspected that the bone is displaced, try first at the part where there has been damage.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 Here is the translation: "The man should gently extend his hands when he is sitting alone.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	 And when standing upright, if it's convenient that you sit with your right side forward and the elbow touches the knee.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	 Then press it to one of your hands and then switch to the other hand, repeat this three times, and hold it high for a moment.
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	 And do that two more times as we have said, removing and stretching the shoulder.
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	 If it comes back, you're good to go.
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	 But if not, repeat the process as we have said, for it may come back.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	 And if it does not come back after that process, sit on the ground with your elbow between your knees and hold the shoulder down firmly until it stops.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	 Here is the first sentence to translate.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	 After that, these ministers are gently applied all over, and should be pressed between the two sides of the wound to hold it in place while the wound is being treated.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 Then apply ice packs gently all over and press them between the two sides of the dislocation to hold it in place until it settles down.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	 And when it reaches the point of needing staples and stitches, press them in place, form the wound and hold the arm to the leg, while firm but not too tight.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	 Then let it rest for two or three days, be gentle with the patient if stitches are required.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	 After that, remove them after one day to four days and treat the wound for another two or three days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 And if he stands at this end, it is still necessary to straighten him as well.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 "And the patient should avoid doing this, as we've said before, until it is healed.
des dois	 "The second one does not
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	 "When the two are loosened, if it's convenient to stretch gently while working on them.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	 And if dislocations occur in no less than two joints, make sure to straighten the affected limb at its point of origin or attachment, and keep your finger on that joint while pressing down firmly until it straightens.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	 And when the dislocations are gone and no longer cause any pain, if you have identified two joints as the source of the problem, then straighten them out and let go after three tries.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And keep it at rest until it is healed completely.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	 Of injury and dislocation combined
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	 When there are dislocations along with wounds and injuries that come and go many times,
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	 if you are not skillful in the art and you do not apply it properly for a long time, nor show mercy or compassion to others.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	 "And begin with gentle care, leave the patient's hand free of pain. Do you not see hope for recovery?
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	 And when you do see hope, gently stretch the limb back to its place.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	 And when the limbs are in place, administer gentle care as needed to heal wounds.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	 "And with dislocation and fractures, attend medical attention if necessary, and follow the instructions given in simple injuries.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 "And be cautious of entering into a state of fear, as I have mentioned, for it is not good according to your Creator, and for the safety of you and your body.
