After I have completed for you, O sons, this book which is the last of the sciences in medicine with its complement, and I have finished it by means of its explanations and declarations, it seemed good to me to complete it for you with this treatise which is a part of action, that is, surgery with the hand.
Because surgery with the hand has been neglected in our land and in our time altogether, until perhaps its science has perished, and its track has been lost, and nothing of it remains except small descriptions in the books of the ancients, which have been altered by hands, and error and hesitation have happened to them, until its intentions were closed, and its sight was elongated: It seemed good to me to quicken it with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of explanation, and declaration, and abbreviation, and that I should come with the forms of cautery tools, and the rest of the instruments of the work, as it is made from the addition of the declaration, and from its expediting what is necessary.
The reason why a good practitioner of this art cannot be found with his hands in our time is that the art of medicine is long, and its author must exercise himself in the science of anatomy as narrated by Galen before that, until he knows the parts of the limbs, and their forms, and their connection and separation, and have knowledge of bones, and nerves, and tendons, and their number, and their exit, and of the pulsating and quiet veins, and their places.
And because of that, Hippocrates said, "that which is named with a name is much, and that which is named with an action is little, and especially in the art of the hand.
We have already spoken about him at the beginning of this book.
For he who does not know what we have said about anatomy is not purged, but already falls into error, whereby men are killed; just as I have seen many of those who form themselves in this science and boast about it without knowledge and without experience.Quod si illi facerent sese cum scientia et experientia, non esset uox quae possit uincere eorum sagacitatem.
If they did this with knowledge and experience, there would not be a voice which could overcome their shrewdness.This is because I saw an unskilful physician follow a scrofulous swelling on the neck of a woman, and he cut some arteries in her neck; wherefore the blood of the woman flowed until she fell dead between his hands.Et cum uideret eam mortuam, quod erat illius, et non sanguis: et cum essent illic medici alii, quod erat illorum, et non uterquin: sed illum, quia fuit stultus et ignorans, et non habuit experientiam in arte sua.
And I saw another physician who presumed to extract a stone from a man who was old and the stone was large. So he came to him and extracted it with a knife. Wherefore the man died on the third day.
And indeed I had been called already to extract it; and I saw from the size of the stone and the condition of the patient that he would die.
And I saw another physician who was receiving a fee from one of the Dukes in our land for medicine; and it happened that an eunuch had a fracture in his leg near the heel; and the physician with his ignorance drew the fracture above the wound with splinters, and bound it tightly with strong bands, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
Then he released him according to his desire. Afterwards he left him for a few days, and gave him orders not to loosen the bandage; and it was so until his leg became swollen, and his foot, and he came to ruin.
I was then called to him; and I hurried to loosen the bandage; and peace followed, and he escaped from his pains.
However, the corruption had now become established in the limb; and I could not restrain it.Et mortuus est uir.
He then stopped the corruption from spreading in the member until it ceased.
And I saw another physician who pierced a cankerous ulcer and it festered for a few days until the wickedness of it was magnified with its lord.
This is because when there is a pure cancer of melancholic humour then one must not approach it with iron altogether unless it is in a member that can tolerate it so that all of it may be cut off.
And for this, O sons, it is necessary for you to know that surgery with the hand is divided into two divisions: namely, surgery which is associated with safety and surgery with which there is danger in many dispositions.
And I have now exited in every place of this book where comes surgery in which there is fear and terror.
Therefore it is necessary for you to beware of that, so that the stupid ones do not find a way to speak and bring dishonour.Quare omnes uiri medicinales per totum mundum scire debent, quia in omni operacione est duo genera: scilicet, unum utilissimum et alium periculossimum.
Take therefore the measure with solicitude and protection, and the sick people under your care with facility and firmness, and use the better way leading to grace towards salvation and a laudable succession: and reject terrible diseases of difficult healing; and raise up your souls from that which makes you fear, so that hesitation may enter into you in faith and benefit.
For it remains more for your glory, and higher in this world, and finally for your quantities.Quare non debetis uitandum esse uobis periculum, sed quod vosmet ipsos exspectat salutem magnam: et scitis, quia in omni operacione corporalis, periculum est de facto in se: et necesse est, ut faciat timorem et metus, donec non fiant experimenta et experientiae de illo periculi.
Therefore you ought not to fear danger but rather that which awaits you with great salvation; and you know that there is danger, in fact, in every corporal operation, and this produces fear and dread until experience and experiment are made of that danger.For Galen has already said in some of his admonitions: You shall not heal a bad sickness so that you may not be named wicked physicians.Quare necesse est, ut cognoscatis quod sit periculum et terror in omni operacione corporali; sed tamen non debetis uitandum esse uobis periculum per se: sed quaerite quod utiliter faciat operacione.
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
Chapter one.
Of cauterization with fire and cauterization with sharp medicine, in small chapters and ordered from head to foot, and the forms of instruments, and tools of cauterization; and everything which is necessary in the operation.
Chapter two.De Cauterio cum medicina, et aere: et de medicamentis quae habentur in operationibus.  ¶
Of dissection and puncturing, phlebotomy and venesection, and wounds: and extraction of arrows, and the like; and all the small things, ordered according to the forms of instruments.
CHAPTER THREE. Of the operation of cupping-glasses upon the head De capite.
Of restoration and displacement, and cure of torticollis, and the like; capitulum, ordered from the head to the feet, and according to the forms of instruments.
But before I speak of the operations pertaining to it, I ought first to declare the quality of the cautery, and its injuries; and in what complexion it should be applied, and at what time; whether with iron or gold.
I say therefore, that speech concerning the quality of cauterization, and its injury, is a long and subtle science, and an occult secret.Et si quilibet non habuerit per se experientiam naturae, et medicinae, et qualitate iuuamentorum: per certum postea experientiam, per legem et regulam naturae, ostendamus ei qualem qualitas sit cauterium, et quibus complexionibus conveniat.
Even a multitude of wise men have spoken of it, and they have disagreed; and for my part, I am satisfied with a little of their words, fearing prolixity.
I say therefore that cautery is suitable universally to all temperaments, which are with matter and without matter; excepting two temperaments, namely the hot temperament without matter, and the dry temperament without matter.
But in the hot and dry temperament with matter they disagreed. For some said that cautery is hurtful in it.Alii autem dicunt, quod bene convenit in ea. And others have said the opposite of this, namely that cauterization is not suitable for a disease which is due to heat and dryness; because the nature of fire is heat, and it is unsuitable that one should be healed from a hot and dry disease by something hot and dry.
And the one who says the opposite of this has said that cauterization is effective treatment for every hot and dry disease which occurs in the bodies of men; because when you compare a man's body and its moisture with fire's nature, you will find a man's body cold.
I, indeed, say this from my own experience; for I have already seen this myself many times.
Nevertheless, one should not practice it unless he has already been tested and exercised in the last chapter on cauterization, and know the difference of men's complexions, and the disposition of diseases in themselves, and their causes, and their accidents, and their time span.Et non oportet, quod omnem homines incipiat Cauterare: sed illum primum, qui habet complexionem frigidam, et umidem superabundante, cum humore foeto.
Indeed, one should not cauterize all men; but he who has a cold complexion and an abundance of moisture, with phlegm. But from other complexions you should have no fear; especially in cold and moist diseases.Nam omnes homines non habent dispositionem similiter: sed alii teneantur ad caliditatem et siccitatem: alii ad frigiditatem et umidem: uerum tamen omnes homines, qui habent aegritudinem frigidam et umidem, debent Cauterari. And all the physicians were agreed about them; and they did not disagree with cauterizing them.
And know, O sons, that from the secret of curing by cauterization with fire and its goodness over cauterization with medicine is burning: for fire is simple, whose action does not reach except to the member which is cauterized; and it does not harm another member joined with it, except with a little harm.
However, the action of medicine which burns reaches that which is drawn out from the limbs; and perhaps it brings about sickness in the limb which is difficult to heal, and perhaps it kills.Et scitote filii quod medicina comburens facit per longum tempus durare member quod curat, et facit esse eum debiles cum debilis medicamentum: et facit esse eum robustos cum robusto medicamento.
And know, O sons, that medicine which burns makes the limb which it cures to last for a long time, and makes it feeble with a feeble medicine; and makes it robust with a robust medicine. But fire, because of its subtlety and goodness of its substance, does not do this, unless it superabounds.
And indeed this has become known to us through experiment, because of the length of service and study with art, and standing above the truth of things; and because of this I excuse myself from the length of speech.
And if it were not for the fact that my book is not allowed to bring you a hidden secret in fire, and the quality of its action in bodies of its own expulsion, which expels illnesses with philosophical speech demonstrated, which would be sharpened by your minds.
And know, O sons, that they themselves disagree about the time when it is convenient to do a cauterization, and they put a better time for this.Et scitote quod super caeteras rationes qui conueniunt in cauterium, debet conuenire uestra experientia et uestra industria, nam illuc habemus ad experientiam, quae uobis est.
And know that over all other reasons which agree about cauterization, your experience and your skill must agree, for to this we have come through experience, which is yours. And I say that cauterization agrees in every time: because the harm happening because of the time is submerged in the oath which is taken with cauterization.Et scitote quod omnia studia et experientia debet ponere ad cauterium cum iuuamento, propterea quod in iuuamento est bonitas super omnes rationes: nam qui conuenit cauterium, non debet perire membrum: sed qui non conuenit cauterium, debet perire. And especially if the cautery is on account of pains due to necessary strong and urgent pains which will not bear delay, for fear lest from them something worse than a little harm should happen through tardiness.
And let not that fall into your minds, O sons, which the common people and foolish physicians do not esteem, namely, that it is not always a return to health when there has been cauterization: and they put that consequence, although the matter is not as they think; for cauterization is not except in the place of medicine, which alters the constitution and dries up those moistures which are the cause why pains occur.
Nevertheless cautery surpasses medicine in swiftness of its strength and the power of its operation and vehemence of its lordship: and it is possible that disease should return at some time according to the constitution of the patient, and the location of his disease, and its strength; and what is prepared in his body from aggregation of superfluities in him, and what reaches him in acquisition from his foods, and like causes, unless there occurs a disease in which cauterization is administered.
A subtle disease in a member of few superfluities and moistures, as cautery of tooth on account of pain, and the like to it; for it is possible that that pain should not return in him. But that happens in few.
But the common speech that cautery is the last of medicines is right speech: not to what they intend therein; for they believe that it is not a cure which will bear with medicine, nor with anything after the occurrence of cautery.
But the matter is altogether contrary to that; and the intent that cautery is the last of medicines is not, except when we administer modes of cure in some diseases, and those medicines do not confer; then we administer at the end of the affair cautery, and it confers: then from thence falls that cautery is the last of medicine, not according to the intention which they understand the common people and many foolish physicians.
The ancients have said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron; and they have not said this unless on account of the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance; and they have said that it does not produce pus at the site of cauterization. But this is not absolutely true; for I have already tested it and found that it does not do so in some bodies without others.
And cautery with itself is good and better than with iron, as they have said. However, when you cauterize with fire from gold, it is not made clear to you when the fire burns according to the amount that you wish, because of the redness of the gold; and if you add upon it ignition, it melts in the fire, and turns into sheets.Et quilibet cognoscit quod lumen est cauterii et calor: et non facit pus in loco cauterii.
Why does the craftsman then fall from that occupation? And because of this cautery with iron is done more quickly and closely, from rectitude to operation.
And indeed I have already arranged this Chapter on cautery according to the Chapters; and have arranged them from head to foot, so that those who search for it may find what they want in it.
Chapter 2.
It brings cauterization to the dominion of moisture and coldness over the brain; which two things are causes of gout, and multitude of flow of humors from the head to parts of the eyes and ears, and multitude of sleep, and pain of teeth, and pain of throat; and universally all sickness which happens from coldness, just as paralysis, and gout, epilepsy, and apoplexy, and suchlike those sickneses.
The manner of cauterization is, that you should first order the sick person to be cleansed with medicine dissolving three nights, or four, according to what the strength of the sick person demands, and his age, and his habit.
Then order him to make a fire upon his head with red hot iron.Et post haec cauterizet locum, unde fluere debet humor: et sic faciatur in uersibus: et sic in pedibus, et in manibus, ubi debent flere humores, et in ulcera quae debent suppurare, et omnimode in omni parte corporis, quae debet suppurare. Then have him sit in between your hands, so that he has put his hands on his chest.
Then place the palm of your hand over the root of his nose between his eyes. Wherever therefore your middle finger comes through, mark that spot with the stylet.
Then ignite the cautery-lantern: whose shape is as follows.
Then place it over the spot marked with the stylet, lowering it as you gradually close your hand and you wind it up. Then lift your hand quickly and look at the spot.
If you see that there has already been removed from the bone the amount of an almond-kernel or of a grape-seed, then lift your hand. And if not, go over the spot with the iron again or with another one if this one is cooled off; keep doing this until you see the bones which I told you about.
Then take some salt and dissolve it in water and soak a bandage in it and put it over the spot; then leave it on for three days.
Then put over the bandage butter that has been soaked in vinegar and leave it there until the fire-sore is destroyed. Then treat this with the tetropharmacon ointment until it heals.
Already they have said that as long as an open wound remains, it will emit pus; therefore it is better and more advisable.
And some of them have said that the skin should be cauterized all the way to the bone; and the cautery is to be held there until something of the thickness of the bone burns.
Then after this burned part of the bone has been rasped away, then it should be treated.Et si quid superest intra cutem, et non potest extrahi cum ferri punta, tamen si possit extrahi cum punctura, utrummque eorum est melius.
And others say that one must cut with the cautery to the end until it leaves an imprint on the tooth, so that the tooth falls out as if in the shape of a key; or with the instrument that women use, the little alphabet pot: and they estimate that the vapors of the head are breathed out through this place, and that the wound is left open for a long time.
Then it is treated until it heals.
However, I do not believe that these two types of cautery are at all suitable for any man according to the way of fear.Et si fiant cauteria peruiens et profundum, uel timide et celeriter, quae omnia sint ex necessitate; neque enim debet prolixe temperari neque tardius inuolvere, sed in medio inter utrumque: nam si in uitio timoris fiant, uelint in cutem: nam si peruiens cauterium uelint in cutem, non solum in dentem, sed etiam in os, et alibi multum male: nam quod est contra naturam, illud neque saluberrimum neque sanitatem habet.
And if they are cauteries that are thorough and deep, either timidly or quickly, all of which are out of necessity; nor should it be tempered for a long time nor wrapped slowly but in the middle between both: because if they are made according to the way of fear, they wound the skin; because if a thorough cautery wounds the skin, not only the tooth but also the jaw and elsewhere very badly: because that which is against nature does not have health or wellness.
For the head is weakened by the disruption of its natural continuity; as we have witnessed in other limbs: and especially when the patient's head is naturally weak by nature: and the first kind of cautery is indeed more safe and better with me, and I use it: operate therefore with it in health.
Head 3.Et postea fiunt cauteria extra os super dentem per cauteiam ita quod non fiant intra os, sed super dentem: et quilibet cauterium in suo loco, donec fiant omnia cauteria extra eum dentem super quem dolere, et super illius ossibus circumdantis.
And afterwards there are cauteries outside the tooth over the tooth in a careful way so that they are not inside the tooth but over the tooth: and each cautery in its place, until all cauteries are outside the tooth on which it hurts and on its surrounding bones.When chronic pain occurs throughout the head: and prolongs itself in the sick person, and uses hyssop and cocklebur, and head purges, and oils, and embrocations.Et non debet intra os per cauteiam uelare intra dentem ultra necessitatem: sed super dentem extra os multum melius est procedere cum cauteriis: et si intra dentem fiunt cauteria intra os, debet intra dentem per cauteiam ad primum tempus temperari, et postea per cauteiam debet intra dentem temperari: nam intra dentem non debet intra ossibus intra os per cauteiam uelare ultra necessitatem.Et si intra dentem intra os fiunt cauteria intra os, debet intra dentem intra os per cauteiam ad primum tempus temperari, et postea per cauteiam debet intra dentem intra os temperari: nam intra dentem non debet intra ossibus intra os per cauteiam uelare ultra necessitatem.Et si intra dentem fiunt cauteria extra os super dentem, debet intra dentem extra os per cauteiam ad primum tempus temperari, et postea per cauteiam debet intra dentem extra os temperari: nam intra dentem non debet intra ossibus extra os per cauteiam uelare ultra necessitatem. And especially if it has already been cauterized with one of those cauteries which we have described, and you apply nothing to it from among those things, then take heed. For if the head of the sick person is of a strong nature and not feeble, and finds the cold disagreeable, then cauterize it with another cautery beneath that one slightly. Then cauterize it all over the horns of its head with a cautery, so that it may not pass through the skin and there be exposed from the bone an amount, as we have described. And cauterize it with one cautery in the back of its head, in the place which is called the vas, and this is the place where the windpipe is placed; and raise your mat on that, and do not expose bone. For the sick person will find this very painful, and different from the pain of all other cauteries on his head.
And I will say this about the cautery; it is fitting that there be a cautery by which the horns of the head and the back of its head be cauterized subtly with a cautery, by which the middle of the head is cauterized.
De modo cauterizandi in hemicrania, tam cum medicina adustiua, quam cum ferro.
When there is pain and swelling in a part of the head, or the pain extends to the eye, and it is evacuated with cleansing medicines, and other remedies are administered, as I have described in the various diseases, but it does not bring complete relief, then cauterization is indicated in two ways: either cauterization with an acrid burning medicine, or with a hot iron.
But cautery with an acrid burning medicine is done in this way: take a tooth from another person and scrape off its bark, and cut off its tip on both sides.Et fac res uti possit, et quod non exuat, quodque habet extremitas, fac illum in unum locum, ut possit in hunc modum cauterizari: et cito accendis cum igne, et applicas eum super caput ad dolorem usque ad consumpcionem. Then split the painful site with a large blood-letting needle until there is a subcutaneous space into which the tooth can be caught.
Then push it into the subcutaneous space until it is hidden; then press tightly above it with a piece of thread decently tied and leave it for fifteen hours; then loosen it, take out another tooth, and leave the wound for two or three days; later put on a poultice soaked in butter over the site until pus forms; then treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
And if you wish, do this with some burning remedies which I wrote of in the twelfth treatise, on Burning Remedies.
However, cautery of it with iron is done according to this method: Fire-Cautery, whose form is as follows.
And it is named "Clavus" because the shape of its head is like that of a nail, and there is some hollow in it, and in the middle of it is a small protuberance.And it is used for cauterization with fire.
Then place it over the site and hold your hand still; and you gently rotate the iron with speed, and let what is cauterized be according to the thickness of the skin, just as its half-width.And when the cautery has stopped, then immediately put on cold ointment around the site that was cauterized. And lift your hand so that not below it be cauterized the artery and happen a flow of blood.
Then moisten the poultice with salt water, and put it over the site, and leave it for three days; then put on a poultice with butter; later treat with ointment until it heals.And if you wish, do this:
And if you wish, cauterize half the head with the second end of the scalpel of cautery. Beware of cutting the artery in this half-head, not an old one indeed.And if you wish, do the cauterization as follows:
On the way of cauterizing in an old half-head.
When you are treating a headache and the treatment that we mentioned earlier does not help, and what we said about the divisions of illnesses, and the treatment does not work: then from the illness you see that it is not enough for him to use cauterization with medicine, or cauterization with fire, then you should use the knife cautery until it turns white. After marking on the site of the pain with a line, whose length is about half a finger, or almost that, and take off your hand at once, and compress it until you cut the artery and reach to the bone.
However, you must be careful not to damage the jawbone which moves during chewing or the nerve which moves it, so that a spasm does not occur.
And this is about the care and precaution of the flow of blood from the artery, which has been cut. For in its cutting there is indeed a fear, and especially for him who does not know what he is doing, and is not diligent, nor experienced; and leaves the operation with it in the first place.
And I will come with a reminder about the regime of blood flow from an artery according to its way and in its place in this book.
If you see from the illness that this cautery does not suffice for him and you see the body of the patient enduring the cautery in the middle of the head, as we have described, treat the wound until it is healed.Quod si infimus est, quod non sufficit ei Cauterium cultellare, uidesque eum tolerans illud cum magna constrictione, et dolore, fac Cauterium cum igne, donec albificetur.
And if the lowest one is, that the knife cautery does not suffice for him, and you see him tolerating it with great constriction and pain, do cauterization with fire until it turns white.And if you wish, administer cauterization, which we said in the chapter on the extraction of the artery with a cautery holding two knives. For cautery is better and more effective against this condition.
On cauterizing ear-pains.
When there is ear-ache from cold, and it is treated with poultices and the rest of the remedies which we have mentioned in the preceding chapter, yet the pain does not cease, then use cautery by fire: and that is called the Point, the form of which is as follows.
Then make the points on both sides around the whole ear, as is required; or on both sides at once if the pain is in both ears.Et sit forma Punctis ita, sicut diximus: sed sic, quod non sint multum prope: nam si sint prope, et igni cauterizantur omnia simul, prae uentura periculosa, et in multum uelocior ad curam. And elongate it with a cautery from the root of the ear a little, after you have marked the places with a cautery; and let the amount of the cautery be ten punctures in each ear, and almost like that.
Then heal the places until they are cured.
¶ Of the manner of cauterizing in torture.
Chapter VII.De cauteria.
The torture which is treated with cauterization does not exist except from the species which happen from phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of diseases.
And leaving aside the cauterization of the species, which happens due to drying and nerve spasm.
When you heal this species of torture with hyssop and head purgatives and gargarisms, and your treatment does not help, then you should cauterize the patient in three places: once at the root of the ear, and a second time a little below its natural place, and a third time at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery from the opposite side of the affected part. Because softening does not occur except in the part which appears healthy.
And the shape of the cautery is that you should cauterize with it directly at the tip of the upper ear below the horn of the head, a little bit: and another one in the timpani: whose length is according to the length of the thumb. And take your hand away with the cautery until half the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the shape of the cautery, and it is a species from the scalpel, whose shape has just been described; however, it should not be much more subtle than that, as you see: and the scalpel should have a little superfluous thickness in it.Et si non possit curari cum cultello, tunc oportet ut facias Cauterium de rubea charta, et depone super eam ligno caustico cum sale, et ponito super infirmum partem, et teneto eam super partem infirma, donec sentiat dolorem.
And if it cannot be healed with a scalpel, then you should make a cautery of red paper, and put over it burnt wood with salt, and place it over the affected part, and hold it over the affected part until he feels pain.Then heal the places, with what preceded: until it is healed.
¶ On the way of cauterizing in old apoplexy.Et si non posset curari cum cultello, tunc oportet ut facias Cauterium de rubea charta, et depone super eam ligno caustico cum sale, et ponito super infirmum partem, et teneto eam super partem infirma, donec sentiat dolorem.
When you have treated a stroke as we said above and your remedies fail to help and the patient is free from fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries on each side of his head, one in the middle of the head, one at the back of the head, as mentioned earlier, according to what was prescribed. The size of the cautery should correspond to that of the previous cauteries.
He is also to be cauterized with a cautery over the bone of the stomach; this is the last resort.
Then he is to be treated as before.
Chapter 9.
It is necessary that the patient should first be given large amounts of the herb hyssop and purifying pills for the brain.
Then shave the patient's head completely and apply to his forehead an ointment of lupine beans as described in the treatise on ointments; and apply it frequently.Deinde fac cauteria ad pedem et ad manum, sicut praecessit: et fac eum ambulare postea intra domum per aliquot dies.
Then make cauteries on the foot and on the hand as before; and let him walk about indoors for several days. For this is the way of cautery; and do it in the same order I mentioned there.
If he recovers through that, it is good.Si autem non curatur, deinde fac eum stragulam quae vocatur Theria: et ponas illam super caput eius intra fascem: et fac illam intrare ourem eius per aliquot dies. If not: then make three cauteries on the back of his head, which descend from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the eye: and put between each cautery the thickness of a finger.
Then treat the cautery with what precedes it.
But if you see that there is need of an addition, and he can bear it: then make a cautery for him in the middle. If you see that there is need of an addition, then cauterize him above the two horns.Si autem postea notitiam fecerit de quolibet, et non poterit illa suppurare:
But if he afterwards become aware of any of them and it cannot suppurate: then treat him until he is healed: let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the shape which has been mentioned before.Deinde cura Cauterium oliuare secundum formam, quae praemissa est: siue super eorum partes: donec sanetur.
Then treat the cautery olive-shaped according to the shape which has been mentioned before: or upon their parts: until he is healed.Of the manner of cauterizing in Paralysis and of softening.Si autem uis additionem facere: deinde cauteriza super eorum partes, donec sanentur: et postea fac secundum consuetudinem.
But if you see that there is need to make an addition: then cauterize upon their parts until they are healed: and afterwards do according to custom.Chapter 10Si in quolibet, qui uenit ad te, non sit dubitas, de qua parte cauterizanda:
If in anyone who comes to you there is no doubt as to which part should be cauterized: you must proceed with the purification of the head with hyssop, and with that which we have said.Si uero dubitas est, qualis sit parte, qua debet cauterizari:
But if there is doubt as to which part he should be cauterized: then shave the head of the patient: afterwards cauterize him with a cautery in the middle of his head, and with a cautery above every horn of his head, and with a cautery above the back of his head, and with three cauteries over the vertebrae of his neck.Si autem dubitas est de qua parte debet cauterizari:
But if there is doubt as to which part he should be cauterized:If indeed you need in the sickness of softening the body many of those things, and he can bear it, and the sickness is severe: then cauterize him with four cauteries over the vertebrae of his back, and the last one with a cautery until it burns most of his skin, and lift up your hand.Si autem dubitas est de qua parte debet cauterizari, et non habes experientiam in illo: Then treat it until it is cured and then cauterize with olive oil.
The method of cauterizing in epilepsy.
Epileptics are not cauterized unless the person is suffering from a phlegmatic condition.
Therefore it is necessary for the physician to cleanse his brain first with hyssop and with the rest of the treatment which we mentioned earlier in the section on division. When there is a serious illness or the patient cannot tolerate medicine,
but if it is a child who cannot tolerate medicines, then he is given a gargle and purifying mastications to cleanse the brain, for several days with good food.
Then he shaves his head, afterwards he cauterizes it with one cautery in the middle of his head according to what came before in the method; and with another cautery on his occiput, and above every horn of his head with cautery.Si autem est in parte corporis eius quae non potest tolerare cauterium, sed in parte capitis eius, qui non potest tolerare medicamentum, et non potest fieri neque sanguis eius fluere, si quid superest: If the weak person is strong and tolerant, then cauterize him with the cauteries which I have said about having paralysis, and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck, and the vertebrae of the back; and let the cautery be oiled according to the method which preceded.
But if the weak person is a child, then apply a subtle cautery, in this way.
¶ On the mode of cauterizing in Melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humours and thick phlegm, then cauterize it with cauteries, as we said above for the case of paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess of yellow bile flowing towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is damp, then give him a drink that cleanses his brain, as mentioned earlier in the diagnosis; then shave the head of the patient and afterwards make a clean bandage of linen, like a circle.
Then place it in the middle of the head; and let the patient sit upright and be held from all sides.
Then present the ointment. And it is more worthy to use old mutton suet. And heat it over moderate fire in a measured amount that the finger can tolerate when it goes inside. Then apply it in a circle in the middle of his head and leave it until it cools down.
Do this to the patient once every week with the rest of his good regime until he is healed.
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making many small points on it except where you are holding the cautery tool; rather let him smell it.
For this kind of cautery moistens the brain with its quality.Et si non posset tolerare cauterium, fac illum calidam tepidem biberi, et da ei, donec toleret cauterium.
Then place over it a bandage soaked in butter or chicken fat.
The method of cauterization with descending water towards the eye:
Chapter 13.
When you become aware of the beginning of water in the eye through the signs which I have described in the division, then begin and give the patient a drink with that with which he may cleanse his head.
And keep him away from all moisture, and let him sit in a bath for several days of fasting.¶ Et teneat vestem intra balneum et bibat vinum rubrum modicum, et faciunt eum calidam aquam per signum ad oculum.
Then order him to wash his head, and cauterize it in the middle of his head.¶ Et dante ei potum ad potum, usque dum agat, quod dixi, ut mundificet oculum suum. Then cauterize it above the two temples with two cauteries, if there is an inflow of water into both eyes simultaneously; or from one side only, if there is inflow into one eye only; and with the cautery cut off all the veins and arteries which are under the skin: and let the cauteries be long in width equal to the breadth of the temples; and beware of a flow of blood.
What if you see something of it, then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible; and I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and cutting them off, and cauterizing from blood flow.
And when it is cauterized in the neck, under two bones, two cauteries finally extended.
¶ Of the way of cauterizing in ancient tears.
When the tears of the eyes are ancient, constant: and they are over the veins and arteries which are in the obvious exterior head, it is verified that this is from superfluities cold, phlegmatic: then cauterize with the same cautery that I narrated in the inception of descending water, a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries above the two temples, and two cauteries in the neck under the two bones. And if you need an addition, then cauterize it on all sides of the eye carefully, over the extremity of the eyebrow with a small cautery.Et si indiges aliam additionem, tunc cauteriza in omni latere oculi caute super extremitatem supercilii cum cauterio paruo: et uidebis eum ex illo, qui est super extremitatem supercilii intra oculos.
On cauterizing a nose ulcer:
When you treat it with the ointment I described above and it does not help, then give him three nights in a row a drink made of a mixture of herbs that cause vomiting. Then shave his head and cauterize the ulcer with an oil-soaked cautery. Then cauterize it again with two nails that have been heated red hot, just above the eyebrows under the hair.
Be careful not to cut an artery.Cauterizatio est per se signum bonum.
And this is the shape of the cautery of the key.
On the way of cauterizing for softening of the eyelid.
When the eyelid is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid with a single cautery, with this lunar cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize it above the two eyebrows with a little more than two cauteries in every part; and they should be elongated from the two temples; and let the length of all the cauteries be according to the lengths of the eyebrow; and do not move your hand with the cautery but lower, according to the amount that the third eyelid is burning.
¶ Of the way of cauterizing the eyelid with hairs when they go against pricking the eye.
The cautery is according to two modes: either cautery with fire or cautery with a burning medicine.
But as for the cautery with fire, let the sick person be instructed beforehand to shave his hair, if he is one of those who clean them, until they are prolonged and made even. But if they prick him at his origin: then constrict his eyes with a bandage, so that they do not move, until they are born.
When they are therefore born and made even, then place the sick person's head in your lap; then brand a mark over the eyelid with cautery, a mark that be according to the shape of a myrtle leaf; and let the beginning of the mark be near the hair.
Then place a pad moistened with egg-white, or with the mucilage of psyllium, over the eye.
Then apply the cautery with fire, whose shape is thus:
Then cauterize over the figure, which thou hast marked little by little in many turns, until the surface of the skin is burnt, which is as the shape of a myrtle leaf, all apparently proper.
And the sign of the health of thy work is: if thou seeest the eyelid already contract and the hair be loosed at the puncturing of the eye.
Loosen therefore thine hand then, and leave him for three days.
Then place over him a pad with butter, until the eschar is eradicated.Et cotum cum butyro munda facies tertio die. Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
If it returns with some of the hair after an hour, and the eyelid softens: then repeat the cautery on that spot, as you did at first.
If, however, the hair is in the lower eyelid: then cauterize it until the eyelid returns to its natural place and the hair is straightened so that it does not irritate the eye.Quod si non eleuat palpebra ad locum suum, sed et postea pili iterum retortus sint: sicut antea fuit: tunc sciaphum cum sanguine facies.
Of the way to cut the hair which grows on the upper and lower eyelids with the scythe and with burning medicine.It is as if you were commanding a weak person to drop the hair until it lengthens out and straightens up. Make of paper a shape of myrtle leaf.Poni autem debet sciaphum super palpebras, donec concidant pilos: et postea cum medicina comburente.
Then place the scythe on the eyelids until it cuts the hair; and afterwards with burning medicine.Then take of soap known, and of chalk unslaked each one-sixth pound i or almost that: then rub them together good rubbing, and make it with kneading, so that it does not chill. Then grind out of it on the paper you made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it over the eyelid of one or two eyes.Et postea cum sciapho concide pilos, donec aqua cadat: et postea fac ut sanguis fluat super locum quod cauterizatur, donec sanguis sedet: et deinde terga lavere, sicut docemus in cauteriabus caeteris. And place under the eye a cotton pad soaked in white of egg; and let the patient's head be in your lap.
And place your index finger on top of the medicine, and press it gently. And you shall move it whenever the patient feels the bite of the medicine; for he finds its biting like fire.
When therefore he has persevered in what he found to be the bite, then leave off the medicine, and move it with your finger. When therefore the biting ceases, then remove the medicine, and wash the eye with water.
And then consider whether you see the eyelid to be swollen as if swollen by a burn or with an incision, it is well; and if not, then repeat over it from the medicine over the place where the medicine does not impress and does not darken, until your work is evened out and the eye is contracted.
Then place over it a cotton pad with butter, until the burnt skin is eradicated.Et si uides cutem esse laceratum, et sanguinem fluere, et non possis eleuare cum medicinis, quae tibi placuerunt: sed necessitas te ad traxerit in hoc: deinde ita fac, sicut dico tibi. And if you see the skin to be lacerated and blood flowing, and you cannot soothe it with the medicines which have pleased you; but necessity drives you to this: then do thus as I tell you.Then care for it with diaphenicon ointment, or another, until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you in the operation, that you keep a watchful eye lest anything of the medicine falls into the eye.
If the eyelid becomes soft after days, and something struggles out of the eyelashes into the eye, then repeat the medicine over that place which is softened from the eyelid itself, just as you did at first. Then care for it until it is healed.
And this is the form of bay leaves.
And you shall know that men's eyes are diverse in size and smallness. Therefore according to that let your consideration be: and the way of uprightness is not hidden from him to whom is devotion to this art.
§ On cauterizing in lacrimal fistula.
When you are treating a fistula and your treatment does not work as described in the previous chapter on diseases, then you must cauterize it in the following way.
Tell the patient to place his head in your lap and have an assistant hold his head still between their hands so that it does not move or turn from side to side.Postea teneas tu manum tuam super oculum infimo, ubi est Fistula, et teneas ignem sub manu tua, taliter ut tangat non nisi cutem exteriorem.
Then place a piece of cotton in rosewater or psyllium mucilage over his eye where the fistula is located. Then cauterize it with an iron whose shape is as follows.Forma autem cauterii debet esse rotunda et plana per modum patellae, et debet esse cum lamine subtegente, ut non tangat ignis cutem interiorem.
The cautery iron should be round and flat like a spoon, and it should have a guard so that the fire does not touch the interior skin. It should be hollowed out on one side in the shape of a goose feather pen so that cauterization can be done with it from one end to the other. If desired, it should also be able to reach upward like this.
However, this hollow shape is better for your work.Et si post Cauterizatum uidebis quod non est bene cauterizatum, cum eo quod videbis uenam sanguinis per eam manere fluens: tamen ne desistas, sed ad te remeias et postea resumpas, donec fiant scarificatio.
Then express the fistula if it is open and withdraw pus from it and dry it up; and if it is not open then open it and extract its pus.
Then put on it a cautery that is made very hot.
And hold with it your hand for a little while near the cautery by the eye so that your hand does not wander or shake with weakness; and put the cautery on the eyeball, and destroy it.
If therefore you can get the cautery to the edge of the eye at first, that will be well.Et postea ponas super eum plastrum in circulo, et facias ex eodem oleo: et sic facies de alio occhio, si placet tibi. And if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, as needed, and leave it for three days.
Then apply the poultice with butter, and treat the wound with a drying ointment until it heals.
If forty days pass and it is not healed, then apply a strong corrosive medicine on the wound until the bone is exposed, and scrape the wound according to what came out in his chapter.
And there is another mode of cautery for fistula, which some have spoken about first. Look at the location of the fistula and find it; then put into its fissure a slender pipe, that is, a slender tube, whose shape is thus: And pour into it a quantity of drachm from the melted lead, and hold your hand with the tube with a good grip so that it does not move at all, so that the molten lead does not run into his eye.
And you should put over the eye of the patient a poultice soaked in white of egg, or in water.
For the lead burns the place of the fistula and heals it with a wonderful healing.
If the fistula is healed with what we said about cautery and treatment, that is good. And if not, then it is necessary to open the nostril and bring the fistula back to its course through the nose, according to what comes in its own proper place.Et ponantur super locum cauteria et medicamen corrosiuum, donec detegatur os: et rade secundum quod diximus: et ponatur cotum super oculum: et debet inferre omnia per nosam, donec sanetur.
Of the manner of cauterizing in fissures of the lips.
Fissures often occur on the lips; they are called "hairs" and especially on the lips of children.
Therefore when you treat these fissures, as we said in the discussion of diseases and if treatment does not help, then brand with a little knife with fire according to this form.Et quaecunque ex his sunt contra naturam, et praecipue inter pueros, quae multotiens in labiis puerorum accidunt, et qui non possunt bene uti labiis, nec bene loqui, neque bene masticare, neque bene bibere.
And its concavity according to the λεπτότητα of the knife.
Then put it quickly ablaze in the fissures, until cautery penetrates deeply into the fissures.
Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
¶ Of the manner of cauterizing a fissure of the mouth.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the gums, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth: then it becomes suppurative, and breaks, then it becomes chronic, and pus flows from it, and a fistula is made; then you treat it with ointment, and no treatment works for it, then you should cauterize with fire according to its quantity, which fits in the fistula. Then insert the fire into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron reaches the bottom and the end of it; do that once or twice.Et sit concauitas eius secundum subtilitatem cultelli.
And its concavity according to the λεπτότητα of the knife.Then treat it after that with what we said about treatment until it is healed.Et tene manum tuam super eum post cauterium, et cura ipsum cum caeroto donec sanetur.
If therefore the pus is cut out and the wound healed, it will be well. And if not, then it is necessary to cleanse the place, and take away the rotten bone according to what will come into his head.
Of a way of cauterizing Gums and Softened Teeth.
When the gum is softened by moistness, and the teeth are moved, and it is cured with medicines, and brings no relief: then lay the head of the patient in your lap.Antliat tegyras, et facies molle focum, et ponas super gingiuum, donec sentias caliditatem in capite tuo.
Take a small iron and make it hot in the fire, and place it on the gum until you feel heat in your head.Then ignite the cautery-iron according to what will come after this, so that you put the tube over the tooth: and thrust into it the ignited cautery quickly: and hold your hand for a little while, until the patient feels the heat of the fire having now penetrated to the root of the tooth.Et erunt alii qui non possunt perferre caliditatem, sed cadunt in sopor: sed tu facies festinanter, et tene manum tuam donec sentiat infirmus caliditatem radicitus dentis.
And then raise your hand; and repeat the cautery several times according to how you see fit.
Then let him fill his hollow tooth with salt water, and keep it there for an hour; and then spit it out.
For the movement of the tooth is made firm, and the softened gums are tightened up, and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
On the method of cauterizing a toothache.
When the toothache is due to coldness, either there is coldness in it or heat and the treatment does not work with remedies; then there is cauterization on it according to two methods: either cauterization with butter or cauterization with fire.
But the cauterization of it is with butter, so that you take vakkin butter and heat it in an iron spoon or in a bowl.Et postea frictio est facienda super dentem cum his: ut accendatur in ipso, donec fumet, et siccatur: Then take a ligature and apply it over the end of the tent. Then immerse it in melted butter and quickly place it on the aching tooth and hold it there until it freezes; then repeat several times until the fire's power reaches the tooth's root.
And if you wish immerse a piece of wool or a ligature in cold butter and place it on the painful tooth, and then place on it a red hot iron until the fire reaches to the bottom of the hollow tooth.
The cautery with fire is done in such a way that you aim it at a straw or an iron pipe. And there should be something thick on the body so that the fire's sharpness does not reach the patient's mouth.
Then light the cautery which will come to a point; and place it on the tooth and hold your hand there until the cautery freezes.
Do this several times, for the pain will go away either that day or the next day.
And it is necessary, after applying the cautery, for the patient to fill his mouth with good butter and hold it there for an hour; then he should spit it out.Et si uis, fac illum post solis occlusus interuentum: et mane prima hora, ut ante prandium, et beuat infuso de uino rubro, ut facit per se sanguinem calidum: et non uitat diuo.
And if you wish, do this after sunset; and in the morning at the first hour, before a meal, let him drink a warm infusion of red wine, to make his blood warm; but let him not fast all day.
Cauterize with whatever end you wish as much as possible; and this is the shape of the cannula.Et sit in illo, ut infrigidetur per se, vel cum aqua frigida uel per se: nam haec est bonitas Cauterii, et non aliter, sed ita faciatur omnino.
Of the manner of cauterizing in a strophulus.
When strophuli are from phlegm, and from cold humors, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, and you see their digestion quickly: then use a hollow cautery, whose form is thus.
Having two open ends, so that the smoke of cautery goes out by one end, and apply it burning to the ulcer once, and again a second time if needed, until it penetrates to the depth of the ulcer.
If the ulcer is small, then adapt the cautery according to the quantity of the ulcer.Si autem in ipso apostema non peruenit ad profundum: et post primum Cauterium non est dictus phlegmas, sed expositus est humor albus, et superfluitates carnis: et si post secundum Cauterium, et tertio, uel quarto,
Then leave it for three days, and put on it a poultice of butter until that which was burnt by the fire is healed.
Then treat it with an ointment of tooth powder until the wound of the needle heals.
Of a way of cauterizing a hoarseness of voice and difficulty of breathing.
When there are humors upon the tubes of the lungs and especially when it is accompanied with a cold constitution then the sick person ought to be evacuated in the first place by opening medicines.Quotiensque non poterit respiri, et uocem trahat per cannulam, utpote quando ueniat in contusionem, et uelamentum factum sit super eam per contusionem, quod uelamen exuere debet, et super uelamentum ponatur uasa calida, et faciuntur super eum frictiues cum unguento calido, donec remoueatur uelamentum, et melle et teriaca linantur intra os.
And when he cannot breathe and draw his voice through the tube as in the case of a contusion and a membrane is formed over it by the contusion then that membrane ought to be removed and hot vessels should be laid upon it and friction should be made upon it with a warm ointment until the membrane is removed and honey and teriaca should be applied within the throat.Then cauterize it at the root of the gullet in a depressed place: and beware lest you touch the cautery to the gullet, nor yet to the skin, but only a little of it.In uiribus etiam qui uelamentum habent super cannulam, faciunt super eam frictiues cum teriaca calida, et melle et tu quoque lineres intra os, et ponas super eam uasa calidas, donec remoueatur uelamen: et si non possit remoueri totus, sed quidam, faciunt super locum qui remouerit frictiues cum unguento.
Also in men who have a membrane upon the tube make friction over it with warm teriaca and honey and you too shall smear within the throat and lay hot vessels upon it until the membrane is removed; and if not all of it but some of it can be removed make friction over that part which was removed with an ointment.Then cauterize it with another cautery at the junction of the neck in its last vertebra there making the cautery a claw according to the manner which has preceded.Nam si quid super uelamentum remouerit, sed remoueri non potest totus, et tamen debet fieri ut totus remoueatur: faciunt super locum qui remouerit frictiues cum unguento, et cauterizantur in eodem loce.
Then treat it with what preceded it until it is healed.
§ On the method of cauterization for ailments of the Lungs and Cough.
When Cough and ailment of the Lungs are from cold humours, and the sick person has no fever nor phthisis nor chronic ailment: then cauterize it with two cauteries above the collarbone at depressed places, gently, without piercing.De modo temperandi cauteria.Cauteria debent fieri de plumbo calento, et argento vivente, vel de stearide solo. And with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts; and let the cautery be of a tube according to the shape which precedes.And the cauteries must be done of molten lead, and quicksilver, or of stearine alone.De pulbere ad dentem dolentem.
And if your cautery be by pricking with a cautery called the Point, whose shape precedes in pricking the pain of ears; and let the points be from thirty to almost another.De modo temperandi cauteria.Quo modo faciunt cauteria Gallici medicus ad dolorem aurium: ita et ad dolorem dentis.
Then treat it with what preceded it, until it is healed.
And now let the cautery have three branches: according to this form.De modo temperandi cauteria.Cauteria debet esse de plumbo calento, et argento vivente, vel de stearide solo. Wherefore let the cauterization be allayed with it when you do at the same time three Cauteries.De modo temperandi cauteria.Cauteria debet esse de plumbo calento, et argento vivente, vel de stearide solo.Et sic fiant omnia cauteria quae fiunt super carnem.
Of the dislocation of the humerus.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to moisture and does not return to its normal position within an hour of the dislocation, until it becomes accustomed to returning, then it is dislocated by a slight movement, which occurs as we have already testified, then you should reduce the dislocation first. Then the patient lies on his back or on his healthy side.Omnes adjuvatores stant adversum pedem quod est in dislocatione ad auxilium humeri. All assistants stand opposite the foot that is in the dislocation to assist the humerus.Then lift the skin that is inside the titiligo towards the top with your left fingers; and if the joint is dislocated inwardly.Si dislocatur subdextra, resupinetur infirmus super latus dexterum, adjuvator stet adversum pedem sinisterum.
If it is dislocated to the right, the patient lies on his right side; the assistant stands opposite the left foot.Then apply a cautery with two flames.Et si dislocatur ad sinistram, resupinetur infirmus super latus sinisterum, adjuvator stet adversum pedem dextro. The form is this.
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates to the other side; and you will see the shape of the cautery with four marks.
And when there is cautery with a tool having three edges, then the shape of cautery will have six marks; these are according to the fineness of the probe.
This is the shape of the cautery with three edges.
And sometimes one more is added to this way; therefore there are eight cauteries.
Then place over the cautery crushed pepper with salt.Et postea resecando cauterii, resecato cutis. Then make the sick person rest in tranquillity, that the limb be not moved for a time, until he be comforted.
And if the dislocation is to the upper parts, and this seldom happens, then cauterize it over the shoulder-joint with a nail-cauter, or with many cauteries by pricking.
For the joint is made firm, and moisture is driven away; and the sick person is healed.
Of the manner of cauterizing the Stomach.
When coldness and great moistnesses happen to the stomach, till they draw him from his complexion, and catarרים multiply to it, and frequent ways of curing, and he does not get better: then it behoves that the sick person be laid on his back, and spread his legs and arms. Then cauterize with three cauteries; with a cautery under a spoonful of the chest the bigness of one finger with a nail-cauter, and two cauteries below from both sides cauteries of one [bigness], till the figure of the cauteries come to a triangle.Et si non potest tolleri se super dorsum suum, ut accipiat cauteria sua super latus suum, aut per viam recti ventris, et accipere cauteria sua super ventrem, et supine. And lengthen between each one so that they don't join together when they make pus.
And the depth of the cautery should be the amount of two thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And the shape of the cauteries should be according to this form without addition: and if you cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and let the cautery that is used to make this cautery be one according to the form of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach is cauterized by puncturing it with the one that frightens it from this cautery: and it is, as signs above the stomach are punctured according to the quantity, as you wish with encaustic: then cauterize it with a cautery of a point: then cure it with the cure that preceded until it heals.
¶ Of the way of cauterizing cold Gall-bladders.Et sit figura cauteriorum secundum hanc formam.
When the pain in the liver arises from chill and moisture, or from thick wind, until it is discharged with an egress above its natural state, and is treated by the sick person as aforesaid, yet it does not avail him: then the sick person must be laid supine on his back, and with a cautery of encaustics three scars be made according to this figure, and with the same quantity on the lower side of the liver from the hypocondria, where the elbow of man reaches: and there must be an interval between every cautery according to the thickness of a finger: and the cautery must be as long as the body is broad: and do not press your hand much with the cautery.
And let the quantity of that which is burnt be according to the thickness of the skin, a quantity of its half not added; and let the sick person stand on his feet.
But if he is not standing, then let him be lying down, who has already extended his legs and raised his arms.
This is the form of the cautery.
And indeed it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a knife-cautery, when subtility and skill are with you in the art.
And beware lest you proceed at last in cauterisation, and the thickness of the skin everywhere is burnt up, and the body be burnt up, and it come to the intestines; for the skin there is subtle: know then this.
Of the manner of cauterising the apotems of the liver.Apotemus autem Epatis habet tria genera: autem de genere primo et tertio scito, quod non potest fieri nisi per cauterium: sed de secundo genere potest fieri per medicamentum cum applicatione et per cauterium.
When a discharge occurs, and you wish to know whether that apotem is in the flesh of the liver, or in its membrane; then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the sick person suffers pain, and heaviness without keenness: and if it is in the membrane of the liver, there is keenness with burning pain: and you see already that its treatment has wearied its physicians.Et quoniam diu non est profecit, scias ergo, quod est in tunica Epatis, et est subcutaneum: et quandoque accidit ut illud exulcatio sit, et post exulcatio fit suppuratio, et post suppuratio exitus.
The sick person should therefore recline with his head resting on the pillow. Then comes the application of a blister with a cautery which resembles a red-hot iron. And this is its shape. And you shall apply with it a cautery one time, until the skin is burnt up and comes to a head, until all the pus flows out; then cure the wound by means of poultices, until it is healed.
And it is not fitting that this kind of cautery be used, except by someone who has a great deal of experience in the art of medicine and whose hands are accustomed to dealing with such diseases through much practice; then indeed he may dare to carry out such an operation.
But as for leaving it, that is better with me.
¶ On the manner of cauterizing in pleurisy.
The ancients said that a cautery with the roots of Aristolochia should be applied to cold pleurisy in the following manner. And it is like this: take a long dry root of Aristolochia, one as thick as the thickness of a finger, which is found in that plant. Then immerse it in oil and light it in the fire.Et quando fuit ad ustum, totum cum oleo applicare debet tibi super pleuritidem frigidam, si possis bene tollerare cauterium; quod si non potes, debes facere cauterium super caput. Then cauterize with it once between the furcula and the neck, and with two small cauteries at a slight decline towards the side which is under the beard.Et si postea non cesserit dolor, cauteriza super caput cum oleo scillae, et oleo aristolochiae.
And by two cauteries also on that which is between the fifth and sixth ribs inclining to the back a little; and by another cautery in the middle of the breast, and another above the belly. And by three cauteries behind: one on that which is between the two spatulas: and by two cauteries from the two sides of the breast, the lower cautery being that which is between the two spatulas.
And it behooves you not to press your hand with the cautery, nay, rather let it be on the surface of the skin smelling.
And some of the ancients have said, that from men there are who use a cautery of iron like a ray: and they ignite, and put it inside in that which is between the ribs, until it reaches with it to the ulcer, and pus comes out: as we have said in the ulcer of the liver.
But in this piercing with a cautery there is a fear that either the sick person dies immediately, or an fistula happens in the place which cannot be healed.Et si in hoc postea exsistit pus, oportet ut incidas et facias escaram, sicut diximus in capitulo de fistula.
And if afterwards pus appears in this, it behooves you to cut and make an ulceration, as we have said in the chapter on the fistula.Chapter 32 On the Mode of Cauterizing the Spleen.
When you treat the disease of the spleen, with that which we have said from the treatment in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not effect a cure, then cautery is in it according to three modes, which are all right.Et primo modo est ut sit superius splenis cauterio: secundus est in medio splenis: tertius autem in inferioribus lateribus.
One of them is to make three cauterizations or four by lining up according to the length of the spleen according to the figure of the cauteries of the liver, of which the figure precedes.
And there should be between each cautery the amount of thickness of a finger, or a little more.
And the mode of cauterization, which we said in the cauterization of the liver, should be equal.
And do not press your hand with the cautery: and let the patient lie down on his back.Quod si erumpat sanguis intra cauterium, desistas a cauterizzando.
And if blood erupts within the cautery, stop cauterizing.And another mode of cauterization is: to heat the cautery having two threads, which we said in the chapter on dislocation of the humerus: and lift up the skin, which is above the spleen, where the elbow of the sick man comes; and your elevation should lift up the skin according to the breadth of the body, so that the cauteries fall according to the length of the body.
Then insert two threads very hot, until with them you penetrate the skin from the other side; then withdraw the cautery: so there are four cauteries.Et sic facias inter omnes lunas, in quibus peruenerit lunam splenis: et non alibi.
And if you cauterize with a cautery having three folds, hold it in the other hand.
Then take care that after you have removed the cautery, it will produce pus for many days; for it is much more beneficial than the rest which preceded from the curing.
§ Of the manner of cauterizing in dropsy.
A cautery does not take effect in dropsy unless the scrotum is properly cauterized.
When you cure a hydrocele with the modes of curing which we have said above in division and yet the cure does not take effect, then you must cauterize it with four cauteries all around the navel; and with one cautery over the stomach and another over the liver and one over the spleen and with two cauteries after the back between the vertebrae and with one on the sternum and another in front of the abdomen: and let the depth of the cautery be near to the thickness of the skin.
Then leave the cautery open so that it will emit pus for a long time.
And do not dismiss the invalid from curing after cautery with it; for two intentions ought to be added to him; and healing will hasten to him with God's help.
However, the shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized must be claw-like according to what preceded its shape; and that with which the back is cauterized must be olive-shaped according to what preceded its shape.Et quodque praecessit eius forma, sic postea uteratur.
Of the method for cauterizing feet and legs.
When they are stopped up with a hydroptic and filled with yellow water, you should cauterize on the back of the foot in the spot between the ear and the ring: then lift your hand with the cautery, and do not twist it; next, lift your hand again, and do not at all repeat it.
For the yellow water will come out, and the cautery should be performed in this manner.
Then do two cauteries on each leg, and the cautery should be done with a knife-tip cautery; and let the cautery be according to the length of the leg, one under the knee, and the other below it, about midway down the leg: and over the hip joint do two cauteries: then leave the cautery open without dressing for a long time so that some water will come out of it; then dress it with the rest as we have said.
Of the method for cauterizing for hernia.
Chapter 35.Resudet enim aqua citrina, et sit cauterium secundum hanc formam.
For when hernia is caused by cold and moistness, until it weakens the retentive and digestive powers which are in the stomach and intestines, and is treated with methods of cure, and does not heal; and you see a feeble patient tolerating an abundant cautery of great power, then cauterize him with a large cautery over his abdomen, according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach with the ring cautery, and with four cauteries around the navel, subtle with a needle-tipped cautery; and a cautery over the hip joint with a large cautery, or two cauteries.
And if you see abundant moistness, and it feebly tolerates that, then cauterize him with a cautery over the breastbone, and a cautery over each hip; and perhaps add two small cauteries near the large one over the abdomen.Et si uides illum debilem et non tolerantem multum, tunc facis super eum duo cauteria cum cauterio paruo, uno super ilium, et altero sub ilio: et non iteres, ne clyster sit in eum.
For a successful treatment, there must be no error in its preparation.
On cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Chapter 36.
When there are many old hemorrhoids in the anus, or one, and they are from gross humors, cold, or corrupt moistures, and are treated with that which we said in the division, and the treatment does not work: then cauterize with three cauteries over the lower vertebrae of the spine under a little almond oil triangularly, and with the cautery almost two fingers under the navel.
And if you think that his stomach is frigid and his food does not digest, and you see his face is pustular, then cauterize him over the stomach with a large cautery according to what has preceded: and with a cautery over his liver, and another over his spleen, with a nail cautery: and leave the cautery open for some time: then treat him until he is healed.
Chapter 37.Et si quid de hisce ulcera in corporibus, vel faciebus, aut pedibus, aut manibus, post abscisionem eorum remanserit: tunc cauteriza eum cauterio parvo post quaquaversum per omnia loca, ubi ulcus erat, et dimitte cauteria apertam donec ulcus curatur.
When you cut off a tumour, then heat the cautery until it is red hot. Then insert the red hot cautery into the tumour that has been cut off, and hold your hand there until the cautery reaches the orifice of the vein from which blood is flowing; do this once or twice.
If therefore there are many tumours, then cauterize each one separately according to what we have described. Then treat them with the ointment, as we have said, until they heal.
And if you cauterize it with a large cautery above the alcathine, that is more suitable for a wound.
¶ On the manner of cauterizing a fistula in the anus.Postea quod ad cauterium pertinet sic facito.
Chapter 38.Postea quod ad cauterium pertinet sic facito.
When it is not compliant with the weak incision and operation which we narrated in its place, and is frightened away from it, perhaps it will heal with cauterization.Et si non obedit caeteris operibus quae narrauimus, et terretur ab eis: si obeat autem a cauterio, est sanabile: facito igitur sic.
And if it is not compliant with the other operations which we narrated, and is frightened away from them, but is compliant with cauterization, then it can be healed; therefore do it thus.When a fistula happens to anyone, and becomes old, pus flows from it, and corrupted moistures.Igitur postea quod ad cauterium pertinet sic facito. Therefore afterwards, do thus what pertains to cauterization.It is indeed more worthy that you should probe it with a subtle probe.Et si tentum non obedit, sed in locis suis stat: tamen probatur ea cum tenta subtili: et quando per totum tentum non obedit, sed in locis stat, non obest tibi quominus ab ea trahas cauterium, nam bene curatur cum cauterio. Then feel the depth with your fingers.
Then apply a cautery, which is like a brand. Then put the red-hot iron into the fistula and note how far it goes in.
And repeat the cautery treatment until all the decayed matter is burnt away once or twice or thrice according to your needs.
And beware of scorching the nerve if it is there or a great vein; or if the fistula goes towards the bladder or the intestines then beware of all these places.
And do not do it unless the fistula is in a fleshy spot and you think that it is not penetrating through.
Then heal the wound till it is cured.
If however the spot is sealed over and matter is pushed out from it and remains thus for a long time then know that it is now quite cured.Deinde fac postea moxa et tega.
And if matter is not pushed out from it then know that it is penetrating or there is some rotted bone in its depth, or something of that kind whose memory will come back to you at the right moment.Deinde fac postea moxa et tega.
¶ How to Cauterize Kidneys.
When in the kidneys there is pain from chill or from gross humours which are increased through it then you must cauterize over the almethen above the kidney with a cautery over all the kidney with a nail-shaped cautery the memory of whose going before will come to mind.Et si accidit ut post illum coius, qui est super renem cauterizatus, ueneat ad se dolor per renem et ad inguina, et in urinas, tunc scias quia cauterium non profuit, et oportet te iterare cauterium.
And if after the cautery on the kidney above there comes pain to it through the kidney and into the groin and into the urine then know that the cautery has not been beneficial and you must repeat the cautery.Perhaps we will cauterize it a second time in the almeiden itself.Et si accidit ut ueniat ad se dolore post illum cauterium ad cossum, et ad inguina, et in urinas, tunc scias quia cauterium non profuit, et iterabis te cauterium. Why come three lines. Therefore will they be more in judgement.
Of the manner of cauterizing a fistula.
When there occur in the Bladder weakness and relaxation from cold and moistness, until it holds back the feeble urine, then cauterize it in the lower part of the root upon the Bladder, where the hairs of the comb begin, and with a cautery on the right root, and with another on its left: and let the length of that cauterization along the side be according to the quantity of the nodule of the thumb; and cauterize it with a cautery of the back, or with two cauteries if you need it: and let it be according as has preceded the cautery nail.
Of the manner of cauterizing the Womb.Caput XLI.
When colds and moistures happen in the matrix and are prohibited by it from impregnation, and her menses are corrupted, and their production is delayed, and there happens to her a pain at their coming; then she should be cauterized with three cauteries about the navel as we said in cauterization of the ureter, and with one cautery over the alcatimi below the back, or with two cauteries; and let the cautery be clavate.
Of the manner of cauterizing a dislocation.
When the moistures of the mucous are poured out to the foreskin of the clitoris, and they become the cause of the exit of its parts from their place; and the sign of this is that the crus is prolonged over one another when compared side by side; and the dislocated part is found empty.
Therefore you should cauterize the weak one over the foreskin of her clitoris with a similar circular cautery; after you have marked it with encaustic in the circumference of the foreskin, as it turns over and over: and let the foreskin fall in the middle of the circle.
If you do not have this cautery at hand, then cauterize it with three cauteries with a large olive-oil cautery; and let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the skin in all parts.
Then treat it until it is healed.
Of the way of cauterizing for sciatica.
When pain occurs in the region of the anus and its causes are coldness and moisture, and it is treated with medicine which I have mentioned before, but the treatment does not suffice, and it becomes chronic: then you should free the patient from gross humours by means of stinking pills, or artificial pills, and such like. Then cauterize him.
And the way of cautery in this case is according to two ways: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Cautery with fire is according to many modes.Quo modo cauterizatur sciatica cum cauterio oleario.
One of these is to cauterize over the head of its anchor with three triangular cauteries, in this form. And make them a good depth, or a bad one. And let there be a space between each cautery of the thickness of a finger; and let the cautery be olive oil.
Also, sometimes the cautery is done in the middle over the head of its anchor. Wherefore there are four cauteries.Et fac ut sit cauterium oliuato, intra omnes interuas.
And make the cautery with olive oil between all the intervals. And if you see to cauterize with a circle, whose form precedes in the cauterization of the dislocation of the anchor, one: that the circle contains the whole anchor.Et fac ut inter omnes intervalles sit oliuato ad profundenam quantitatis grossitudinis digiti, circa omnem circumferentiam anchae: et sic per omnes latus eius.
And burn the thickness of the skin throughout.
This is the method of cauterization for sciatica, when the pain is adhering to the anus itself and does not extend as far as the hip and thigh.
But if it extends as far as the hip and thigh, then you shall cauterize it with two cauteries over the hip, over the place to which the sick person points with his finger, where there is pain; and you shall also with your cautery lightly touch for a little the buttock four fingers from its lower end: and let the cautery be a knife.
And the depth of the cautery should be according to the thickness of the skin.
If however the sick person points out that the pain extends as far as his toes, then you shall cauterize it there where he points with a puncturing cautery, three or four or more if necessary.Et postea cum spathula concidito cutem super locum ubi fuit cauterizat, et terga eius, si indiget, quia ibi multum est nervorum: sed non concidat sicyum eius.
And afterwards with a spathe you shall split the skin over the place where it was cauterized and over its back as well, if necessary, because there are many nerves there; but do not split its side. And if he points out that the pain is on the inside of his leg below the knee, then you shall cauterize it there with one knife cautery.
And in every cautery be careful that you do not go too deep with your cautery so as to burn the nerves or a large artery and bring about through it upon the sick person evil harm or contraction. Nam postea si non sit cauterizat usque ad nervum, aut arteriam magnam, et comburatur per te, tunc fit per te postea cum cauterio multum malorum super infirmum, quoniam nervus et arteria, qui est prope cauterizat, per hunc postea contrahitur et torturat se: et per hoc, ut fit, ad dolores alios super eundem infirmum.
And indeed I myself have seen one and another who cauterized above the buttock, and went too deep in cauterizing, and the leg swelled up until a tumor was produced which extended as far as the foot, and it was all rotted away, and the whole foot was ruined: then there followed a rupture of the belly and death afterwards.Et alii quoque multum offendi sunt per cauterizationem super cavillam, et contraxerat nervus, qui est in cauilla: et contraxit se totum crurem ad dolores grandes, donec mortuus fuerit, et multi morientur per istud.
If there is pain in both parts simultaneously, cauterize both according to this method.
And certain wise men have said that in the cautery of the anus, for which this is the mode of cautery: Make a waxed-end from iron, whose diameter is half the width of the palm; and let it be at its orifice according to the thickness of the nucleus of the finger, or less by a little; and inside that wax there is a third wax.
And let the space that is between every wax be by the quantity of a node of the thumb; and let the waxes be open from two parts; and let their height be almost a node, or two nodes; and make for them a handle out of iron decently fitted into the waxes.
Then it is heated in the fire until it reddens and throws sparks; then it is placed on a pillow, when the invalid is lying on his side on the healthy side. Therefore cauterize him with three round cauteries at once.Et sic fit cauteria anchae.
Then let him be left for three days.Et post tres dies faciatur super eum amni, et linteamine tangatur. Afterwards make a poultice over it and touch it with linen.Then let the wound remain open for many days.Et postea faciuntur super eum cauteria singula. Then afterwards single cauteries are made over him.Then treat him with ointment until he is healed.
Albucasis says: "With this kind of cautery we have been little used because of the fear of its appearance; and because we found few who would wait over it.
Nevertheless it is one of the good cauteries for him who endures it, and finds with it its place.Et si non possit tolerare, sed eruat: postea faciatur super eum cauteria cum samio magno secundum hunc modum quod diximus: et dimitte eum diebus tribus.
But if he cannot bear it but erupts: afterwards cautery is made over him with large wax according to this method which we said before; and let him be left for three days.This cautery however is with medicines burning, in that you make two waxes having a perforated bracelet, into which descends the pin of the door of it out of brass, or iron, the length of the wall; whose height is two nodes, or almost so.
And let there be a space which is between both quantities of the thickness of the finger, and let them be open below and above; and let that which contains itself within, according to this form.
Then place it on the palm of the hand, the invalid lying on his sound side. And press your hand strongly on the palm of the invalid's hand.Et postea levem inplicans et verberans. Then pour between the two circles from warm water, which has been heated a little with fire, and hold it for an hour's time: and let the invalid bear its bite and its burning, for he will find the bite like fire, until the bite goes away.Et postea funde super eam aquam frigida.
And then pour over it cold water.Then lift up your hand with the instrument and wash away the warm water from the wound entirely with sweet water; then leave it for three days.Et deinde funde super eam aquam tepidam, et eleua manum tuam cum instrumento ab Anchae, et absterge omnem illam aquam, sed non omnino.
And then pour over it tepid water, and lift up your hand with the instrument from the wound, and wash away all that water, but not entirely.And put butter on it, until the blackness of the burning goes away: and leave it for several days, and let pus flow out of it.Et postea funde super eam aquam tepidam et eleua manum tuam cum instrumento ab Anchae, et eleua illum ad pedem modium et absterge illum omnino. And then pour over it tepid water and lift up your hand with the instrument from the wound, and lift him up to a foot's height and wash him entirely.For this is the last of the journey.
Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.Et si fiat in palpebris ulcus, et non possit ad modium pedum elevari, sed sit in locis fixus, ita ut non poterit ad modium pedum levare illud: postea trahe illum cum linteo et funde super eum aquam calidam.
And if an ulcer happens in the eyelid, and it cannot be lifted to a foot's height, but is fixed in its place, so that he cannot lift it a foot'height: then draw him up with linen and pour over him warm water.If the pain extends to the hip or leg: make for him a bath in which there is water, just as you did in the wound equally.Et postea trahe illum ad pedem modium et funde super eum aquam frigidam et tene modicum tempore.
Then lift him up to a foot'height and pour over him cold water and hold it for a little time.And this is the mode of hot water: and I have already written it in the tractate of rectification of medicines.Et postea eleua illum ad modium pedum et funde super eum aquam frigidam, et tene modicum tempore. Take equal parts of alkali and unquenched lime, both reduced to powder; mix them together and place in a new pot with a small hole in its bottom, the size of the hole being according to the thickness of the liquid which is being prepared: then place under this pot another pot filled with water. Pour sweet water over the alkali and lime, so that it covers both by a finger's breadth; let them then be well pressed together by the hand; leave the pot aside until the liquid has run into the lower pot.
Then gather all this water and pour it over another lime; and strain it until it is renewed.
This will then be a strong liquid of great acuity, which is administered in many medical operations, and in cauterization of the other members. For it brings about the action of fire itself.
And among remedies there are some with which cauteries are performed, as well as with tetter-wort, and also honey of the date-plum, and lime with soap, so that both are mixed together.
And Galen indeed in his narrative has related the cure of a certain ancient man from pain in the anus and sciatic vein; and he extolled the virtue of this acrid liquid. And he said that it needed no other cure, and that he was healed by the application of this liquid alone, until he related that perhaps he had entered a bath, and emerged from it already cured.
And it is to be obtained from the green of the wild garlic; and if the green is not found, then the dried plant is taken, fresh, and ground a great deal with a little fat, and placed over the anus where there is pain, or on the leg, or in the hip: and let it be bound, and left for a period of three hours, or as much as the sick person feels the heat of burning. Then let him enter a bath.
When his body becomes perspiring, then let him be placed on the bed. The pain will go away and be cured.
And you should know that one must not use cauterization with these medicines unless after evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides who said that when goat dung is cauterized with a sciatic vein it brings relief; and the cautery is made in this way. Take some wool, soak it with old oil and place it over the spot between the big toe and second toe, that is closest to the big toe.
Then take dry goat dung, ignite it in a fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then place it over the wool and leave it until it is extinguished. Then repeat that again. So do not cease doing this until the feeling passes in the middle to the joint and the pain subsides.
And this way of cautery is called a "bovine cautery.
On cauterization for the pain in the back:
When there is pain in the back from many causes, by chance, or by a blow, or excessive evacuation, and those like them, from an infusion of cold and moist matter; and cautery indeed does not come about unless in this single kind alone, which comes from an infusion of cold matter.Et si dolor accidat inter omnes articulos dorsi:
And if there is pain between all of the bones of the back:  It is appropriate then after evacuation of the patient with stinking pills, and those like them, so that lines are made over the back where there is pain, three lines according to the width of its own skin; after you mark with encaustic in every line five cauteries, or more according to the quantity that comes from tolerance of the patient, by virtue of this:  And cauterization is done with cauterizing points.Et postea super omnes lineas quaecunque fiunt, ponatur stercus caprarum cum oleo antiquo: et imbibito lino intrantibus inter omnes lineas, quae fiunt, quomodo diximus, super locum doloris, et faciantur in illo cauteria.
And if you wish, cauterize in three cauteries, or four, with a cautery of the middle claw, according to this form.
On the mode of cauterizing in the foramen of the gibbousity.
This disease happens very often to little children.De medicamento in caetero et suppuracione.
And the sign of its foramen in children is: that which happens to him above a constriction in panting upon elevation, and motion; and you find at the end the last vertebra of the back and its nodes, which already begins to project over the other vertebrae.Et hoc incipiente haec medicamenta adhibere debes: caput aggeris super spondilium et locum incaeptionis, et suppuras cum sanguine et pusillo caetero.
And when you see that and feel it, then cauterize it with a cautery which is a circle according to this form.Et si uis, cauteriza tribus cauteriis, aut quatuor, cum cauterio clauili mediali, secundum hanc formam.
And let him take a cautery over every part of the vertebrae equally: and if you wish to cauterize around the circumference of the vertebrae with a punctured cautery two lines, or three; and may the points be close to each other.
Then treat the spot until it is healed as we have said.
And beware lest you administer a cautery on the swelling which happens in a spasm of a nerve.
Of the manner of cauterizing in Gout and pains of the joints.
When the pains of the joints are from cold humours that flow to any part of the body, then when they occur in the feet, by custom the physicians call that by its proper name Gout.
When therefore gout from a cold cause is treated with modes of treatment and the pains are not driven out then cautery drives them out.Et sic fit, sicut diximus de spondylis: et sint puncta in circumitu iuncturarum in modum crucis, et omnia propinquiores invicem.
And it is as if he cauterized it after evacuation around the junction of the feet with many cauteries: and let the cautery be oliue.
And if you need to puncture above the foot, then do it with a needle cautery. If the pains ascend to the knees, or other joints, and it often happens that this is the case, then cauterize above all the knees with three cauteries, or four from every side, with this same cautery of Clavius.
If you need more cauteries, then do it. And do not immerse your hand with the cautery but let it be about the thickness of the skin only.Quod si ad pedes, aut reliquas iuncturas dolores non remittuntur post huius cauterii applicationem, sed magis increviscunt, tunc fac his modis.
If the pains do not decrease to the feet or other joints after the application of this cautery, but rather increase, then do these things. If they go up to the knees and back, then administer what we said from the cautery in its chapter.Si dolores ascendunt ad lumbos, tunc fac ut diximus super capitulum eorum quod est de cauterio.
If the pains are only in the hands, then pricks are made around the fingernails as two lines are unwound.
But if any pains remain in the fingers, then prick them, above every joint a prick, and over the palm of the hand.
But if the pains go up after days into the arms or shoulders, then cauterize both from every part.
And do not discharge the invalid from good regimen and reception of medicines. For if good regimen is used, and phlegm is discharged, he will be healed by God's help with this cautery.
Of the manner of cauterizing for ruptures.
When a rupture happens at the groin, and intestine has descended, or hernia to the testicle, and it is incipient near by: then you must command the invalid to let out wind on his own day.Et postea recidere ad latus dolens: et faciunt eum stetere in pedibus, et oportet qui cauterizat stetere super caput infirmorum. And let him use laxatives so that he can pass his bowels.
Then let him sit between your hands on his back: and command him to hold his breath until it comes out, or a fart, or intestinal gas.
Then draw him back with your fingers and make signs with a cautery under the rupture above the pubic bone, with a sign whose end is similar to half a circle towards the upper part of the body.
Then ignite the cautery, whose shape this is, until it becomes white, and throw off sparks. Then draw back the intestine or fart into its hollow. Then the assistant shall put his hand over the place so that the intestine does not come out: and you have already opened up between the patient's thighs, and placed a pan underneath him, and another servant on top of his thighs, and another on top of his chest holding his hands.
Then put down the cautery over the sign, your hand with the cautery standing straight up. And hold him until you reach his pubic bone with him; or repeat the procedure on him a second time if you did not reach it with him on the first try.
And carefully observe the exit of the intestine during your cauterization hour so that you do not burn him and it goes through him into the patient or death, or great harm.
And you shall know that when you do not reach with the cautery to the pubic bone, your operation will not help.
And it is necessary for children's cauteries to be thin, according to their size.
Then treat with the rest of the ointment until he recovers.
And let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound heals.
And it is necessary to give him food according to the length of time his cure is, so that he does not suffer from stomach-ache and intestinal gas.
And then when he wants to rise after forty days, then administer the bandage made decently and hold it for another forty days.
And he shall be lessened by labour, and filling of meat and drink, and vehement cries.
For when he uses this treatment, he is healed by a whole healing.
And I will say the cure of Wounds with incision in his chapter.
When wounds happen in the rest of the belly, and they are incipient, and you see that they do not increase, then cauterize the wound with a round cautery according to its quantity; and let that which is burnt from then on be like the third part of it. Then heal him, with that which we have said; and let nothing be added.
And now some of the first have said: to cauterize the wound with a triangular cautery, according to this form.
After it has been marked with wax, and there is placed a line which is through the breadth on the upper side of the wound, and another line towards the bottom. And place your hand in the middle with the cautery-pin.
But the cautery is first easier and better.
¶ Of the way of cauterizing for pains because of a fall, or a blow.
Chapter XLVIII.
When it happens in some members because of a fall, or a blow; and that pain persists for a long time, and the treatment does not work on it with medicines: then one must cauterize it with a punctured cautery.
And let the cautery be a cautery of all the members according to its size, and its smallness, and its weakness, and its strength, and the location of twisting, and pain from it.Et si in quolibet membro dolor sit propter casum, vel percussione: et sit dolor illaesive, et non confert in eo curatio cum medicinis:
If therefore it is healed from the first cautery, it is well. If not then repeat over the same cautery.
For it is usual with these pains that they are transferred from one limb to another that is near them. Wherefore it behoves you to follow them up with the cautery until the patient is healed.
On the way of cauterizing for Leprosy.
Lepers are sometimes treated with hot irons. And especially the kind of leprosy that occurs because of the putrefaction of phlegm and black bile: when therefore you wish to cauterize it, consider this.
If therefore the leprosy is incipient, and you have treated it with that which we said in the division, and it does not go away, nor does it stop, and you fear lest a corruption take hold of all its complexions: then cauterize him upon his head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head marked, and secondly below this towards the forehead at the end of the hair, and two over the two horns, and one behind upon the nape of the neck.
And with the last hand your hand a little with the cautery, until it makes a shallow impression in the bone, and the cortices will be displaced: that the expiration of the thick vapors may be relieved from it, and you will also cauterize the spleen with the cautery, according to what has preceded.
But if the leprosy is already scattered over the infirm person and appears manifestly: then you ought to cauterize with these cauteries which we said in the head, and with a cautery over the end of the nose, and with two cauteries over the two jaws, and with two cauteries over the neck-bones, and with six over the back-bones, and with one great one over the buttocks at the grain of the tail and one above itself in the almidad: and with two over the hips, namely over every hip one, and with two over the knees, one over each knee, and with two over the shoulders, and with two over the arms, and with two over the tender places of his chest; and you will cauterize him over every joint from the joints of his fingers of his hands and feet: and you will cauterize over every calcaneum of his feet, and over the toe-nails of his hands.
And beware of the nerves that are above the last calcaneum, lest you burn them.Et si alicui in omni parte corporis seu multum seu pauciun, de seu lepra apparuit: et non curavit, sed magis crevit, sed neque poterat curare eam: tunc oportet cauterizare super caput cum cauteriis quibus diximus, et cauterize etiam super almeidatos sui cum cauterio, et super omnes partem carnis suarum, ubi apparuit, et omnes articulas corporis suum, et super omnia ossa sua, si potest.
And sometimes a cautery is used on the bone of the breast, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And you should know that the more you add to the cautery, it is more beneficial, and more effective.
And you should know that the sick person does not find pain in cauterization as do healthy people; this is because his body is already numbed.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be of size and shape according to the limbs and joints; following what has preceded in terms of tools.
Then treat with a cautery made from flour of an herb with honey, and other treatment until it is healed.
¶ On the manner of cauterizing for stupor.
When a limb is stupified and treated with remedies, oils, and plasters, but does not heal, then cauterize the stupified limb with cauteries, according to the size or smallness of the limb.Et si in stupore sit caput vel facies aliqua, et non possit rem edere in faciendo vomitu vel aliter, ut necesse sit, ut stupor tollatur:
Let your cautery enter into the depth of the skin a little. Then heal it with ointment until it is cured.
And when it is cauterized to something like a paralysis that has happened to the hand or the foot on the spine of the back near the end of the nerves which move this member; and the paralysis is removed.
But he should not attempt it unless he is wise in anatomy of the members, and in the going forth of the nerves which move the body.
Chapter 51.
When the wound does not advance any further in its healing, then you may cauterize it with a little deep-going cautery according to the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness is removed and its colour changed.
Then heal it with herb-powder and lentils with rose oil, and leaves of the arnoglossa, and pigeon's blood and blood of a swallow; from each have one part: mix all these together, and apply them on a piece of linen which may adhere to the spot until it is cured.Si vero sit in capite, et sint superius nervi, qui movent membra superius, ut manum, pedem, et brachium: et est super illum albus, et sanguis non fluere poterit, neque movebitur membre superius, et super illum non potest clystis intrare:
If it is on the head, and there are above it nerves which move the superior members, as the hand, foot and arm; and upon it is whiteness, and blood cannot flow, and the superior member is not moved, and upon it clysters cannot enter:Caput LII.
When the cancer is beginning and you wish to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circuit as it turns itself around.Deinde cura omnia loca cum unguento, et faciunt ut clyster intrare possit super eum: secundum diem, donec sanetur.
Then heal all the places with ointment, and cause that a clyster may enter upon it; according to the day, until it is cured.The wise have also said, that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in its midst.Quod si non possit intrare clyster in eum: et non potest remouere stuporem: sed sit super illum albus, sanguisque non fluere, nec movere membrum possit: tunc faciunt ut clyster intrare possit super eum:Deinde faciant ut intrent super eum cauteria in locis nervorum mouentium membrum.
But I don't want to see that because I'm afraid it will get infected and I've seen that happen many times before.
And it is better to cauterize the wound all around as we said above or with many cauteries.
On cauterization according to Adubalati.
When someone has an abscess called 'Adubalati' and it is delayed in maturing either because of a surplus causing it or due to the age of the patient when he is decrepit with little blood, or because of the time, if you want to speed up the maturation of the Adubalati, then cauterize its edges with many small cauteries by puncturing. Then leave it alone. For itself will hasten its maturation.Et uidebis quod post cauterisationem, si non facit maturatio in diebus tribus vel quartus, uel utroque, si faciet maturatio: nam post tres dies aut quartum diem fere debet esse maturitas: et si non erit maturitas, aut scies quia non facta est cauterisation bene, quod non debet esse maturitas.
If you want to probe it with a cautery, then heat the cautery which has this shape:
And place it in the middle of the abscess until it pierces the skin: and let the cautery be from that which follows the patient so as to open up a passage for the pus.Et post haec fac ut debet fieri.
Then care for him until he recovers.
§ Of the mode of cauterizing a bad corrosion.
CHAPTER LIIII.De modo applicandi olea ad ulcera.
A cancer is nothing but a corruption in a walking limb, and it corrodes itself, just as fire eats up dry wood.
If you see a corrosion in a place that will bear cauterization by fire, then cauterize it with many small and large cauteries according to what is appropriate for the place where the corrosion is.
Then cauterize all of it until you eradicate the whole corruption and nothing at all remains of it.
Then leave it for three days, and then apply powdered sulfur with oil over the cauterized areas until all the scars and all the corruption are eradicated.Postea si uides aliam corruptionem in corporis parte aliqua, ita fac de novo, sicut superius descripsimus.
Then if you see another corruption in some part of the body, do likewise as we described above.Then treat it with ointments that generate flesh.
If you see that after three days healthy flesh is born by natural generation where there is no corruption, it is good.Et cum carni et carnibus qui corroduntur omnino non concordent, sed inter se mortem et putredinem generant, ut supra descripsimus, ergo non debet carnis genere concidi, sed cauterium debet illi imposita esse.
If the flesh and the腐肉 do not at all agree with one another but rather generate death and putrefaction as described above, then it should not be cut out by means of a knife, but cauterization should be imposed upon it.And if not: then repeat the cautery over that which remains of the corrupt places.
And the corrosion is treated sometimes with an acute medicine.Et si postea uides carnem generatam de novo, quae conciditur cum carne sana: ita debet esse cauterizatum donec eradicetur. And if you then see flesh generated anew, which is cut out with healthy flesh: thus it should be cauterized until eradicated.For the flesh itself arises in the place of the cautery.Et si non conciditur sano carnis genere sed corrodens medelatur cum medicina: non debet esse conciso.
However, cautery is of the nature of fire and heat; I have already mentioned that this cautery with sharp medicine should be used during division. So take it from there when you need it.
The method of cauterizing warts and moles:
Chapter 55.
This sickness often occurs in the lower parts of the feet; it is a coarse, filtered thing that injures the foot.
And there are two kinds of cautery for them: cautery with fire and cautery with hot water.
Now as regards cautery with fire, it is such that the cauterizing instrument should be like a hollow feather of a vulture; this is made from iron according to the size which contains the mole on all sides and is thin at the edges.
Then lay the hot stone upon the nail. Then move your hand with the cautery all around the nail, until you reach the bottom of it; and leave it for three days until pus begins to come out. Then put a plaster on it made with evil silkworm cocoons, crushed with salt; and leave the plaster over night. For this way it will be eradicated from its roots.
Then treat the spot with an ointment to generate flesh until healed.
If these are not turned over and happen many times on the surface of the body, especially in hands and feet; then use cautery with hot water on them. You may take a tube made of bronze, iron or goose feather; and place it upon nail or wart. Then pour into the tube a little amount of hot water; hold your hand and move it a little with compression of your hand so that the edge of the tube is impressed in root of nail and finds hot water way to depth, to root of nail; and let sick person wait a while over bite of hot water.
Then leave it, for nail is eradicated with its roots.
So do with them one after another, until you come upon all who are in the body.
Then treat them after they have been eradicated, with what generates flesh out of ointment.
On the manner of cautery for trembling.
When it happens to someone that there is trembling from chill in nerve, or from quartan fever, or other: then you ought to cauterize it with four cauteries, or five above vertebrae of back, and between each vertebra cautery, and in his chest cautery, and over his stomach cautery.
For trembling is quieted with olive-oil cautery, and hastens health of cold sickness.
On the manner of cautery by Albeithar.
Chapter 57.
When foulnesses are expelled from the body they are called pustules, that is, they are caused by corruption of thick materials.
Hence, when they first appear, it is important that they be cauterized with a fine cautery iron heated in the fire over the head of the pustule. Or with the root of a long aristolochia plant. Or with a lentil-shaped cautery iron.
And when they are cauterized over the pustule at the beginning of their appearance: and not increased: and the excess that makes them is broken up and healed from them.
However, this should be done after evacuation with bloodletting.Et si fiant in corpore foedae et non possunt expelli nisi per evulsionem: ut sint cauterizate per evulsionem.
Take a silver vessel full of water and place it on the fire so that it comes to a boil, then take it off the fire. While the water is still hot, take a clean sponge and soak it well with vinegar; then apply it to the wound so as to cool the blood which has come from the artery. Take another clean sponge soaked in hot water and squeeze it out, then apply it to the wound until you feel that the heat of the blood has gone, but be careful not to stop the flow of blood completely.
Many times an artery which has been cut externally, or in an incision over an abscess, or during cautery of a limb and similar procedures, may begin to bleed profusely; it is then difficult to stop the bleeding.
When this happens therefore, quickly place your hand over the opening of the artery and put your index finger on top of it; press hard until the blood is held back under your finger and flows no more.Postea tene digitum illum super orificium arteriae donec sanguis obsit.
Afterwards hold your finger over the opening of the artery until the blood stops flowing.Then put small and numerous olive-wood splinters into the fire and blow upon them until they are burning fiercely.Ibi ponito super orificium arteriae, et tene super eum donec obsit sanguis: sed cura ne te mordacant.
Then take one of them, either small or large according to the wound and the place where the artery has been cut, and apply the cautery to the vein; then quickly remove your finger and hold the cautery until the blood is stopped.Postea tene digitum tuum super uenam donec obsit sanguis: et post haec depone super eam cauterium alium, et tene super eam, donec sanguis abscindatur.
Then hold your finger over the vein until the blood stops; and then apply another cautery to it, and keep holding it until the blood is stopped.If however, when you lift your finger from the opening of the artery and extinguish the cautery, the blood starts flowing again, then quickly take another cautery from those which are prepared in the fire.Et ponito super eam uenam, et tene super eam festinanter donec sanguis obsit: sed cura ne te mordacant: et fac illud per omnia loca ubi sanguis egreditur ex arteriae, quae incisa est.
Do not then cease doing this one after another until the blood is stopped.
And beware that you do not burn the nerve that is there and add another wickedness to the sick man's disease.
And you should know that when blood flows from an artery, then it is not possible to stop it, especially when the artery is large, unless with one of four remedies. Or by means of cauterization, as we said above. Or by extraction, when it has not been extracted. For when it is extracted, its extremities are contracted and the blood stopped.Et sic debes facere cum omni arteria qua tu scieris. Or it must be bound with a strong ligature of thread.For all arteries should be treated thus. Or medicine of the proper kind should be placed upon it and bound with a suitable poultice of chalk dust.Et faciatur compressio de lino, et stringatur benigne, ne nervus comburatur: nam periculum est, si comburatur nervus, quod omnia membra infra nervum debiles fiant et claudent.
Whoever performs the operation with a ligature and compression with a cloth, or with the application of caustics, and similar substances, does not bring about complete cure, except rarely.
If however it happens to anyone and the doctor is not present, nor medicine: then he should begin with the application of his finger over the orifice of the vein, as we have said, and its compression strongly, until the blood is stopped from above the wound, and above the artery. And the finger should not be removed, but it must be washed over with very cold water always, until the blood freezes and is cut off.Et tunc remoueat digitum, et liget super eam ullam fascem, ut antea praecipiuit s.
And then he must remove his finger, and tie over it one of the ligatures, as before directed. And in the meantime he must consider what is needed from cautery or medicine.Si vero sanguis non congeletur per aquam, sed per ignem faciendum sit, et tunc incipiatur cauteria.
On Incision, Piercing, and Venesection in Wounds, and similar things.De incisione.
We have already said in the First Chapter of every disease in which appropriate cautery or medicine burning is, and its occasions, causes, and instruments, and forms of cauteries.Et quod super uulnera faciendum est praesertim pro sanguine stante et percutiente.
And I placed there the little chapters from the crown of the head to the foot.
And I shall follow the same method in this chapter as well, so that he who seeks may find what is sought.
And before I begin it, you must learn O sons, that there is in this chapter what was said to be feared in the first chapter on cautery.
And because of this it is necessary that the precaution be even more strict, for in the operation which is in this chapter there often occurs a discharge with blood, with which life stands at the door of aperture of the vein, or incision on the boil, or the aperture of the exit, or the cure of the wound, or the extraction of the arrow, or the incision over the stone, and such like; from all these is joined trembling, and fear, and in many of them falls death.
And I warn you that it not fall upon you that in which there is hesitation, for sometimes come to you men of various infirmities with various modes. For among them is he who rages with his disease, and death is light upon him because of the vehemence of that which he finds from his disease and the length of its malignity.Et est ex eis qui timet cum aegritudine sua: et est uerebila apud eum mors, quia non habet uitam in se ueluti in illo qui irascitur. And among them is he who fears with his disease: and death is terrible upon him because he does not have life within him like the one who rages.And with disease is from fear that which signifies death.Et ex eis est qui non sentit, sed dormit cum aegritudine sua et uenena quae in se habet: et stat mortalis eius uita in illo quasi in limine, et quasi in fine eius ueluti uigiliae.
And from among them is he who gives you his own tibicenum, and enriches you with it, hoping for health, but his sickness is destructive.
Therefore you ought not to agree with him who comes to you from among them, whose way is like this. And let your caution be more severe than your greed and your avarice. And do not presume anything from him unless after certain knowledge, which verifies with you that to which he has arrived at a praiseworthy succession.
And be used for the cure of all your sick, prognosis and indication of that to which conveniently is health.
In him indeed is your help in acquiring fame and glory, memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O sons, his understanding, and not take away from you direction and inspiration; for that is in his hand.
And indeed I have ordered this Chapter distinguishing by chapters, according to what precedes in the Chapter of Cautery, from neck to feet; so that you will be eased of the sought-after which you want from it, and which you need.
Of the cure of Water which is aggregated in boys' heads.
Chapter I.
Know that this sickness often happens to boys at birth: or when the midwife tightens the boy's head without lightness.
And it also happens from a hidden cause which is not known.
And indeed I have not seen this sickness in others than in boys; and to every whom I saw hastened death: therefore it seemed good to me to send the operation in her.And if you see that the water is white, as snow or milk, then fear God in heaven, and do not touch the head of the sick boy.
And indeed I have seen of them a boy whose head was filled with water, and the head magnified in every day, until he could not sit over himself, because of the magnitude of his head; and the moisture was increased, until he died.And if you see that there is green or yellow water, then fear God, for it is a dangerous matter.
And this moisture, either is accumulated between the skin and bone: or it is accumulated under the bone over the face.
And the operation in that, if there is moisture between skin and bone, and the pustule is small, then it behooves you to find in the middle of the head a single fissure, two inches in width: and let the length of the fissure be almost two knots, until the moisture flows.
And this is the form of the spatula.
If therefore the moisture is more increased, and the pustule is larger, then place those two fissures, according to this form.
And if the moisture is under the bone, and its sign is, that you see the joints of the head open on every side: and water is depressed when you press it with your hand to the inward, and it does not disappear for you: then it behooves you to find in the middle of the head three fissures, in this way.
And after the incision draw out all the moisture. Then bind the fissures with cloths and bandages.Et susextrahe osse quod super est, et facias eum utramque partem ad exteriora: et trahatis osse eam modum ubi stet illud prope nasum. Then draw out the bone that is above, and make it both sides to the outward: and draw out the bone in that way where it stands near the nose. Then embrocate it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day.Postea, quomodo cernis te humorem sub osse non esse, tunc facias ut antea, et incidas in medio capitis duas fissuras secundum modum praedictus: et extrahe illud usque ad ultimum.
Then cut the ligament, and treat the wound with plasters and ointments.
And do not stop binding the head tightly. And feed the weak patient with dry food little by little until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Another method of incision is to consider where there appears to be a large pustule and collection of water.
Because sometimes the pain is greater in the back of the head or in the forehead, or on the right side or left side.
Therefore, go up with an incision where you see a pustule and a filling of water; and cut it according to what you are able.
And beware, lest you cut an artery and have a flow of blood and the weak person die from that flow when the moisture is evacuated.
¶ Of incisions of the arteries which are behind the ears.Et si apparierit tibi quod non sit apostema, sed dolor in loco illo: incide tamen locum cum lancea, et tasta, et trahe sanguinem.
Head 2.Et obserua quomodo procedas ad curam eorum.
When cataracts occur to the eyes or to the chest and that is hardened and does not respond to medical treatment, then the final treatment in such a case is the cutting of these two arteries.
So when you wish to cut them, he must turn the invalid's head aside. Then wash the site with a rough cloth so that the arteries may appear. Then let the invalid draw up his neck using either his own bandage.Postea teneat manibus seu aliquo alio modo, ut non possit motus capite tantum facere, ut illa incisio disiungatur et diuida, sed tenendo ad unum collum suum. Then consider where the pulse is. And the places are behind the ears depressed: and it is seldom hidden, unless in some men.
Then mark with a cautery on both sides and cut each one with a sharp spatula all around the cutting going to the bone; and let that be all over the width of the head.
And if you will, insert the spatula under the artery and cut it towards the top with an incision.Deinde ad inferiora utramque parte sub arterias: et disiunga illas per longitudinem capitis.
And cut those at the bottom on both sides under the arteries and separate them all over the length of the head.And let the length of the incision be about two joined fingers.
For when the vein is cut, blood will flow out in a pulsating stream which leaps into the inside with frequent bounds.Namque et caput eget sanguine, ut alium uiscerum: qui est sub eo.
For the head needs blood as any other viscera does which is under it.But if the artery does not appear to the senses, then one ought to measure from the ear a quantity of space of three fingers. Then mark with cautery and go all the way to the bone.Et quod non apparet sensui, fac incisiones per tres digitos: et si non apparuerit, fac aliam per tres digitos.Et ita fac ad omnes partes.
And that which ought to be emitted from blood is vi ounces and perhaps you emit more or less from it. All this according to the quantity which appears to you from the viridity of the patient and filling of his artery.
Then consider the wound. Then if something remains to the bone from the sifac, then cut it, so that a warm apostema does not occur: then tie the wound with lint made of linen cloth.
Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
¶ On the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
Chapter III.
When a person has a long-standing hemicrania or acute cold catarrh due to sharp humidities and heat in the temples, or an old soda with a foul smell, and similar conditions, and is treated with methods of cure according to medicine, but it does not help, then we have found in such diseases that extraction of the arteries from the temples or cauterization of them, as we have narrated.
And the manner of operating on their extraction is to shave the hair which are in the temples and move towards the artery that appears in the temple. Indeed, it is revealed to you by its pulse, and is rarely hidden except in a few people, or vehemence of cold.Unde si uides arteriis pulsandi latus pedem cum manu, et non habes eam ex parte pulsam, ubi est incisa, sed ad contrariam partem: scito quod extractio non fuit plena.
If it is concealed from you, then the sick person binds his head with any of his garments; then he rubs the place with a rough cloth. Or he steams the place with hot water until it becomes clear to you. Then take the spatula that I formed a little while ago. Then, with ease, peel the skin until you reach the artery. Then insert into it a hook and draw it towards the upper part until you have extracted it from the skin and made it emerge from the tunics that lie beneath it on every side.
But if the artery is slender, wind it round with the end of the hook.Deinde extrahe eam usque ad ossa et tene eam ut non retortur in cutem. Then draw it out as far as the bones and hold it so that it may not slip back into the skin. Then cut off a portion of it according to the amount by which its extremities are prolonged and drawn in, lest a flow of blood occur. For if it is not cut and if a part of it is not removed, the blood will not come up entirely from within.
Then let out from the blood six drachms and one third.
But if the artery is large, it is necessary to ligate it in two places with a double thread of strong silk: or with a chord of alhohod, so that putrefaction may not come upon it before the wound is healed, and that flow of blood might not occur.Deinde, si res erat subdola, et non appareret tibi qualis esset arteria, incide in eam uncinum, et extrahe eam ad superiora, donec uides carnem albitarem: sed ne forte liges arteriam quae est intra cutem.
Then, if the case was a cunning one, and did not appear to you what manner of artery it was, insert into it a hook and draw it towards the upper part until you see the white flesh: but take heed lest you ligate the artery which is within the skin. Then cut off the superfluity which lies between the two ligatures. Do that in that hour or another.Si uero arteria non erat subdola, sed appareret quod esset arteria: tunc incide eam cum lama, et fac ut sanguis fluat usque ad extremitatem eiusdem arteriae.
But if the artery was not cunning but appeared to be an artery, cut it with a razor and let the blood flow to its extreme end. And if you will, cauterize it with a cautery up to the bone, with a knife-cautery: until its extremities are cut through and the work of that part is brought to a standstill.Si uero non potes, neque auderes incidere eam cum lama, aut cauterizare eam cum cauterio cultellari usque ad ossa, fac illum ligaturam super eam arteriam, donec discedat fluxus sanguinis per extremitatem arteriae.
And it is better for the operation, unless if he be infirm and has a fever or a heated complexion. Because cautery is of those things which help to end moistures. Therefore the poultice is better.
And it behooves after the drawing of arteries, that the place be filled with a cooked poultice: and on it to be laid decently made boluses.
And after the dissolving is healed with dry medicines, which cause flesh to be born, and with ointments, until it is healed.
If meanwhile while you are operating there happens a flow of blood from an artery, then hasten to cut it off with cautery or to fill up the place with a sponge: and press your hand until the blood is cut off. If nothing of these is present to you, then place your finger on the spot until the blood congeals. And embrocate the place with water of violent coldness, until the keenness is stilled and bound up according as it behoves.
And because it is lighter and easier to draw a vein, it is that you should cauterize the artery with this cautery having two knives; let the keenness of the two knives be like that of almug. Nevertheless they are of much less keenness than two knives.Quod si inter venam et arteriam habes nervum, ut non facias eum cum vena perire: quia potest esse, ut perit toto corpore. For if you have a nerve between the vein and the artery, that you do not make him perish with the vein; for it can be that he perishes throughout the body.Because if they are acute like two knives, the coldness hastens to both; and they do not cut into the flesh with swiftness. When therefore there is a little thickness in them, the heat of fire is held in them, and the flesh is cut off quickly; with this therefore the work is better, and lighter, and easier.Et post quod perficitur cauterium omnium partium corporis, et non est uelocitas carnis: cum eis tamen oportet uti, donec carnis uelocitas perficatur.
And this is the form of the cautery.
Let there be a space between the two cauteries equal to the thickness of a finger, after you have marked the two places with caustic: and apply both while very hot until they reach the bone and pierce the vein in the two places, so that what is between their extremities may be elongated. For they are not firmly consolidated with this cautery.
Chapter 4.Antiquo tempo per medicos et magos, utpote per omnes homines, fuit inventum verum almighty medicamentum omnipotens, et nominatur oliua sancti Iohannis.
¶ On the cure of acute and constant flowing of tears from the eyes.
In ancient times by physicians and magicians, indeed by all men it was found a true almighty omnipotent medicine, and is named the Oil of St. John.When there are constant tears, and there is flowing from them out of veins which are above the skull externally: and he confers in them nothing of curing medicine with medicines, and you see the face of the patient already redden, and feels in his forehead a crawling, just as there is a crawling of ants: and his eyes are enfeebled, moist, so that they are already eaten away with corrosion: and his eyelids are heated from the acuteness of tears: then the ancients resorted to their curing by this operation, and called this cure, with The Sword.
And it is that you should command the patient to shave the hairs which are on his forehead.Et postea facias eam operationem cum Ense: et teneas eam super lachrymalem, donec sanguis erupat per venam. And then do this operation with The Sword: and hold it over the tear duct until blood flows through the vein.Then cut in the forehead three incisions equidistant according to the length of the forehead: and let the length of the incision be almost two fingers, and one incision be equidistant to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length by a little from the movement of the lizards, and the third on the other side: and beware of cutting the arteries which are on both sides: and elongate your hand from the continuation of two jaws, and let the space of all the incisions be the quantity of three joined fingers: and have a piece of sponge prepared for you, or many pieces of dry cloth, with which you will stop the blood.Et postea facias eam operationem cum Ense: et teneas eam super lachrymalem, donec sanguis erupat per venam.
Then insert the spatula with two acute ends, whose shape follows immediately after it. From the incision which is by the temple to the second incision, scrape all the skin which is between the two incisions with it, up to the bone. Then do likewise from the middle incision to the second incision. Then withdraw this spatula and insert into the first incision again another instrument called a sharp knife, softly on one side, not sharply on the other. And thus is its form.Haec autem est forma cultellare.
And place the sharp side of it against the flesh with the skin and the dull side against the bone; and push it in until it reaches to the middle fissure, and cut away with it all the sacs which descend from the head to the eyes, leaving only what is joined to the skin by the incision.
Then do likewise in the middle fissure up to the other fissure.Et erga cutem bene, et quod sit sub cutis uterque latus eius cum cultellare, donec perueniat ad ossa oculorum: scil. ad illud quod uisum est, sed non apparet.
And after an equal quantity of blood has run out, squeeze the places from which the clotted blood comes.
Then place on each crack a little pitch from old cooked pitch, and put over them lint soaked in wine, or oil, or vinegar. And see that no hot pustule occurs.
And on the third day loosen the bandage and administer much infusion with warm water. Then heal it from basilicon ointment and other things by which wounds are healed: until it is cured.
Chapter Five.
¶ Of the cure of acute weeping eyes and cataracts inside the head.
When a person suffers from acute, fierce and persistent cataracts; when you see that his eyes are emaciated, tiny, and their aspect is already debilitated; and the eyelids are ulcerated, and hairs fall out from them, and there is a sharp pain in the depth of the head which is damaging, and a consequent sneezing: then take from among those accidents, for these matters and cataracts do not come except from many veins.
And a better cure for them is this one.Unde ueniet cataracta? a sanguine et humore malis qui per oculos ueniunt. And it is, as you order the invalid to shave his forehead. Then cut the fissure in the middle of the forehead, or the other slightly by breadth, and begin with the fissure from left tempora to right tempora: and let the incision be up to the bone: and extend your hand from the back of the ears which move upon mastication: until when the bone is uncovered: and you will dry all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate between two lips of the fissure with a cooked veal, or with bandages out of linen. Then bind it from above with wicks: and moisten the wicks with wine and oil, lest hot ulceration happen.Et in manibus uigilantibus tenebris tege, donec quando contusio concidit: et postea facies clysteres calidos.
And when you have released it, and see that the hot ulceration is now lessened: then it behooves that you should file the bone, until flesh begins to grow on it.Et postea facies ad modum quod supraribant: et memento ut non concidat in illum locum de novo.
Then treat the wound with a drying poultice that will cause the flesh to grow: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and prepare a poultice from these ingredients which is applied to wounds to promote the growth of new flesh.
Chapter 6.
Of the treatment for an ear wound.
All wounds to the ear are of four kinds: either a stone, or a substance like a stone, such as iron and brass; or it is a plant, such as peas and beans; or it is a fluid, such as water, vinegar and their likes; or it is an animal.
When then a stone or a substance that does not grow falls into the ear, expose the ear to the sun; if you see the stone then drop something into the ear from olive oil or sesamum oil. Then administer its extraction and cause sneezing with snuff, and plug the nostrils at the approach of sneezing, after you place around the ear rags of cloth or wool, and extend the ear upwards.Et postea, cum res uterque cadit in aurem, administra extractionem eius per stethon, vel tubam: sed si non possis per stethon vel tubam extrahere, pon in aure oleum, et fac uentilare per buccam, et uidelicet exire lapidem per buccam.
Often it happens that with this cure.
If however it does not go out, then administer its extraction with the pizigaris, that is, the very fine tweezers; whose form is this.
If therefore it goes out with the pizigaris, it is good.
And if not, then administer its extraction with a very fine blind hook of few turns.
If therefore it does not go out through that, then make a tube of brass, and insert the end of the tube into the ear much, and the plug which is in the circuit of the tube with soft wax with oil, so that there be no way for air except for the tube: then extract with your strong attraction.
Often indeed it goes out with that which we have spoken of.Si non tamen, tunc faciendum est ad modum eboris, ut antea. If it will not come out this way then take a little bit of glue from the glue-pot or from the glue of fish, that is, with which they catch birds, and put it at the end of the rod after you have wrapped the cotton over it decently; then introduce it into the hole of the ear with ease after you have dried the ear from moisture.
If then it will not come out with all that we have said, hasten to split it before a hot blister or spasm occurs.
And the way of splitting is that you should first draw blood from the weak person in the head using a phlebotome according to his strength. Then let the sick person sit between your hands and turn his ear upwards and find a small split at the root of the ear near its fat in a depressed place and let it be in the shape of a moon until you reach the stone; then take it away with him using whatever instruments are possible for you.
Then you close up the split quickly and carefully from your side until it is healed.
If what falls into the ear is a single grain which has grown and swollen then you must carry out its extraction.Et sic fit extractionis modus.
And thus is the way of extraction made.But if it does not obey you by coming out then take a very fine and thin spatule according to this shape:
And carry out with it the abscision of that kind from grains which have fallen into the ear and do not do this when you think that the grain has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear until you put it in many times: then pull it out with hooks or a subtle knife or by suction as we have said, because its extraction is eased.
In addition the sick person should blow his nose with snuff before the water enters the ear and has already filled his ear with a little cooked snuff and is lying on his back with the affected ear upwards.Et sic debet esse per trios horas, quod non posset aliter aduertiri: et sic est modo per multum tempus usque diem tertium. If it therefore goes out through it, it is good.
And if not: then take many stones, according to the length of the finger, thin, smooth, and heat them a little with fire, and let the sick one put one of them into the hole of his ear: and spit upon his foot on that side, and strike with another stone upon the stone which is in the ear. He shall not therefore cease doing this with a stone and a stone until all the water comes out.Et si non: tunc accipe cerym viridem et fac simiam ut tangat auriculam suam cum eo: et postea tangat pedem suum super illam parte, ubi est aqua: et mox redibit ad locum primo consilium.
And now the water will flow out, so that you take one from the cup or from the reed, and insert one end into the ear; and light the other end with fire, until most of it is burnt away. Then take another reed, and do this many times until all the water is out; then withdraw it with the tube as mentioned before on the stone.
But if an animal has entered it, and it is small of body, such as a flea or similar, treat it as I have said in the division above.
But if it is a large body which can be seen with the eye, then treat it with forceps and hooks; and this is easier in all cases for objects held in the ear.
But if you treat a worm born in the ear as we have said above, and the treatment does not work for you, then it is necessary to look at the ear in the sun.Et si exspectes quidam spatium, scies quod apparet mota et saepe movebitur, ut sit sensibile oculo tuo: tunc scito quod facit apodem intra eam. If then something appears in the ear from these worms, then extract it with forceps or with very fine hooks.And if you wait a while you will see that it is moving and often moving about, so that it can be perceived by your eye; then know that there is an abscess inside it.If there appears in there anything of worms, then extract it with forceps or with very fine hooks.
But if nothing appears there, then take the tube, which has this shape, straight below and broad above; and insert its slender end into the ear according to how much it can tolerate it, then suck with a strong suction.And if you cannot extract it easily in this way, then bring the fire close so that you can see within by the light of the fire; and if you see something shining within like a grain of wheat or an olive stone or similar thing, then take hold of it as above with the forceps and extract it. Do this many times until all the worms have come out.And if you see any other object in there, which seems to have entered by accident or by some other cause, then treat it as we have said above, whether it is a stone, grain of wheat, bone, or similar thing; and also if you see an abscess.
But if they do not come out readily for you, then wrap the tip of the tube with some cotton wool, as I have said above on the stone.And apply it in this way until the wound has closed up and healed over; then leave it.
If these do not come out with what we have said, then administer the distillations which the ancients experienced in infected wounds; and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
And let there be an effusion of oil and medicines into the ear with this instrument, the form of which is depicted here. As you see make it of silver or brass, drawn out below, in which there is a small opening, larger above.
Let the plug, therefore, which is in the concavity of the cannula be made decently of brass. And if you wish take a rod and wrap a piece of cloth on its end decently; then pour oil, or juice, or what you will from these medicines into the cannula; and let this be in the ear; then push in the rod with the cloth from above, and press it with your hand gently, until the oil is forced into the concavity of the ear, and the sick person feels it within; and let that which is infused into the ear be somewhat warm; and beware lest what is distilled be very cold; for medicines will not tolerate this.
CHAPTER VII.
Of the cure of the accident of a burst Ear.
Sometimes children are born from the wombs of their mothers not opened.Quod si in tempo conueniente non possit per feriam extrahi, sed ueluti mortuos ueniat ad terminos et diem mortis, quod est malum extremum: tunc fiant haec remedii, et proficient.
And now it happens also that some men become deaf from a wound, or from suppuration of flesh in their ear.
And this deafness sometimes happens in the depth of the hole of the ear, which is not reached by the touch; and sometimes it happens near the opening of the foramen, and it is reached by the touch.
So that which happens in the depth of the ear, and which is not comprehended by sight, is difficult to heal in many dispositions.Et haec quae fit ad externum foraminis et per illam accessus est uisi ad curandum: et si cuncta concidunt ut debent, multum facit ad sanationem, et redit homo ad audientiam.
And that which happens near the foramen and is reached by touch is cured by putting the patient's ear towards the sun, and looking in it; then if you see the suppuration apparent, open it with a spatulum, of which the shape follows, its end having a little breadth, one part of which is acute, and the rest of the spatulum being gentle on both sides, so that it does not hurt the ear.
If then the suppuration is from suppuration of flesh in the ear passage, hold it with a slender hook, and cut at it with facility and vehemence, until all the flesh is taken away.Et si in eodem meatu auris, uel in alio, est quaedam carne cresca et opilatio: ponas in solum uigiliae uolutabiles et facies illa carnem in ea cadere usque ad extremitatem: et postea incidas eam cum facilitate vehementi: et sic usque facias donec omnia carnes quae in meatu sunt auferantur.
If there is wax deep inside the ear: then take a thin rod, heat it gently over a fire and then insert it into the ear.
If you feel congestion with this, as the invalid does with the weight of his hearing, try to open it gently and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
Then apply to the ear a piece of linen according to the size of the opening, which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; do this for several days until you are sure that the wound is healed.
Or take a piece of linen and soak it in rose water, and powder over it ground zega, and use it.
If you see that the ear is already forming a scab, then you must remove the linen and let it remain with another piece of linen which you have wrapped in ointment made from rose oil until the scab is dry; then tend to it until it is healed.Quod si uides apostemum frigidum: tunc trahe licinium, et olea cum oleo rosato: sed si calidum est: tunc trahe eam cum unguento aegyptio usquequo aperiatur, quoniam est utilior in apertione.
If you see that the scab is cold: then remove the linen and anoint it with rose oil; but if it is hot: then remove it with Egyptian ointment until it opens, for this is more useful in opening. If however there is a flow of blood: then immerse a sponge or pieces of linen in cold water and place them over the ear; and use the rest of the cure which stops the flow of blood as mentioned above in the tract on distillation.
Of the treatment of Altheli for eyelids.
Chapter 8.De curis ad othorrhoas et laryngorrhoas et ad uulnera in ore et in gola: de quibus loquebitur in capituli sequentium.
The swellings which occur on the eyelids of the eye are sometimes moist and sometimes dry.
You must therefore hold them with forceps or with tweezers, and cut them with a spatula from their roots. Then apply ground zeger to the places.
If blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a thin lens-shaped cautery.
And cauterizing them is better after cutting. For often they return when something remains of their roots. And when cauterized with fire, those roots are burnt and do not return.
Of the cure of Granulations on the Eye-lids.
CHAPTER 9.
It often happens on the eyelids something that resembles a granulation in its strength and hardness, and therefore it is named Grano; and it is an accumulation of coarse moisture in the upper eyelid, and the lower eyelid.Et si non est curata, consumit oculum, et perficit eum omnino.
And if it is not treated, it consumes the eye, and destroys it entirely.Therefore the operation on them is to consider then, whether there is a Grano coming out in that which appears from the eyelid, and they move to every part, and its substance is easy.Et tunc est faciendum ut teneas eum cum tenali, et incidas in medium usque ad radicem, sed non profundum ne illum percas nec scis unde procedit.
And then it is to be done that you hold it with tweezers, and cut it in the middle up to the root, but not deep so as not to pierce it nor know where it comes from.Then cover that slit across its width.Et si ex ea fissura fluat sanguis, non debes curare illum: sed si non fluat sanguis, debes cauterizare radicem cum cauterio lenticulari post incisionem. And if blood flows from that slit you must not cure it: but if no blood flows, you must cauterize the root with a lens-shaped cautery after cutting.Then scrape off all its parts easily until it is healed.Et post haec, deinde in ungenti moxa facis super locum: et super eam feci spatulam unctam, et tenas eam usque ad curam. And afterwards, you make a poultice of moistened moxa over the place: and then spread it with an oiled spatula, and hold it until it is cured.Then lift it up with tweezers, and cut it off.Si autem esset in palpebris grandinus, et ad omnem partem moueretur, non debes eum incidere, neque cauterizare, sed solo tenali excidere, et facies super locum moxam unctam, et super eam spatulam unctam.
If you don't prepare it for you with an incision, unless after you penetrate the eyelid a little, then that weakens it in some way.
If the slit is large, then gather it with a stitch and care for it until it heals.
And if it's small, no harm will come of it. The ointment indeed restores it and causes it to grow together.
And if the slit goes towards the interior of the ear, towards the inner surface, then turn over the eyelid and hold the slit with a hook; moreover you will need an incision, and press it from every part.
If the eyelid is stretched through the incision, no harm will come of it.
Then wash the eye after the slit of the grandine, with salted water; and care for the place with it that causes it to grow together, until it heals.
§ Of the cure of the axilla of the eyelids.
Chapter 10.
Axirnath is the fat which is generated in the sheaths of the upper eyelid; and indeed it very often happens to boys: and it weighs down their eyes, and cataracts occur to them in the morning, and they cannot see the light of the sun because of that, because the tears flow towards them, and for that reason you see them reclining over their faces all the time, and sleeping on them, and their eyelids are damp under their eyebrows, which indeed has been swollen by inflation: and indeed prominent Axirnath is visible to the eye, and when you press the place with your fingers, you feel the Axirnath between them.
And its manner of operating is so that it puts its weak head in your lap.Et quando intuebitur lumen solis, oculos movet palpebris superioribus: et cum uisuit lumine, parum illius visus est in oculis.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare in it a layer of lint, and make out of that lint a round shape according to the quantity which contains the Axirnath all around.Et faciunt circium illum in locum cuiuslibet axillae palpebrarum superioris: et si fuit ibi parum spatie inter carnem et oculum, ut tu putas, adesse debes circium intra locum illum. Then place him over it and press with your fingers from every side so that the axismath is gathered in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of that moisture with a spatular instrument the cracks through breadth, and the crack not be larger than that which is made in phlebotomy in the depth.
Or you must find the skin entirely, until you come to the axismath, for in many dispositions the axismath proceeds from the crack according to the form of a white fat.
Therefore draw it out with a cloth which you have moistened between your fingers towards the outside; and you must turn your hand to the right and the left until it is dispersed; and beware lest in the crack you add so that you do not come with the spatular instrument to the eye and injure it.
But if the axismath does not appear to you at first in the crack, then add a little in the crack with ease until the axismath comes forth.Et si quid superuit in medio circuli, tu ponas spatulam in medio illius, et trahas ad omnes partes, donec dispertatur Axirnath; et si tamen non poteris peruenire ad oculum cum spatumili, tu addas in medio circuli, donec dispertatur. Then extract it as we said.
Then immerse bandages in vinegar and water, and place them over the wound, and bind it with cotton pads.
And there are men who rub salt, and place it in the hollow of the fracture that what remains from that moisture might liquefy.
Then treat it until it heals.
But if it happens to be a warm abscess in that place, then treat it with soothing plasters until it heals.Deinde extrahe eam, sicut diximus.
¶ On the ways of Ataxmir the eye, that is, when the eyelid softens on the eye where it becomes wrinkled as it ought not to be.Deinde extrahe eam, sicut diximus.
Chapter XI.De caliditate oculi et de modo curandi eam.
When hairs are born in the eyelids, added to those that grow naturally there, and when they become ingrown, then they harm the eye and cause diseases such as chronic tears, softening of the eyelids, and a milky film, until it results in the destruction of the eye.
And now for the treatment of the eye according to four methods: Or by cauterization with fire.Quod si fiat cum aqua, vel cum oleo, vel cum vino. Or with water, or oil, or wine.Or with a sharp medicine, according to what was mentioned in the chapter on cauterization. Or it is cured by incision and sewing up.Cum vero incisi sint palpeβραe, faciuntur duodecim plica, quae vocantur sutulae, quae debent fieri tanquum crinem capilli usque ad radices pilorum naturalium, et sic suturatur, ut non restet ulla lacuna. When the eyelids are cut, twelve folds are made, which are called sutures, and these should be made as thin as a hair, down to the roots of the natural hairs, and so they are sewed up, that there remains no opening.Or by means of reeds, according to what I will say.
You should place the patient's head in your lap.Et incidas locum medius ubi palpebrae conveniunt, et facias incisionem tanqum crinem capilli usque ad radices pilorum naturalium, et extrahas lamina carnis cum pilis ad modum valvis. And you should cut in the middle where the eyelids meet, and make an incision like a hair down to the roots of the natural hairs, and pull out the skin with the hairs as a flap.Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.Et facias eadem incisionem in palpebra oculi contra, et extrahas lamina carnis cum pilis ad modum valvis.
If it is turned inside out, it is good. And if not: insert the needle into that in which is a thread at the lower part of the eyelid, and make the needle with the thread penetrate from above, and let it be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the edge of the eyelid, where the hairs are born; and draw the thread toward the upper part with the eyelid, and turn it with the needle.
Then find in the inner part of the eyelid under the added hairs, with the incident spatulum, from the greater tear-duct to the lesser tear-duct.
Then draw out the thread, and place under the eyelid a little bit of cotton from burnt material, or cloth; then mark on the eyelid with cautery, in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
However, it is necessary that the figure be made according to the quantity and elevation of the eyelid; for it has long been varied in men.
For there are some who require that a great quantity be cut from the eyelid, according to the amount which is softened by the eyelid.Et sunt alii qui faciunt ut eleuatur palpebra usque in osseum, et ita incidiunt eam ut faciant figuram ungue.
Then with the spatulum find upon the two lines which you have marked, and begin at the greater tear-duct as far as the lesser tear-duct; and let there be one split near the natural hairs, as far as the thickness of the needle.
Then insert a hook into one of the two angles of the skin.Et cum eo trahe super pilos eorumque radices usque ad lachrymale minus, ita ut omnes illi pilus et radices eorum, quae in fissura posuerat, eruantur cum cutis; sed non extrahe radices pilis usque ad lachrymale majus. Then remove all the scabs. Then bring together the two lips with a suture of fine thread and needle; and wipe away the blood, and make what is left on the two supercilia adhere, with some sticky stuff if you wish to do so; but if not, it does not matter.
Let the suture remain and the thread for three days or four; then see to it.
And if you wish, leave the wound without a suture, and care for it by drying it and constricting it.Quod si facias, quod antea diximus, de sutura et filo, deinde fac illum calidum salem, ut antea diximus, et pon eum super labia: et si super uulnus illud sit sanguis, tangas ut pertingat ad sal: et postea fac illum salem esse in pulvere fino cum aqua rosata. For if you do as we have before said, about the suture and thread; then make that warm salt, as we have before said, and put it on the lips; and if there be blood upon the wound, touch it, so that it may reach the salt; and after that make that salt into fine powder with rose-water.For the palpebra will rise up by the binding of the wound and its being brought together; but it will become better.
This is the way of curing, which was taught by the ancients.Et si uolueris scire de eius nomine, vocatur Arabice Athaxmir: et Latine appellatur Ophtalmia.
However, it involves concern for the patient's well-being, and it is a good procedure; there is no fear associated with it.
And another method is used in Ataxmir as well: it consists of making a cut on the eyelid to form an image like that of a myrtle leaf, as we have said.
Then raise the eyelid with three separated or joined hooks according to this form that follows; then cut away the excess with small forceps according to this form, making the cuts equal.
But if you are unable to hold the hook steady and it doesn't line up, then take an awl with a thread on it, and insert it in the middle of the figure; and take another thread near the larger tear duct, and a third thread near the smaller tear duct; and gather the threads between your fingers, keeping them even.
Then raise your hand with an even pull; and raise the skin over which the cut was made, as we have said.
Then sew together the two lips of the wound with a suture; and dress it until it heals.Et si uulkanum sit magnum, non possitque eleuari eleuatione equali: sed debet eleui cum uelocitate, quod sit prope lachrymale minus: et debet permanere cum solutione sicut antea narrauimus, donec sanetur.
If however an abscess forms at the site of your cut or slit, treat it with a poultice of wool and similar sedative ointments.Quo modo autem debet esse solutio?
And sometimes it happens to the eyelids too that they turn inward.
Therefore you should use on it what we said about making an incision; but sewing is more artificial for both. About the cure of Ataxmir with dogs.
AND It is, that you turn back the eyelid, and split the fissure which is within, according to what I narrated. Then you make with skill two reeds or thin pieces of wood, whose length is according to the length of the eyelid, and whose breadth is less than the breadth of a hair: and already you have made an incision at both ends of each of its two parts where you hold the hairs.
Then gather both with subtlety above that which hangs over from the eyelid of the eye, and tightly draw together the two reeds with a strong ligature at both parts, and leave it for several days. For the skin will die, and become black and rot, until it falls off by itself.
If it is tardy then, then cut it with tweezers. Then heal it until it is well.
When therefore it is solidified, lift the eyelid: and the hairs will not stick.
And this is the shape of the two reeds which you make according to this figure and quantity in length and breadth.The figures shows a drawing of an eyelid with the reeds placed on top and stitched at both ends where the hairs are held.
Chapter 12.
About the lifting of the pricking hairs in the eye with a needle.
The operation in this is that you take a thin needle and insert into it a thin thread of silk, gently.Deinde facis cum ea ut subteat palpebram oculi usque ad filum eius, et per illud trahas pili quos voles. Then you do with it that it goes under the eyelid of the eye to its thread, and through it pull the hairs which you want.Then you tightly gather its ends and tie each one with a subtle strong knot: and let the length of the threads be one palm.The figure shows a drawing of the needle being inserted beneath the eyelid and used to lift the hairs.
Then weave into it another subtle thread in briefly, and knot its ends if you wish.The figure shows an additional thread being woven under the first thread and the eyelid to provide additional support.
Then let the patient lay his head in your lap and be near to the light so that the operation can be seen; for it is a minute and subtle operation.
Then insert the needle with the thread into the root of the eyelid, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly, until you draw it out above the natural lash.
Then draw the thread up through the lash; and insert that thread into the eyelash, if it is one, or two, or three, not more.
Then draw your hand with it, until the lash comes out of the eyelid with the thread together with the natural lash.
But if the lash is drawn out and the thread does not come with it, draw the lash downward with the thread which you have made in it, until the lash comes out of the upper foramen, and you will see it on the surface of the eye; then you will draw out the lash and the thread, and close the eye: and leave it closed two or three days, until the lash adheres in its place, and flesh grows over it.
If the lash is short, then either attach a long lash to it from the natural lashes and lift it up with that; or leave it until it grows longer afterwards, and then lift it up.
Chapter 13.De alxatrate quod accidit in palpebra inferiori.
When this happens in the eye it is named Leporina.
And this Leporina may be natural or accidental.
Accidental therefore arises from the hardening of a wound, or a cut, or burning, and similar things. Naturalis vero ex ipso oculo procedit.
But the manner of operating on it is to find that hardening and separate its lips, and put into what lies between them a poultice made from flax, and tie it up until it heals.
And you ought not to use in curing it things which dry and harden; for if you do this, the Leporina will become worse than it was; nay, you must use upon it things which moisten, as fenugreek: and embrocate with water in which althea has been boiled, flax-seed: and anoint with diaquilon ointment, which has been liquefied with some of the oils: and wrap up in this a poultice, and heal with it.
And the treasure of your curing is to use every contrivance so that it may not harden as it was at first.Et si tu findes eam in oculis canum, et in oculis equarum et bestiarium, fac illas quodam modo, qui non sit ut supra diximus.
And this operation which we have described is indeed only a certain correction of Leporina so that the appearance of the place may not be as it was altogether.Et si tu findes oculo quod sit in medio, et non circa palpebras, ut in oculis equarum, quae facis?
Of the cure of Alxatrati which is performed on the lower eyelid, and which is a wrinkling or contraction upwards to the right and left.
Chapter 14.
This Alxatrati which is performed below, is what is truly called Alxatrati. And it may be natural or accidental.Quod naturale est fit per senectutem.
And an accidental wound is one which occurs as a result of cutting, splitting, burning with a hot iron or similar actions.
And the method of operating is as follows: you will take a needle with double thread and pierce the flesh with it, and make it go through from the left tear-duct to the right, until the thread passes through both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh upwards with the needle and cut it with a broad knife. If therefore the shape of the eyelid is restored as it should be, that is good.Sed si non, totum illud, quod superest, excide cum spatulo, donec reformatur figura palpebrae secundum naturam suam.
And if not, take a stick and place it in the slit, and move the eyelid with it; and find two slits in the inner side of the eyelid, and the ends of the two slits are from the two corners of the incision, until they meet and an angle is made from them; until when they are gathered together, this is their shape, and it is the Greek letter lambda.
Then remove that meat by as much as is the acute lower side, from that which follows the eyelid. Then gather the separated parts: sew it up with a thread of wool.
Then treat them with what we have said about softeners and poultices, until they heal.
And if to Alxatrati happens from the slit, and sewing or cautery, then you must find a flat slit under the hairs of the eyelids, also according to what precedes. Then separate between the two lips with a poultice, as we have said.
And the end of the speech about the cure of Alxatrati, when it is above or below, is that there should run in it an operation, according to what is prepared from the form of Alxatrati.
For it indeed has many variations in form: and the skilled practitioner prepares his skill with whatever way is possible for him, until he causes it to return to its natural shape or near it; and also the sick person himself, according to what suits him from operation and instruments in many dispositions.
Chapter 15.De adhaerentia palpebrae oculi cum coniunctiua, vel cornea: capite quadam carnis inter illas partes, ut cernatur, vel quae non debet esse, aut ut resipiscat per diuersas causas.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid of the eye with the conjunctiva or the cornea.De adhaerentia palpebrae oculi cum coniunctiua, vel cornea: capite quadam carnis inter illas partes, ut cernatur, vel quae non debet esse, aut ut resipiscat per diuersas causas.
And sometimes this consolidation happens to many men, so that the upper eyelid is consolidated with the whiteness of the eye, and prevents it from its natural operations.And sometimes it happens because of an inflammation caused by some wound, and sometimes because of a cold, and sometimes because of a heat, and sometimes because of an excess of sleep, and sometimes because of some other cause which we do not know.
You should therefore insert the tip of a radius under the eyelid and raise it up, or extend it with a hook; then cut the adhesion with a very fine spatula, not with the sharpness of spatulas, but rather slightly blunt, so that the weak person is not distressed during the operation, and remove the spatula and injure the eye with its sharpness; and your incision should be as if you were excising that adhesion easily, until when the eyelid returns to its natural shape and the entire adhesion heals.
Then pour into the eye salt water, with which you wash it; or distill into it from a Siebel made from dissolved potash with water.
Then separate the eyelid and eye with a piece of linen; and place over the eye wool infused with white poplar, and after the third day use potash, and with salves, until it heals.
Of the incision of the nail and prominence of the flesh of the tear duct.
Chapter 16.
Know that there are two kinds of nail. Or it is nervous; and it is like a hard, thin membrane.aut crassa et turgida: et non debet esse incisa. Or it is not white and tough like frozen moisture; when you touch the iron instrument to it or try to pick it up with a hook, it will tear away and the hook will not stick to it.
Both kinds do not start unless from a greater tear, until it runs slowly, until it covers the sight, and prevents light and movement of the eye.
And the way to operate on it is: so that he who is weak puts his head in your lap. Then open his eyes and lift up the eyelid by hand. Then pick up the edge with a hook of a little strength, and extend it towards the upper part. Then take a needle and thrust it into the edge with a horse hair or an ox or cow hair; and let the thread be strong, and bend the end of the needle a little, and fix it in the middle of the edge; and pierce it with the needle, and tie it with thread, and extend the edge towards the upper part: and cut with the hair the side of the edge that follows the pupil, as if you were squeezing it with a hair to its end.
Then cut the residue at the root of the tear with a fine spatula or small tweezers; and leave the flesh of the tear natural, so that it may not happen from cutting it an assiduous flow of tears.Quod si tu incidas omnino lachrymalem, et non dimiseris carnem eius intactam, non desistenet fluxus lachrymarum per postremum: sed in perpetuum habebit oculum lacrimans.
And if you cut the tear altogether, and do not leave its flesh untouched, it will not cease from a flow of tears through its end; but it will have a weeping eye in perpetuity. And sometimes extend the edge with only a hook; or with thread as we said. Then peel off with a gentle spatula, of which this is the form.Figurator oculi
And beware lest the spatula touch the horny tunic, and it happen that there be a rupture in it, and the pupil be punctured.Figurator ungue
Then after cutting, throw into the eye something of powdered salt or a salve made from lead, and leave it until another day.And on the next day, draw off the pus with a sponge.And then put into the eye some powder of salt, or a salve made from lead; and leave it until another day. Then treat it as needed until it is healed.
If the nail is not sore and you cannot push anything into it or catch it with a hook, then this kind of nail is treated many times with remedies, and healed as I have related in the division.
If you wish to cut it, then open the eye of the sick person and take a very thin, smooth, weak blade with an acute edge in this shape. And pare the nail off at the top carefully with precision. If you see that it splits and breaks, and the edge cuts into it, then drop an hour-glass into the eye from a syringe made of brass, or of red copper, or with powdered salt: and put a patch over the eye until the next day.Quod si confringatur et rarificatur, et non imprimit in eam rasio, sed permanet in uno loco, tunc radere desuper subtiliter usque ad os unguei: quia non oportet radere ultra ostium unguis.
If it splits and cracks but the edge does not cut in, but remains in one place, then pare off the top very thinly as far as the quick of the nail: for you must not pare beyond the matrix of the nail.Then repeat this operation over the whole of it, until all is removed.Quod si uides quod facit callum et conglutinatur, tunc faciunt medicamentum de pulvere gallis et de fimo albis et de sal. If you see that it is forming a callus and congealing, then they make a medicine of powdered eggshells, white clay, and salt.Unless it be an ulcer in the eye, for then leave it alone and treat the ulcer until it is healed.Et si facit ad modum calli: tunc faciunt medicamentum de pulvere gallis et de fimo albis et de sal.
And if it is forming a callus: then they make the medicine of powdered eggshells, white clay, and salt.Then repeat the operation over it with the blade until it is healed.Et si facit ad modum calli et conglutinatur et non imprimit in eam rasio, sed permanet in uno loco: tunc faciunt medicamentum de fimo albis et de sal et de bora.
And if it is forming a callus and congealing but the edge does not cut in, but remains in one place: then they make a medicine of white clay, salt, and rosewater.However, if there are prominences of the membrane of the tear sac which harm the eye greatly, they must be hooked up and cut off from that part: and do not cut it off completely, so that no canal of tears is cut.Et si facit ad modum calli et confringitur, et imprimit in eam rasio: tunc faciunt medicamentum de fimo albis et de sal.
Then apply eye-drops made from ruby glass or from brass until he is cured.
About the incision of Alguareni and the flesh that grows in the eye.
Chapter 17.
There is sometimes born in the eyes of men a red flesh made up or superimposed, until it covers the pupil, or approaches it, or presses upon the eyelids, and perhaps converts the eyelids to the outside; and it is like a rose-red marble.
And there is also an operation on it, so that the sick person puts his head in your lap. Then open his eyes and collect all that flesh with suitable hooks; and hold it with one forceps or take it up.
Then cut the flesh first, until you finish it all with the knife. And beware of the eye lest you injure it while operating; and let your incision be, with which you cut it, either with a scalpel, which we described in the incision of the fingernail, or with small tweezers, with which asebel is collected, according to its shape after this little chapter.
When your incision is closed and all the bandages removed, then fill the eye with powdered salt or a similar red powder made from corrosive medicines; and apply a poultice of white cotton wool outside the eye to protect it from hot apostemas.
If anything remains of the bandages and hot blood prevails in you, and you fear a hot apostema; then leave the eye untreated, and care for it with that which subdues the apostema.
Then repeat the treatment on it until it is cured.
And likewise do with the flesh added which occurred in the eye from this kind.
Nevertheless, it behooves you to remove the cure of all weak eyes from their natural way or accidental, working with iron; and do not insert your hand into any of these operations until you see that that member is bearing that operation.
Of gathering pus out of the eye.Cum ergo incideris in oculum, et dissecaveris eum, et superieris, ut antea diximus: et non spernas, quod diximus sibi super oculum ponere ex albugine cotta cum cotta; sed postea, ut dissecaverit oculum, et supererit:
Chapter 18.Of gathering pus out of the eye.When therefore you enter into the eye, and dissect it, and have gone over it, as we said before; and do not despise what we said to you to put on the eye out of boiled white cotton wool: but afterwards, when you have dissected the eye, and remaineth;
The sebel are red veins which are woven over the eye, and hinder the use of its action; and weaken the eye with the length of days.Et istae non debent aliter fieri, nisi cum uene secta: nam cum incideris in oculum per uia naturalem, et dissecaveris eum, et superieris: et spernas quod diximus sibi ponere ex albugine cotta, et accidit apostema calidum supra oculum: et debes aliter fieri.
And these ought not otherwise to be done, except with a severed vein; for when you enter into the eye through its natural way, and dissect it, and have gone over it; and despise what we said to put on the eye out of boiled white cotton wool, and there occurs a hot apostema above the eye: and you ought otherwise to do.It is necessary therefore for you in the first place, to consider, if the eye in which is Sebel, is strong, and there is not in it any sickness whatever, except Sebel; then collect its Sebel.Et si oculus eiusdem est infirmus, et debilis, et accidunt in eo uiae accidentales: sed tamen non per uiam naturalem, sed per uiam accidentalem: tunc collige Sebel, si potes, cum ferro utrique.
And you should instruct the sick person to place his head on your lap.
Then you must tie off those veins with one hook or two according to your judgment; and let the hook be thin and of this shape, or let there be two hooks inserted into the same body in this way.
Then you must gather up those veins with fine forceps, and squeeze out the blood hour after hour until you see that the veins have retreated from the eye and are no longer swollen; be careful not to damage the eye with the ends of the forceps.
And you should do this operation in the middle of the day in the sun, and be very careful in performing it, so that you cut only those veins.
And when you have finished squeezing it out, then pour into the eye either green vitriol or red; let its sharp quality eat away what remains of the scurf.
If, however, you cannot manage to squeeze out everything in that hour, then bandage the eye with what eases the pain of the eye; and leave it for several days until its pain is eased: and let it be protected from hot poultices; then repeat over it according to the same method until it is healed.
And this is the shape of the forceps.
¶ On the reduction of a dislocated nose.
CHAPTER 19.
Physicians call a tube of bronze or silver a Aristat; when they treat it with a cautery or with sharp medicine that burns according to the account which has preceded.
And if it does not heal, then there is no healing in it; unless you find upon the pustule at its birthplace and extract all the moisture which is in it and also the pus until the bone is laid bare.Et super eam stet luis palliatus cum oleo, donec sanetur.
When therefore you have laid bare a bone and see in it decay or blackness, then shave it with an instrument of this shape.
And is named the rough head.
Let it be made of Indian iron, and let its head be round like an awl, which is punctured with the puncturing of a file, or with the puncturing of an aliskilfer in a fine puncturing: and place it over the decayed place of the bone.
Then rub it between your fingers and you press your hand a little while until you know that the decay is now scrapped off; and do that several times.
Then restore the place with drying medicines which are astringent.
If therefore the place is healed and flesh grows on it, and the stream of the disorder is cut off; and it remains for forty days, and does not become renewed, and does not fester, and no accident happens in it; then you know that it is now healed.
And if not, then there is no skill in it except to reduce the ulcer to the nostril hole, according to this shape.
And it is, that you scrape off from the bone a second time with iron, or with an acute medicine; and when the bone is scraped off, then take a bore according to this shape, let its extremity be of iron, triangular: and its wood be a tapered pyramid to the extremity, as you see.
Then place it over the bone itself; and let it be near the tear duct; and lengthen your hand a little from the eye.Et agite illum ad lachrymale: et ponatis in illo medicinas stipticas, et superponatis super eum linteas: et resecantes medicinas, quae superimposueris, et rasiens locum omnino, donec elidatur etiam os. Then move it to the tear duct; and you place on it medicines which are astringent, and over it you lay lint; and when you have removed the medicines which you placed, and scrape off the place completely, until the bone is removed also. Then rub your hand with the bore, until it penetrates the bone, and he feels that the wind comes out of it, through this, that he holds his hand over his nose.
Therefore then restore the place with medicines which are drying astringents, as I taught you.Et si postea elidatur omnino caries, et non renouatur: sed quod manet sicut os, et carnis non crescit in eo: tunc restaura locum cum medicinis, quae uides convenire ad te, donec crescit caro, et ossa, et concrescat omnino.
When therefore the flesh is born and hardened in its place, then the matter that was poured out to the outside returns to the nose; so it becomes lighter upon the sick person.
Here begins the chapter on the reduction of a protrusion of the eye.
Chapter 20.
When the eye protrudes with its whole substance, and there is no injury or diminution in sight, then you must soothe the sick person, then bleed him; afterwards, place bloodlets on his neck without scarification, but with suction.
Then put over the eye a liniment made from acacia, and aloe, and frankincense, and mastic.Et si non possit reduci: tunc trahe eum ad iustitiam suam, et ponas in capite eius sanguinolentias, et facias eum cubare super uenter illum, donec redovat. And if it cannot be reduced, then draw him to his rights and place bloodlets on his head, and make him lie over that wound, until he comes back to himself. Then press the eye tightly from above with a poultice and many bandages.Et si eminerit aliter: tunc oportet ut ponas super eum sanguinolentias in capite suo, et facias eum cubare super uenter illum: et ponas super Oculum linimentum quod dictum est.
And the manner of bandages is that you take soft rags, many, and fold each rag in two over four times; make many from them; then place them one on top of the other, according to the amount which it needs; then tighten them tightly with a strong, hard cloth.
And again use leeches without scarification.
Then remove the leeches and leave the eye tight day and night.
But if the bandage again softens, then it must be tightened much; then remove the bandage after a day and night, as we said.
If therefore you see the eye has returned to its former condition, that is good; and if not, then repeat the plaster, and bandages, and tightness, and leeches, until it heals.
Of the incision of the white tunic.
Chapter 21.De incisione tunicae nigrae: et de uulnere oculi intra eam.
When a separation occurs in the white tunic, then it protrudes and comes out between the eyelids like a grain of rice, and the person's appearance is disfigured because of it, and you should operate on it, as I narrate: an incision is made in it from the root of the white at the lower part towards the upper.
Then insert another needle with a double thread at the tear duct, and make it penetrate; and leave the first needle according to its position.Et si accidit ut uulnus non discessit per duos dies, intraque sint lachrymae, et sanguis multum, et dolores, intromittas accum in radice Vuae contra partem osse quae est super illam: et trahe eam ultra cum filo, donec discedat uulnus.
Then cut a place for a double thread, and tie with it part of the Vao around the needle; and tie it very tightly.
Then draw out the needle, and place over the eye the thread which has been dipped in the white of an egg; and leave it until the thread with the Vao falls down.
Then cure the eye with it, as it comforts it, until the wound is healed.
And whenever the Vao is pressed from every side by a circle of cloth, until the eye has great protuberance.
Then it is pierced with a very slender spit which penetrates to the depth of the eye, and the white runs down, and the eye enters in, and immediately it is tied up until it is healed.
Of the curing of the Alcomnat.
Chapter 22.De curatione Vae.
This disease which is called Alcomnat, is not unless it be a collection of matter in the eye similar to water running down, and it is not itself.Et si quoddam corpus alienum cadat in oculum tuum, ut similia corporum alium, vel lapis vel musca: et cadendo illud non posset extrahere.
And if some foreign body should fall into your eye, as similar bodies of others, or a pebble or fly: and falling it could not be extracted.And the manner of operating upon her is to cause the sick person to sit on a prepared seat, or straight.Primero autem uisita super sedem stetit, facias eam aduersum te inclinare, et manibus tuus oculum tenens, ut non posset loqui.
First of all, having sat on the seat, you make her lean towards you, and with your hand hold her eye, so that she cannot speak.Then take her head in both your hands and move it, until you see the matter run down to the lower parts of your eyes.Et cum venit, facias eam super sedem inclinare ad uerticem oculi, et tu trahe filum de oculo tuo, et tene eum manibus tuis, donec cadat omnino sania ex oculis eius. And when it comes, you make her lean on the seat to the vertex of the eye, and you draw out the thread from your eye, and hold it in your hand until all the matter falls from her eyes.Then let it be bound up, and not go down again, and light be accomplished: and let the sick person see things as he used to see; and if it does not go down below, know that it is water.Et si uides quod non est sanies nec aqua sed corpus alienum: et cum cadat illud per faciem, et manibus trahatis eum, donec cadat: et per os illius ueniat ad uiscerum, et deinde cadat, et cum luis per omnia loca corporis.
If however he is not prepared in the manner we have said for removing the stone with that instrument then cause the sick man to sit between your hands. Then take a spatulum that is rather sharp and with it pierce the skin of the scrotum a little above the join between the scrotum and the testicle until pus emerges.
When the pus emerges, then drop into the eye warm water in which you have mixed honey, or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey, then treat with the rest of the treatment until he is healed.
Of the cure for water that flows into the eye, or for a cataract.
CHAPTER 23.
We have already spoken of the kinds of water that flow into the eye and what is fit for piercing and removing it by speech and explanation; now take what was said according to health:
Then cause the sick person to sit between your hands squarely facing the light and towards the sun; then tie his healthy eye shut and press it very hard; then with your right hand close the eyelid of the eye in which there is water, if that eye is on the left; or with your left hand, if that eye is on the right.
Then take with your right hand an almaghd if the eye is on the left; or with your left hand if that eye is on the right.
Then place the tip of the almaghd close to the edge of the pupil through the thickness of the lens which appears white and tearful; then push with force on the almaghd and with your hand you are holding it, until it penetrates into the eyeball, and you will feel that the almaghd has already reached the hollow space.
And it is necessary that the measure of the journey of the almaghd be to the depth and the measure of the space from the pupil to the end of the darkness; and that is the crown of the eye.Deinde impelle almagda per rem uacuam, donec percutiat locum uacuum per finem oculi, usque ad cor: et videas, quod uenit in finem oculi: et postea extrahito manu tua eius almaghdam: et videas, quod est ex toto oculi. You ought to see them in the pupil itself for the clarity of the cornea.
Then put the alum until the place where there is water. Then press it below with one force after another.
If therefore the water goes down immediately, then the invalid sees that which is above him immediately, and the alum remains in his eye.
Then you must wait a little while. If therefore the water goes down again, then put it on again, except that the alum gets out.
When it is pressed, and does not go up: then take out the alum with ease; and you return your hand little by little.
Then dissolve some clear diamond salt in water: and wash off with it the eye from within.Et quod superest, linere oculum, donec omnia abluantur. Then place over the eye a whole piece of cotton or wool infused in rose oil and white egg: and bind it with that.And what remains, line the eye, until everything is washed off.Deinde postea fac uisum: et si non possit uideri bene intra uisum, ut antea: tunc posito stuppam aut lana, fac eam manu tua super uisum oculi, et trahe, donec uisum sit apertum totum.
Then afterwards make the eye look: and if he cannot see well within the sight, as before: then with a piece of cotton or wool, make it with your hand over the eye, and draw out, until the sight is completely open.However we, and those who are our contemporaries, put on top of it ground pepper with egg white.
If the alum does not obey you in entering the eye because of its hardness, since it is of a man whose eye is very hard: then it is necessary that you take spa water, which is called Alberid, whose shape is this.Hic tibi oportet ut ponas oculo tuo, donec aqua te caluat: et facies quod sit in oculum tuo ut intraiat.
With it then you must put your eye, until the water warms you; and you will make that which is in your eye to enter.Then therefore with it only the conjunctiva itself, and not your hand to the foramen: and it is not anything except that you make a subtle path to the alum.Et quia multum est intra oculum tuum et facit te uisum obire: nam ex eo non potes bene uideri.
Then introduce the almighty, as we have said.
And when your work is finished, prepare a bed for the patient in a dark room, where he may sleep on his back; and let him be prohibited from all motions, and from coughing; and let his food be such as soothes his nature: and let him not move his head to the right hand, nor to the left at all.
And let the bandage be according to its arrangement until the third day.Quotidades autem ex te debentur, teneatur, et postea dimittitur.
Then loosen it in that dark room, and let him feel his sight; and let him see objects.Et si bene agat, teneatur usque ad diem septimum: postea dimittitur. And if he does well, let him be detained until the seventh day: then let him go.Then restore the bandage until the seventh day.Et si non agat bene, teneatur usque ad decimum diem: postea dimittitur.
And if he does not do well, let him be detained until the tenth day; then let him go.And it is not to be done in the hour of curing, or immediately after incision: but rather, to be removed; because water rises quickly through the sight.
But if a hot pustule happens; then it is necessary to loosen the eye before the seventh day: and correct it with that which soothes the pustule, until it is soothed: then complete its sight, and put over his face an ointment by which his sight may be ruled during several days, he remaining in the dark room.Et si post septimum dies non agat bene, teneatur usque ad decimum diem: et si post decimum agat bene, dimittitur: et si post decimum dies non agat bene, ponatur super caput eius super uisum, et fac illum dormire super dorsum suum in domo tenebrosa donec sedet apostema.
Then he should go out of the house step by step and be talked with in his own cases.
And you should know that in surgery the student is not excused from dissection many times; then indeed he dares go beyond the operation.
And indeed some of those who are from Al-Yaraq have come to us, who said that it was made in Al-Yaraq a perforated pot for which water is drawn.
However, I have not seen anyone in your land who has made that; nor have I read about it in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that it is new.Et si quaeratur de his quae ueniunt a nobis ex auite et ex sanguine, quod est inter costes: omnia illia scire non possumus.
And if one asks about those things which come to us from fat and blood, that which is between the ribs: all of those I cannot know.And these are forms of species from the pot, so that it may stand on him who ignores them.
Let them be made from their own air; and let their ends with this same subtlety be triangular, and the tip acute.Et omnes illae fiant in domo ubi est aqua salina.
Head 24And what I said about flesh born in the nose, let him who knows this operation come to you; and let us make it over the head of an infant.
¶ Of the care of born flesh in the nose.Et quod dixi de carnibus natis in naso, quod ueniat ad te qui scit hanc operationem: et faciamus eam super caput infanti.
And when there are born in the nose various added flesh, from which is something that is assimilated to a scorpion of many feet; and from it is fleshy cancerous, stony, of dusky colour; and from it is what is fleshy soft, not of dusky colour.Et si quaeratur quomodo nascantur, non possumus scire: sed quia multas habemus de istae speciem carnis.
And if one asks how they are born, we cannot know; but because we have many of this species of flesh.In it therefore which of these flesh is soft, not fraudulent, nor cancerous, one should make the sick person sit between your hands opposite to the sun, and open his nostrils, and thrust a hook into those flesh; then draw them out to the exterior, and cut off what you have comprehended from them with a very acute spatum, until you know that all of the flesh has been removed.Et quilibet qui facit de carnibus natis in naso, faciat de ista carne secundum artem: si quaeratur quomodo debet facere, et qualiter debet procedere in operatione, non possumus scire.
If something remains of that which cannot be cut off: then scrape it away with one of the fine instruments with ease until nothing remains. But if blood rushes out upon you, or a blister appears hot: then apply to it what is appropriate for it: or it is from malignant blisters, then quickly cauterize it until the blood is cut off and all the flesh is removed.
Then throw vinegar, or water, or wine into the nose after the incision. But if the nose opens and moisture proceeds from it to the palate: then know that he is already healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then know that there is flesh grown on the upper bones of the nose to which the instrument did not reach with its incision.Quam ob causam necesse est denuo aperire in quibusdam locis narem per incisionem ut abscindatur illuc carnis nata et ueniat ad palatum.
Then a thread of flax must be inserted, with some thickness to it and many knots in it; and between each knot there should be the length of a finger or less; and let the sick person send one end of the thread into his nose, or as far as he can after he has made it like a hook; and he should pull on it until he feels it touch the roof of his mouth, and then draw it out over his tongue.
And indeed many boys do this very thing in schools; and it is easy for anyone who wants to do so.
Then take the two ends of the thread, one end which comes out over the nose and the other which remains in the nose. Then press and minister to the serration of the flesh with the knots that are on the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is already with the knots of the thread.Tunc trahe filum, et fac illum ut stet super nasum, et omnia carnia qui erant serrata, adhaerendo filo, sint trahi in eorum conspectum.
Then draw out the thread and make it stand over the nose; and all the flesh which was serrated, sticking to the thread, are drawn into their sight. Then extract the thread and put into the nostril after wiping away the blood a lint which you have moistened in Egyptian ointment; do this for three days or more until the ointment has eaten up completely what remains of the flesh.
Then put into the end of the nostril a lead pipe for some days until it is healed.
But if it needs a cure which will dry it up, use the one described above.
For making a head-purging instrument with which oils and other medicines are distilled into the nose, make it out of silver or brass; it should be like a small lamp, open as a seashell, and its spout likewise.
And if you wish to make the spout closed, like a cane.Fac ergo canna parva, et in summitate eius foveola: et super foveolam quae est prope extremitatem, fac pedunculum: et super pedunculum foveolam aliam: et sic usque ad summa canna.
And the spout of the instrument for head-purging should be hollow, detected; and it should have a handle at its end by which to hold it when you heat oil or whatever you wish in it from sucks and fluid things.Et super extremitatem canna fac foveolam, qua remansit res fluxa: et postea fac eodem modo foveolas in summo manubrio, donec sint ad summum canna.
Chapter 25Head.
Many times a Thelul is born at the end of the nose, and it becomes magnificent, and it increases with the days, until its appearance becomes odious.And know that this thing happens to those who are inclined to laugh much and are happy-go-lucky, and especially to those who have an excessive desire for women, while those who are inclined to anger and sadness rarely
And because of that it is necessary, that one should cut off that in the beginning of its appearance, and uproot all of it. Then put on top of the place, either a cautery, or burning medicine which stands in place of that.
If therefore the incision of it is delayed until it increases in size, then consider whether it is stony, hard, dark-colored and of few senses: then do not touch it with iron, because it is a cancerous ulcer.
Many times I have seen him who cut off the human apostema, and great harm happened to him who had it.
And if the apostema is soft to touch, not dark-colored, and you see that incision is possible in all of it, then evacuate the weak one, and cut it without fear or dread, and care for the place with that which dries and constricts, until it heals.Si autem uides quod non est possibile totum incidere, sed quod parte quaedam eius pernicies in corpore intruit, ut non possit esse incisa, et tamen incidio necessarius sit propter odoratam malitiam: tunc fac cauterium super locum illum cum ferro, et cum focis igneo.
Head 26De sutura nasi et labii, et auris.
But if you see that it is not possible to cut off all of it, but that a certain part of its destruction has entered into the body, so that it cannot be cut off, and yet incision is necessary because of the noxious smell: then make a cautery on that place with iron and with fire.
You should know that when there is a rupture of continuity in one of these cartilage parts, the operation makes little difference, unless in some men.Quod si postea accidit solutio in naso, aut in labro, aut in auribus, et non potest esse conglutinata per medicamenta, nec per cauteria: sed quia est in loco facili ad mortem, necessarium est ut incideatur.
So when something happens to one of them afterwards, you should consider whether the wound is recent with its own blood: then gather the lips of the wound with a suture, and then care for it until it heals.Si tamen accidit solutio in naso, vel labro, vel in auribus senis et cum pus illico profuit: et non potest esse conglutinata nec per medicamenta, nec per cauteria: cumque est in loco ad mortem facilioris, quia neque per se neque per medicos potest salui: oportet ut incideatur.
But if there is a rupture in the nose or lip or ears and pus immediately comes out of it, and it cannot be joined by medicine or cautery, but because it is in an easier place to die, as it cannot be saved either by itself or by doctors, it should be cut off.And if the rupture's lips are already separated, and each part has become healthy: then you should cut away all parts that appear from the skin, until it bleeds.Deinde postea oportet ut cures cum medicamentis quae conglutinant et curant: et ponas super locum illum olei et vini et balsamatum: donec saluatur. Then bring together the two lips with a stitch and tighten them and sprinkle on top dragon's blood and powdered olibanum and put on top of the powder a piece of diaphranean plaster and one or other of the consolidative plasters and leave it bound for two or three days. Then loosen it and change the medication and leave it until the threads are absorbed by themselves. Then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
But the manner of the stitch is so that you bring together the solution of continuity or with pegs as we have narrated in the stitch of the belly or bring together the solutions with thread as I made you know.Quod autem non possit aggregari, uti debes trito puluere et unguento, et emplastri consolidativi: quibus utaris donec solutio fiat per se.
Chapter 27.De sutura labrum uertice per se soluto.
But whatever cannot be brought together you must use powdered and ointment and consolidative plaster: which you must use until the solution is made by itself.¶ Of drawing out the knots of the lips.
Of stitching a lip with the root having been loosened by itself.Many men indeed are attacked and are affected with hard pustules inside their lips like grains of herbage and some of them are smaller and some larger.Et plerumque pernicies illas cum filis et puluere trito trahit: sed multum malum facit, si non trahat urticationem cum puluere multum, et unguento.
Therefore it is necessary that you turn over the lip and examine all its folds, and lift it up with a hook and cut into it from every side.
Then fill the place after the incision of the blood vessels with the triturate until the blood is staunched.
Then it should be treated with vinegar and the wound healed with it, where there is astringency, until the wounds heal.
Chapter 28.
Of the cutting of the flesh born above the gum.
Many times there is born above the gum a growth of flesh which the ancients call epulis.
Therefore you must lift it up with a hook or hold it with pincers and cut it at its root, and let the pus run out or the blood.
Then put on the spot some dried blood vessels in powder, or other astringent powders.Si tamen non possit auferri totus: incide in locis quibus potest, et pone super ea zega trita, donec consumatur.
If that flesh returns after being treated, for it often does return, cut into it a second time and cauterize it; for it will not return again after being cauterized.
Chapter 29.
Of the reason of Teeth drawing with Iron.
When they become attached to the surfaces of teeth, from within and without, and between the gums, there grow upon them rough crusts, discoloured and black, and sometimes yellow and verdigris, until the corruption proceeds from this into the gum, and the teeth become loathsome because of it.
It is necessary therefore that you cause the sick person to sit between your hands, and his head in your lap, and scrape off the grit and the tooth, in which appear to you those crusts, and what resembles sand: until nothing remains of these; and likewise do away with the blackness and greenness and yellowness, and others, until they are cleansed.
If therefore that which is in them be taken away from the beginning of the scraping, it is well; and if not, then repeat upon them the scraping a second time and a third, day after day, until you attain to your desire in this which you see.Et si intra rasionem dentis invenieris quod uidebatur sano, et non teneat se, sed exsiliaret, scies quod non est in dentibus corruptio, et quod multotiens per uirum peruenit ad gingiuam: sed si tenebitur, scies quod est corruptio intra dentes.
And you should know that teeth require razors of various shapes and many figures, according to how they are prepared for your operation; because the razor with which the tooth is ground from its lower part is one thing, and the razor with which it is ground between the teeth according to other forms is another.
And these forms of razors are prepared for you, which you see.
Chapter 30.De doloris dentis praesagio.
¶ On the extraction of the pain of teeth.
You must cure a tooth of its pain with every skill, and delay its removal. For there is nothing that will fill its place when it is pulled out, since it is a noble substance: until, if no excuse for its removal presents itself, then when the weak one is compelled to pull it out, let it be strengthened and certified by you as the tooth in pain.
For often pain deceives the weak one and thinks that there is a wound in the tooth and he pulls it out; then the pain does not go away until the weak tooth is pulled out.
For we have now seen this from the practice of blood-letting.
When therefore the tooth in pain is certified by you itself, then you must scarify around the tooth with a spathula, in which there is some strength, until the gingiva is loosened from every part; then move it with your fingers or with fine forceps at first slowly, until you shake it.
Then place the forceps well in those parts, and press the head of the patient between your knees: when you have it well, so that it does not move, then pull the tooth according to its rightness, so as not to break it.Quidam enim solent omnia debita facere cum dentibus dolentibus, et quod non debet, ita quod eradicent ipsos: sed tamen non debet sic faci.
For some are accustomed to do all that is due with teeth in pain, and what it does not owe, so as to pull them out: but yet it should not be done thus.If therefore it will not come out, then take one of those instruments, and insert it under it on every side with ease, and try its motion, as you did at first.
But if the tooth is perforated or worn away: then you must fill that hole with a rag; and press it with the end of a slender rod, so that it does not break in the hour of your pressing on it with forceps.Quod si non possis per stringendum adstringere dentem, sed est tam laxum quod non potest constare tuo instrumentui: tunc oportet ut facias aliam uiridem cum quolibet ex his quae dixi tibi de bucheo.
And you must be very careful with the scarification around the gum on every side much.
And keep your strength so that you do not break it, and part of it remains, and returns to the sick from the wickedness which is greater than his pain at first.
And beware of doing that which ignorant blood-letters do in their haste, and their boldness over his eradication, except that they administer what we have described.
For very often they bring about great infirmities on men, whose roots are harder to break than others; or they extract it with some of the jaw-bones: as we have many times testified.
Then let it be washed after its eradication with wine, or vinegar and salt.Et si quodlibet de istis esset defectus, curari possit, sicut suprascripsimus: sed quodlibet non esset curandum nisi post quaedam dies, donec super eum ueniat novitas.
If any of these things was defective and might be cured as we have written above, then let nothing be done on it until after some days had passed over him, so that freshness came upon him. If, however, there is a flow of blood from the places (for very often this happens) then grind up something from the zega, and fill up with it the place; and if it does not stop up for you, cauterize it.
The forms of the forceps with which the tooth is moved at first are to have long points and a short handle, so that they do not double up when they press on the tooth; they are to be as you see the handles thick, until when you press them on the tooth it does not press itself or double up; the ends are to be short and to be made of Indian iron, or of good steel, straight-edged; and at their ends there are teeth, some of which enter into certain places and hold fast with a decent grip.
And sometimes the ends become like the form of the beak of the bird called the stork, and are of strong grip.
Chapter 31.
Of the eradication of teeth, and the extraction of broken jaw-bones.
When one is left with an aching tooth that has been broken, then it is necessary to apply a poultice of butter to the affected area for one or two days until it softens; then insert into the socket either a pair of tweezers or forceps, whose ends are shaped like the beak of a stork. The form of these forceps is as follows: they have an upper and lower branch, both straight and smooth, and at the end they are curved inwards so that they can grasp and hold fast.
Their ends should be made like a file or like an alisklifege. [The meaning of this word is unclear, but it may refer to some kind of forceps.] The branches of the forceps should be made of iron and should be about six digits long; their ends should be thin, smooth and rounded off so as not to injure any part of the gums or jaw.
If the tooth does not come out with the forceps, then it is necessary to make an incision over the root and loosen all the flesh, and insert an instrument called a small lance, whose form is as follows: It has a long straight point, about half a digit in length, attached to a handle which is slightly curved and has a sharp edge on both sides.
The point should be short and somewhat thick; it should not be sharp so that it does not break.
If the root comes out through this, it is good; and if not, you must swear by these other instruments whose forms are as follows.
The first has a triangular end with some thickness to it.
The second has a thin triangular end.Forma primae extremitatis rotunda.
And with other instruments and tools which precede in the treatment of teeth.
Let there also be an oath with this instrument which resembles a large hook; its form is as follows: it has a hooked, triangular end with some thickness to it so that it does not break, and it should not be sharp.
And you should know that there are many instruments for the teeth; and likewise the other instruments do not count, and a skillful craftsman, subtle in his art, discovers by himself an instrument according to what the operation and the ailments themselves signify to him.
Since there are many instruments for the different types of incisions that the ancients did not describe, we shall now give an account of them.
If a tooth breaks off at the gum or from any other bone of the face, or rots away: examine it in its place with the appropriate instruments and forceps that I mentioned when discussing extraction of roots, using the gesture whose shape is described as follows.
Let something thick be placed in it little by little so that the bone is pressed or held with it and does not escape or slip away until the bone comes out; then fill the opening with appropriate medicines for that.
If there is but a small rottenness in the bone, then scrape it away from its rottenness and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 32.De Dentibus eminentibus super alios.
On teeth that project above others:
When teeth emerge not according to their natural course, a foul deformity ensues; and especially when this happens to women and girls, that is, those of marital age.
You should therefore consider the following. For if a tooth has emerged after another tooth, and cannot be placed, or it is possible to file it down, then root it out; and if it is attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, of which this is the shape.
It resembles a small hook, and is made from hard Indian iron, very sharp at the tip.
And let your incision as you cut it be over many days, and because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that the others are not disturbed.
But if it is emerging exposed to filing, then file it with an Indian file, of which the shape is thus.
The whole is made of Indian iron, and its handle has very fine points, just like the file with which needles are made; with this the tooth is filed away little by little over many days with ease, so that the tooth is not disturbed and falls out; then smooth it, finally filing it with some rasors.
If a tooth is broken and hurts the tongue, then its edge must be filed away until the roughness of the fracture is taken away and it is made smooth, so that it does not hurt the tongue or impair speech.Et si dens est in parte laterali, et non in medio, ut non laedas linguam: tunc oportet ut eruatur, nec radatur.
Chapter 33.
On the extraction of teeth with threads of gold.
When there is concussion and disturbance to the front teeth by blow or by chance, and the weak person cannot grip that which he eats so that it does not fall, and you have treated them with astringent remedies and the treatment did not heal, then there is skill in them to be gripped with thread of gold; for silver becomes green and腐腐腐 after days, but gold never changes.
And let the thread be medium in thinness and thickness according to the quantity that it takes in between the teeth.Et faciatur amalgama de aere et serico et aurum, et fiat ligatura circa concussam dentem ut non cadat: et postea subtrahere filum, et denudare dentem ut cito curet.
And indeed the form of the stitch is to take a thread and pass twice between two healthy teeth; then you weave with both ends of the thread among the moving teeth, whether one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth of the other part. Then you repeat the weave until you reach the part from which you began; and you tighten your hand with subtlety and wisdom, until it does not budge at all; and your tightening when you tighten the thread is to be at the roots of the teeth so that it does not come undone.
Then cut off the superfluous ends of the thread with a pair of scissors; and tie up both ends, and turn them over so as not to hurt the tongue; then hide them between the healthy tooth and the moving tooth, and let go in such a way that it remains tight.
If however it is cut or untied, tighten them with another thread, and let it remain so for the entire time.
And this is the manner of teeth, and the pattern of the stitch for two healthy teeth, and two moving teeth, as you see.
And sometimes it happens that one or two teeth return after the loss of them all to their places and are retained as we have said and remain; but this does not happen unless by an artist who is prudent and experienced.Et hoc ordinem retationis dentium motorum ad dentem sanum, donec perueniatus sit usque in os ad radicem, ut sit quasi quidam pilus: et si superuit dens, faciatur sicut antea.
And this is the order of the stitch of moving teeth to a healthy tooth until it reaches into the gum as if it were a hair; and if there is anything left over from the tooth, it is treated as before.And sometimes an artificial tooth is made from bone-varnish, and it is formed in the shape of a tooth, and placed in the place whence the tooth comes out and is tightened as we said, and remains and serves with it for a long time.
And sometimes it happens that there is a ligament under the tongue against a moving tooth, and it is held so tightly as not to be able to speak unless first it is cut; then the stitch is made as before.Chapter 34.De dentibus motis et cadentibus per imperficiem artificis, seu per uigoram, seu per mortem, seu per aliam causam quodam casu: et de retatione eorum cum filo ut pertranseat intra loca su[m] qua non laedatur lingua vel os.
Whenever this ligament which is under the tongue, it is either natural, with which man is born, or accidental, from a wound that has already healed.
And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the sick person in your lap and lift up his tongue; then cut that sinewy ligament across its breadth until the tongue is released from its retention.
If there is something hard and knotted in it, and that comes from the healing of a wound, then insert a hook into that, and find it across its breadth until you cut through the ligament, and the knot will be released.
And beware lest there be a fissure in the depth of the flesh, and you cut an artery there, and blood flow ensues.
Then let it be bound up at the site of the incision with rose water or vinegar or cold water.
Then place under the tongue a linen bandage which the sick person is to hold in his mouth all night so that it does not heal again.
But if there is blood flow then put over the spot ground rust. If however it is too much for you, then cauterize the spot with a lentigo cautery that suits it; then treat it with remaining treatment until it heals.
Chapter 35.
Sometimes a swelling occurs under the tongue that resembles a small frog, hindering the tongue from performing its natural functions; and perhaps it grows so big that it fills up the mouth.Et si non est extracto cum extractione sua, non teneitur lingua ad operationem suam naturalem: sed uelut capta in catena sit.
And if it is not extracted with its extraction, then the tongue cannot perform its natural function; but rather is as though captured in a chain. And the operation on it is that you open the mouth of the sick person facing the sun and consider the swelling.Et si fuerit sub lingua, tunc incide per medianam eius partem cum scalpellet: et eleua superne linguam et inferne labrum inferius, donec apparuat sita aposteme.
If therefore you see it of a dusky or black colour, hard, and that feels no pain, then do not touch it; for it is a cancer.
And if it be declined to whiteness, whereon is moisture, then cast into it a hook, and cut it with a spatulum sharp, and deliver it from every part. If thou art wounded with blood in the time of thy operation, then put on it powder of aubergine, until the bleeding be staunched; then return to thy operation, until thou hast taken it out with all its members.
Let it then be washed with vinegar and salt; and cure it with the rest of the cure proper for it, until it be healed.
¶ Of the cure of an absces of two Almonds.Take a piece of cloth, and dip it in water that is boiling hot; apply it to the absces; take it away when it has become tepid, and repeat this three or four times, until the flesh be white.
CHAP. XXXVI.De curatione apostematis admodum dolorosissimi in capite.
Sometimes they occur between the throat and the tonsils, that is, the glands which are similar to almonds, which occur outside; and they are called two tonsils. When you cure them with what we said in the division, and they do not heal, then consider this.
If then there is a hard ulcer, dark-coloured, with little feeling: then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red-coloured and its root is large; then do not touch it with iron either, fearing the flow of blood; rather leave it to mature until it is healed. And then either you will perforate it, or it will burst on its own.
And if it is white-coloured, round and has a fine root; then it ought to be cut.Si tamen non potest evelli per se: tunc oportet evellere cum ferro.
And the operation on it is that you consider before his operation, if the pustule of it is quiet and completed with warmth, or diminished by some decrease: then therefore let the weak one sit in front of the sun, and his head be in your lap; and open his mouth, and let a servant take it between his hands, and press its tongue below with an instrument, whose form this is.
Let it be made of silver or brass, which is subtle as a little knife.
When therefore you press with it the tongue, and there appears to you the pustule, and falls on it your gaze: then take a hook, and fix it in the gums, and extract it to the outside as much as you can, except that you draw out with it some of the gum.
Then cut it with an instrument, whose form follows: It is like tweezers: however, its ends are curved so that the opening of each one is opposite to the other acute: therefore take care that it is made of Indian iron or of steel inlaid with gold.Cum igitur traxeris apostemam cum forfice, ostendatur tibi uestigiis, et cadat super eam tuus uisus: tunc accipe aliam forficem, et fige in amigdalem contraria, ita quod uertice eius tangas per uisum, et trahe ad exteriora cum ea apostemam.
When therefore you pull the pustule with tweezers, it will be displayed to you by its stalks and your gaze falls on it: then take another pair of tweezers, and fix them in the opposite gum so that the point touches the other side through the gaze, and draw out the pustule to the outside with it.If however this instrument is not present, then cut it with a spatulum, whose form follows:It assumes a shape like that of a pair of tongs: but its ends are curved like the previous one, so that each opening faces the other acute: therefore take care that it is made of iron or steel inlaid with gold. It is acute on one side and not acute on the other.Deinde trahe apostemam ad exteriora cum eo spatulumili: et si non possit trahi, tunc incide eam cum eo in amisdam.
Then draw out the pustule to the outside with it: and if it cannot be drawn out, then cut it with it in its gum.And after you have cut one of the gums, cut the other according to this same species of incision.Post incisione amigdalem, fige in eam linteum superque eam positum utpote supplicem: et si post hac non cadat apostema sed sit in eadem positione: tunc fige eam linteum aliter.
Then after the incision the patient should gargle with cold water, or vinegar and water.
If, however, there is bleeding, let him gargle with water in which have been boiled the rinds of pomegranates; or leaves of myrrh, and such like astringents, until the bleeding ceases: then dress the wound until it is healed.
And sometimes other sores spring up in the throat, apart from the two tonsils. Therefore deal with these in the same way as I have said above about the incision of the two tonsils.Et si inter amygdalas sint placidae, intraverti utrique latus stiptica: et superplicari illi, donec placent.
And if there are sores between the tonsils, apply an astringent to both sides of them, and bandage it until they heal.I myself indeed have already cured a woman from a sore that had sprung up between her throat which was causing suffocation, with little sense, for it had almost closed her throat: and the woman was breathing through a narrow opening, and had already stopped eating and drinking water, and she would have reached death if she had remained for one or two days.
And the sore had only risen so that it put out two branches until they went out through the two nostrils.Et multum debet medicus curare, ne cuncta apud eum sint in bonis: et praecipue quando inciderit inter amygdalas utramque: nam multum est periculi mortis intraverti in gutture stiptica, vel plica, aut linteo: et tantum debet curare, ne placat: quia si placuerit, et medicus curaverit eum, non potest fieri salus illius.
And the doctor must take great care that everything is in good condition with him; and especially when he has cut between the two tonsils: for there is much danger of death to put an astringent, or a bandage, or linen cloth inside the throat; and he must only take care that it does not become sore: for if it becomes sore, and the doctor treats it, its salvation cannot be.So I hastened quickly, and fixed one hook into it. Then I pulled it out, and a large portion came out of it.Et cum multo effortu trivi eum in caput, donec discesserit toto: quia si aliquid restauerat in eius loco, non potest fieri salus illius.
Then I cut it off where it was grasped at the nostril opening.And with great effort I tore it out into the head until it came away completely: for if anything remained in its place, its salvation cannot be.Then I cut it off at the nostril opening.Et postea fuit curata, donec sanarunt plaga eius.
Then I made that for her which came out of the other nostril.
Then I opened her mouth and pressed her tongue down; then I fixed the hook into the ulcer itself; then I cut off a part of it, but not much blood ran from it. So the woman's throat was cleared, and she immediately began to drink water, then she took some food.
So I did not cease to cut from the ulcer many times over a long period of time; and the ulcer kept on growing in the place where I was cutting it until it got too long with her.
Then I made an incision into the throat below the ulcer, and cauterized it.
She stopped bleeding; then I walked away from her, and I did not know what God had done to her after that.
The incision of the ulcer of the uvula.
CHAPTER 37.
When the catarrh has come down into the uvula and is swollen and long, then itself is named perpendicular; and if it is thick and round in its lower part, then it is named a blister.
When the treatment of what we have said before does not help and you see that the ulcer is cold and sottile, then you must cut it.
And if that which is collected around it is round and not long, and it is blood-red or dark and has no feeling to it, then you must make an incision into it.Et si facis, et non curat, iterum fac: quia sic faciunt apostemata. Fear is associated with illness.
You should therefore when you see it according to the method I have described, from whiteness and length, make the sick person sit facing the sun, and press his tongue with an instrument, for which there was a previous description; then insert the hook into the cavity, and draw it downward; and cut into it with one of the two instruments that I mentioned in cutting the two tonsils.
And you should not cut from it anything except what is added above the natural boundary without addition.
For if you cut more from it, you will damage voice and speech.Et oportet ut uigilescas ad tonum vocis et ad loquendi facientem, donec consueverit: nam si tu concides ad tonum vocis et consuetudinem loquendi per diem, utebitur eam sicut primo, cum non fuit incisura.
Then after the cutting use what we described about the cutting of the two tonsils; and tend it until it heals.And when you have cut the uvula, use a bandage to hold down the tongue with a piece of wool, that has been dipped in hot water and squeezed dry, so as to prevent the sick person from sticking out his tongue.
But if the sick person is terrified by the cutting, then you must use cunning in cauterizing it without fear or trembling.
And the mode of cauterization upon it is not to be with any other substance than water and vinegar; and you must place the sick person's head in your lap.Et oportet ut sedet coram sole, et faciatis eum primum ad solis orientem faciem, et deinde ad occidente faciem. Then make him sit facing the sun, and first face towards the rising of the sun, then towards its setting.Then press his tongue with the instrument we described above.Et oportet ut incidas eam coram sole: et si non poteris facere in domo, fac in via: et sedet infirmus super sedem: et tu stabis super sedem: et fige uncinum in uuam: et trahe eam ad te, et concide eam cum instrumentorum uncine. Then take the water which I told you about in the chapter on cauterization and mix with it a little unquenched lime, neither too thick nor too thin, and fill the hollow of this instrument, which is shaped thus.
Let the end in which the medicine is placed be hollow as a spoon's radius.
And let the instrument with the medicine be laid over its uvula; and let the sick person lie on his side, so that the medicine may flow out of his mouth from within, lest some of it go down into his throat and harm him.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And pour over its uvula a little at a time, as much as will cover it at first, until you see it blackened and the biting of the medicine subsided.
And if you wish to get a lump and wrap it around the end of the radius, and pour the lump with medicine, and thrust the radius with the lump into the pipe from above, until the lump clings to the uvula.
Do that many times, until you achieve what you want in cauterizing the uvula.Et si non possis facere cauterizationem per os, sed quaesieris faciendam eam per nares, sed neque modo potes intrare per nasum, quia multum sanguinis ex ea fluere solet, ut dixi tibi antea, sed uides nasum apertum: Then leave her alone; for it will harden and fall off after three or four days.
If you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it; and after cauterizing wash around the wound with a cotton- wool pad soaked in butter, and cleanse with what is inside her from the medicine; and cool with cold water.
And it will heal externally with poultices, and internally with gargles until it heals.
This type of cure is healthier than by incision and much further from danger.Et si in quolibet signo huius morbi sint, utramque curam possunt pati: itaque post excisionem debent intrinsecus et extrinsecus curari.
And if there are signs of this disease in either place, they can both be cured; and so after excision they must be cured internally and externally. And sometimes a ulcer is cured with something subtler than cautery or incision: it is cured indeed by fomentation in the following manner. Take a mixture of herbs and make an infusion with vinegar in a pot, let the pot be sealed with clay and have a hole in the middle, over which is placed a hollow vessel in the following manner:
Let it be made of silver or brass and the end which has the pomegranate go into the mouth of the sick person until the steam rises to the ulcer along the tube, until the ulcer is darkened a great deal.
Then repeat over it many times, until it hardens.Et si in quolibet signo huius morbi sint, utramque curam possunt pati: itaque post excisionem debent intrinsecus et extrinsecus curari.
And beware that you not perform this treatment at the beginning of the advent of the apostema. The pus indeed is added to the apostema; and you ought not to do this except at the decline of the hot apostema.
But if this instrument is not present with you, then take a reed, and on its end make a covering of lamb's membrane so that the jaw of the sick person may not be burnt, for the lamb's membrane prevents the vapour from burning the jaw: and this is good treatment to bring about health.
¶ On the drawing out of thorns and bones from the throat.
Chapter 38.
Many times a fish-bone or thorn or something else will lodge in someone's throat.
You ought therefore to draw out what is above and visible after you have pressed the tongue down with an instrument directed towards the sun, and it becomes apparent to you that something is in the throat.Et si magnus est os, extrahe totum et mande illum fieri duos in uno, ut possit transire per gutturem.
And what does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make a weak vomit before food is digested in the stomach. For perhaps something attached will come out with the vomit.
Or let him swallow a piece of turnip or the root of lettuce or swallow a dry crust of bread or take a bit of dry sponge, and then swallow it. When he comes to the place where there are thorns, or a bone is stuck, and they come out, then it will also come out.
If therefore it does not come out with the above said things, then use an instrument made of lead in this form.
Let it be somewhat thicker than a finger and at its end let there be a curve, which he shall introduce into his throat with ease, and he himself shall hold his head turned upward.
And let him beware of touching his epiglottis lest he cause himself to cough, and let it push out with it the bone or thorn or let the doctor introduce it with his hand.
But it is better for the patient to do this because of his knowledge of the location of the thing attached; and he shall push downward or pull upward his hand with the instrument according as much as is prepared for him, until it comes out.
¶ Of the Extraction of the Bloodsucker.
Chapter 39.De sanguinisuga in oculis extragenda.
When the blood-letting cupping glass is applied with the medicine I mentioned earlier for a cure over an extended period of time and it does not work, then consider in the throat of the patient before the sun or near the sun after having pressed his tongue with the instrument which I have described to you.
If therefore your patient falls on top of the blood-letting cupping glass, remove it with a small hook or with deft, slender instruments properly.
If it is not possible with them: then take a hollow cane and insert it into the throat of the patient up to near the throat; then insert into the hollow cane red-hot iron with fire.Quod si in capite aut in alio loco cadit, extrahe eam cum uncino paruo. If it falls on the head or another place, remove it with a small hook.Do that many times; and let the patient abstain from water all day.Et postea, uti debet medicis qui loquuti sumus.
Then let him drink a full cup of cold water, and open his mouth in it; and gargle his throat with it, and not swallow anything from it; and move the water around one hour after another with his hand. For indeed the blood-letting cupping glass will immediately fall when it senses water.
But if it does not go out with what we have described, then smoke the patient over with bedbugs, or with asafétida using the instrument which I have described for smoking the uvula.
Do that many times, because it will fall indeed.Et postea fac uti medicis qui loquuti sumus.
And then let him use the medicines which we have spoken of.And the manner of operation in smoking is to take a pot in which there are live coals with fire; and the pot be covered with a cover, in whose middle is a hole: and the end of the instrument be arranged in that hole.
Then throw out the smoking, and let the patient put his mouth on the end of the cane, and close his mouth so that the smoking does not go out, until you know that the smoking has indeed reached the blood-letting cupping glass.Et per totum tempus ubi fumigatur, moveat infirmus manibus suis extremitatem cannulae circa gutturem suam: et fac illud multotiens donec cadat sanguisuga. And a leech immediately falls off.
If it does not fall off then repeat the fumigation many times.
And let the patient endure thirst and eat salt and peppered food and drink no water.
It is therefore necessary that he leave while observing this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which a leech is extracted from the throat when it falls on top of it:
It is similar to tweezers, as you see; except that it has a curved portion which is inserted into the throat.Quamvis namque sanguisuga cadat in gutture, postea uoluntarier et per omnia loca intrare conatur, ut se consumpiat: sed cum haec haec sub trahatur, statim cadit. And its end is like the beak of a bird called a stork, in which there is roughness like that of a file; when it grasps anything, it does not let go at all.Postea adhaerens ad guttum uelut lygro scyphi, trahitur per guturum usque ad os.
¶ On opening and cutting into pustules, and on their cure in general.Quanto enim ante mortem aperitur, tanto post mortem magis claudatur: et multo magis cum mortuo corpori.
Chapter 40.De apertura ulcerarum ad hanc modum.
There are many kinds of pustules and types in the coming of them, as indeed has already been said in this book, namely one kind and another; and they differ in their piercing and cutting in two ways.Quod enim per eorum perforationem intus trahitur, et mox in exteriorem partem extruitur: illud nominatur pustula.
But that one is a kind of pustule in itself, and because it comprises its humidity within itself.Et illum faciunt humor, qui per se, uelut omnia humora corporis humore, tenet et sustinet humorem.
And the second way is due to the places in which it occurs in the body.Nam si in gutture accidit, et in illo loco tenetur: et si per inflatum uelut ovis intra se humorem habet, nominatur apostema.Si tamen per inflatum non tenitur intra se humorem, sed in gutture est humorem faciens, nominatur pustula.
For an apostema occurring in the head is different from one occurring in the anus; and an apostema occurring in a fleshy place is different from one occurring in joints; and each of them has its own judgement according to its operation.Quod autem est in carnoso, per se non debet aperiri: sed ex inflatis quae faciunt humorem: et faciunt sese humore subtegente.
And of the sores are those which must not be opened unless after the ripening of their healing and its completion; and of them are those which should be opened while they are raw and do not ripen according to their completion.
As are sores which are near joints.
For when a sore happens near a joint, and it becomes prolonged until what is around it putrifies, perhaps the ligaments or nerves of that joint are ruined; therefore, there is cause for greater contraction of that member.
Or is it an ulcer near a main limb: because if you delay the piercing of it until it matures, it will harm either that or through that main limb.
Or is it near the anus, then pierce it when immature: and you ought not to pierce a raw ulcer, before complete digestion, except what is near the anus, so that it does not putrefy deep down, and prolong into the insides of the anus, and become a fistula, or in its end become incurable.
You ought to know the hour of piercing an ulcer, which is mature according to its complement: and it is during the sedation of the pain, the recession of the fever, and the diminution of the redness, and the pulsation, and the acuteness of the head of the ulcer: and the other signs.
And you ought to make the same piercing in the lower place of the ulcer, and of greater eminence: and let the piercing be wet in the length of the body, if ulcers are in the parts of the hands and feet, and places of the scales, and strings, and nerves, and arteries, and at last in all equal places, where there is no reflection.
In those however that are reflected, proceed with piercing according to that limb.
Whenever however the ulcer is in fleshy places: then it is better that you omit the piercing of it, until its digestion is confirmed, as we have said according to its complement.Et si post perfusiue ueniseunt eorum fluida per apostemata, et faciunt excoriationes per utramque partem: tunc oportet ut facias in illa parte quae est contraria ad locum aperitivem, sed non in ipsa apostematis, ne perferatur: nam si perferatur, peribit.
And if after being pierced their fluids flow out through the ulcers, and they make excoriations on both sides: then you ought to make in that part which is opposite to the opening side, but not in the ulcer itself, lest it be broken through: for if it is broken through, it will perish.For if you pierce it before that, the course of the virus flows out from it, and there is much filthiness and dirtiness, and perhaps its lips harden, and its depth.
And certain ulcers are pierced according to the breadth of the body at the necessity: or according to that which the limb needs.Et si post perforationem non est ibi reflexio ad loca, uel ad partes quae necesse habent perforationis, et sedere tamen in uno loco: tunc oportet ut facias alteram aliam perforationem sicut diximus.
And you must administer a small perforation for small apostemas, and a large perforation for large apostemas; or many sections according to the size of the apostema.
And there are apostemas in which the skin must be made to sink in; and when it has become like a cloth, and made into a lump, for it is already dead; as happens in many, as in a boil, and a pustule.
And of these some are cut with a three-angled incision. And of these there is one from which an incision is made in the shape of a bay leaf.
Like the apostema of the groin.
And of these there are some in which a round incision and a crescent-shaped incision is made; and similar to these are other incisions.
But that which has no head, as are superficial and soft apostemas, must be perforated with a superficial or flat perforation only.
And when the apostema is thick, and has already produced much pus, and you perforate it, you must not hurry and extract all the pus at that time; indeed, you should draw out a part of it. Then dress the apostema until another day.Quo die post perforae apostemum iterum. On the following day, perforate the apostema again.Then draw out something of the pus once more.
Do this many times according to the progress made; until all has been evacuated: especially if the patient is weak or a pregnant woman, or a child, or an old and decrepit man; for often the animal spirit leaves the body with the egress of pus; and perhaps the infirm person dies, and you do not perceive it.Quod autem fit per apicem, fac illud per punctum: quod autem per latera fit, fac illud per liniam.
But that which is done by the apex, do it through a point; and that which is done on the sides, do it through a line.Therefore be very careful in this matter.Et oportet ut superius concauetas per punctum: et inferius fac illud per liniam.
And after your piercing, by which you pierce the pustules, you should cleanse the wound and consider it. If then the wound of a pustule is small, or the incision is flat, then apply a bandage of linen, or of an old piece of cloth. And if the pustule is large and there are many piercings of the incision, then you must insert linen into each incision until they meet again.
And if you cut away a part of the skin in the pustule, or made it hollow around its edge; then you must fill it with an old piece of cloth, or as when a garment is woven, or shaved with wool from linen without moisture: and bind it until the third day.
Then throw it off, and dress it with that which is proper out of ointment, until it heals.
But if there should be a flow of blood at the time of your operation, then apply cold water and vinegar, after which a cloth is dipped in them: and you place it over the place of the flow of blood often.
But if the flow of blood persists, then you must apply a régime, and treatment, and powders, which I recounted at many places in this our book, and out of division.Et si in uulnus intrauerit sicut quando cato, tunc oportet ut abstergas eum, et curas cum moxa, et puluere calcis, donec sanetur: sed si intrauerit sicut quando liuere, tunc non oportet ut abstergas eum, sed potius adhibe licinium, et aquam frigidam.
And if there is in the wound as when with puss, then you must cleanse it, and dress it with moxa, and powder of chalk, until it heals: but if there is in it as when pus, then do not cleanse it, rather apply linen, and cold water.If also it is in the winter time, and the place of the pustule is of many nerves: then you must pour small pieces with wine, and hot oil: and you put them over the places.
And if it is in the summer, and the places are fleshy: then you must put small pieces dipped in water, and oil, or that wine and oil, and all of it cold.Si autem fuerit apostema in capite, vel in oculis, vel in naribus, vel in ore, vel in alio quolibet loco: et pertingit ad uiscerum, tunc oportet ut abstergas locum illum, et curas cum puluere calcis et moxa, donec sanetur. When it is the third day, as we have said, then you must lance the abscess and cleanse it and apply to it what is appropriate for its cure until it heals.
This then is what is necessary from a general understanding of the cure of abscesses.
According to the path of discrimination, I have already spoken about every kind of abscess and the way to its cure in detail separately.
Chapter 41
About the lancing of abscesses which occur on the head
Small abscesses occur on the head; they are of the nature of nodules contained within pouches in the skin, as if they were water balloons.
And there are many kinds of them.
Some are fat-like; others contain limy moisture; still others contain moisture like curds and pus; and there are similar ones, and there are those which are hard like pebbles.
And in the lancing of all of them, there is no fear, as long as the artery does not pulsate contrary to the lance when they are being cut.Et si pulsabit contra lanceam, tunc est necesse ad extrahendum eam ut supra diximus.
And the operation in cutting them is that you try it with the instrument whose form comes after this, which is called the Intromissum, until you know what it contains.
For if that which it contains is moist, then dry it by cutting according to its length in a superficial cut, in this form.
And begin with the cut from line b to line g. When therefore the moisture is evacuated, then scrape away the skin which contains that moisture, and leave nothing at all in it.
For often it returns if anything remains in it.Et quod remainst illum tamen excoriabas, donec omnia sint exuta.
Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; and if not, in water and salt; and fill it with that, and leave it until another day.On the next day, scrape away the skin which has formed over the wound, and wash the wound with wine. For what remains in the cyst will be corroded.Deinde submerge cotum in unguento aegyptio, si est praesens: et si non, in aqua et sale: et imple cum eo uulnus, et dimitte ipsum usque ad diem alium.
Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment a second and third time, and if need be, until you are confident that nothing remains in the cyst; then heal the wound with ointment until it is cured.Et quilibet uulgus loquatur secundum suam experientiam.
If the pustule contains a fat nodule: then dry it up according to this form, with an incision in the shape of a cross: and insert hooks between the two lips of the incision, and scrape off the skin from all sides: and try your strength in extracting the membrane which contains it.
But if an artery causes you problems, then do what I will tell you after.
And similarly do with a pustule, if it is hard, from the incision and the same cure, according to what we have said.
And the incision on a hard pustule is easier because there is little blood and moisture. And sometimes there are some of these pustules which are on the head in certain men, with whom there is no moisture at all.
That is because I cut into a pustule on the head of an old woman and found the pustule like a solid and hard stone, rough, white, which could not be broken; and if anyone hit it by throwing something at it, it harmed itself.
However, in other pustules that occur on the head, apart from these pustules which occur on the heads of children and near the roots of the ears, the incision of all of them is a superficial incision.Et si quae apostemata non possunt faci in superficialibus, sed necesse est intrare in profundum ut sectio ueniat ad punctum, quia multum sanguinis ex eo manat et si intra se tenet mortuam carnem:
Or always make a perforation in them from the lower part, so that the flow of pus may be relieved to the lows.
Then cure them with what is appropriate for them from the cure.Et si perierunt mortibus, et omnia in eorum locis faciunt ut censebantur mortuos: et faciunt eorum corpora ut censebantur cadavera mortua, ut est manifestum:
Sectioning of the strangled thyroid in the neck.
De strophularis qui in collis interior est.
Ch. 42
And above those which proceed from these in the neck, there are one and many; and they generate among themselves; and every Strophula from them is within its own tunic, as it were in the nodes and apostemata of the head, as we have related.
And the kinds of these Strophulae are many. And from them there are [Strophulae] which are stony; and from them are those which contain moistures; and from them are the malignant ones, which do not yield to treatment.
Now when you see one among these of good disposition to the touch, whose color is evident close to that of the skin, and which moves to every part, and which is not annexed with the nerves of the neck, nor with the vein, nor with the artery, nor is deep: it is fitting that you should cut it by a superficial incision from the upper part towards the lower part of the body, along b. to g., and peel it off from all sides: and stretch forth two lips of skin with the hook, or with many hooks, if you need to, as we said in the apostemata of the head, and draw it out little by little.
And it is [important] to be cautious that you do not cut a vein or nerve.
And let the scalpel not be very acute, so that it does not give you your own hand with the incision, or disturb the sick person, and you cut what is not necessary.Et si in ea uis ex his Strophulis, quae generantur inter se intra tunicam, sicuti diximus: oportet ut incidas omnes partes, et extrahas toto corpori, vel toto collo usque ad apicem axillarum.
If, however, you come upon a vein or an artery and are prevented from operating on it, then place in the wound some powdered zea, or some other powder which checks bleeding; bind up the wound tightly, and leave it until the sharp pain of the pustule has subsided and the wound has softened; if the wound begins to fester and shows signs of putrefaction, you must treat it as follows:
The blood will then be stanched, so return to your task until the wound is healed.
Then probe with your index finger to see if there are any other small stones remaining; then remove these and clean the wound.Si autem inveneris in uulnus aliquid ex ossibus minutis, quae intrauit, ut debes facere, excide os cum scalpelio: nam non potest aliter deicere.
If there is a large vein in the root of the strophulus, then you should not cut that strophulus from its root, rather you must tie it with strong double thread and leave it until it falls without harm.
Then fill the wound with old wool which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then treat it.
If the whole strophulus is cut, then you should bring together the two lips of the wound and bind them immediately, after you see that the swelling has entirely subsided.
But if you see that there is still swelling because of the size of the strophulus, then you should go to cut its root and extract it, and give the stitch which we mentioned.
And whatever holds moisture from strophulus, pierce it with a superficial piercing so that you see its place of maturity, and put the piercing below it from what follows in the body, as we said.Si ex radice uideris Strophulam cadere: et non possis extirpare eam cum radice sua per superfluitatem quae in ea est, tunc debes quod excidendo illam, liges superfluitatem cum filo duplato forti: et dimittas eam donec cadat.
Then administer a poultice with ointment after the perforation, and similar to them, so that it corrodes what remains from the corruption, until when you see the wound already cleansed. Then treat it with an ointment of generative flesh, until it heals.
Chapter 43.
¶ On the section of the epiglottis when affected by an ulcer in the throat.
The ancients have written about this section of the epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it. And this is the writing of their speech:
Now in those who have a synanchism, it is fitting that there should be a section of the epiglottis, because the jugular vein and the lung are infirm through it.
Now in those who have a hot ulcer in the mouth or throat or both tonsils, when there is no sickness in the gullet, it is fitting to use the section of the epiglottis, to avoid destruction which comes from prematuration.Et sic debet procedere in sectione.
And thus one should proceed with the section.Now when we wish to cut it, we must cut the epiglottis under three circles of the epiglottis, or four, with a small section through its breadth, in that which is between two circles by quantity, and there is a section in the septum, not in the cartilage: and this indeed is a place convenient for section, because it is deprived of flesh, and the vessels of blood are distant from it.Postea quando per totum locum, qui sectus est, uideo prolixe sanguis emanare et profiere: ueni ad primam partem quae est versus verticem, circa quae est cartilis trabeata in hoc quod tenet Epiglotim, ut sit infra aliam: illuc oportet te uenire per sectiones paruas, ne si qua pars carnis per uelamentum subdederit, illam ad ferendo non possis.
If the doctor is timid then he must stretch the skin of the throat with a hook. Then he investigates the skin until he comes to the larynx: he removes the blood vessels if he sees any.
Then he makes an incision of the larynx as we have described, and the sign is seen on the section of the larynx from the phlegm that flows out of it, with what is broken, and by voice loss.
And leave the wound open for some time.
When then the hour comes in which we fear pre-speech, bring together the two lips of the skin wound, and just close it without cartilage.
Then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow, until it is healed.Et si postea disrumpatur, iterum resecanda est, et de novo medicando omnia ut antea.
And if later it is broken again, then cut it again and cure it anew just as before, says Albucasis.Ita fit uariola in canna. This is the sum of this discourse which we have described: the explanation is not unless when they see that one of these abscesses has burst in the throat of the patient: and the patient is raised above death, and wants to be cut off from his breath: they cry out to dry the Epiglottis, so that the patient can breathe over the place of the wound by some respiration, and be saved from death; and because of this they instruct to leave the wound open until the wickedness of the disease is consumed, and its wickedness is for three days, and almost itself: then they instruct to sew up the wound, and heal it, until it is healed.
And what I myself saw was that a maid took a knife and put it into her throat, and cut with it part of the windpipe of the lung.Et postea misit medicum ad curandum eam: sed non poterat curare eam per omnes medicinas, quae posset habere.
And then she sent for a doctor to heal her: but he could not heal her with all his medicines. And I was called upon to heal her, and I found her snorting like the snort of a dead man.Et cum incisi eam utuendo stetam in uno latere gutturis, et postea in alio latere gutturis.
I examined the wound and I found blood which had escaped from a small wound. Therefore I was confused that she had not lost her urine nor bled from the wound, and that the wind escaped from it.
I treated therefore both the wound and her, and healed it, until it was whole; and nothing befell the maid but hoarseness of voice; and she returned after a few days to her better state.
Hence I say that there is no fear in the division of the epiglottis.
§ On the division of the hernia of the throat.
CHAPTER 44.¶ Cum uultis aperire os ad trahandelum, et non possit.
This apostema called the hernia of the throat is a large apostema, according to the colour of the body: and it is much in women.Est autem sub lingua, ad partem lateralis, ubi est ossa, prope uulvam.
And it is according to two manners; for either it is natural, or it is accidental.Et utrumque accidit in mulieribus multum, et rarissime in viris.
And both kinds happen much in women and rarely in men.Certainly the natural kind has no disposition.Sed quae naturaliter fit, facit se quoddam quasi nodulum sub lingua, ubi uenose periculum est: et periculum illud in modum noduli est ut dixi.
But the accidental kind is according to two manners; of whom one is like fat nodules.Et sic est quod fit per uenose in modum quasi globuli, et non est in modum noduli, sed in modum globuli: sed ut dixi quae naturaliter fit, periculum illud quoque est in modum noduli: et sic facit se quoddam quasi nodulus sub lingua ad lateris partem. And the other manner is like an apostema that happens from a clot of an artery.Quod autem fit per uenose in modum globuli, sicut dixi, non facit se nec periculum nec nodulus: sed periculum illud fit ut nodulus et quod fit per arteriam periculum facit se ut apostema. And in that which happens from the vein there is fear; and it does not behove you to make a presumption on it with iron, unless in what is small: and you shall prove it, and investigate it with the probe.Et quicquid accidit ad partem lateris periculum illud facit se ut nodulus, et est sub lingua. If therefore you find it like a fat nodule, and it is not hanging with any vein; then cut it, as they cut the nodules; and take out from it whatever it contains in a cyst, if it is in a cyst: but if not, then probe through all of it.Et quicquid periculum accidit secundum arteriam periculum facit se ut apostema et sic extrahe illud cum ferro, donec perscrutati simus totum eius et uideamus quid sit sub eius parte postea: et quicquid invenerimus in ipso, in modum consanguinitatis, si periculum est in eius parte, tunc non dubitemus sed loquamur de sanguine qui est in puluere. Then treat the wound with what is appropriate for it until it heals.
CHAPTER 45.
On the cutting of warts.
There are many kinds of warts, and I have already described them all, in the chapter on Their Types: so I will now tell of the difference between a wart and an ulcer, since there is some uncertainty about it.
So I say that when there is fever and violent pains associated with an ulcer until the ebullition of the suppuration is stilled and the putrefaction completed, then the fever and heat subside.Sed interea Nodum non est, nec dolores vehemens: sed quoddam uolubrum et macula uenosa, et pulsat et sensim crescit.
When there is no heat, nor fever, nor pains, and they are contained in the sac of their own nature, which is called kistis sifachin, and it is according to the color of the body: and its beginning is like that of a pea, and becomes like a bean, larger or smaller.
And they are according to two forms: either fat, or containing moisture. And there are many colors of moisture, according to what I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the cure of a nodule, it is necessary that you should examine it first with an instrument called the intromissum, according to its form as it comes out in the chapter that follows.
And the manner of examining all pustules and nodules is to take this instrument and introduce it into the most moist place which you find in the pustule; then move your fingers with it little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the skin. Then make a mark on your hand according to the measurement of the size of the pustule.Et cum istud fecerit, et intromiserit sepe, et teneat instrumentum in tua manu donec percutiat locum, ubi est apostema, usque ad profunditatem uncias duos vel tres, secundum mensuram corporis, sed ne forte percutiat sicut percutiet gladio.
Then extract what was introduced and consider what emerges with it.
If then a flowing humidity emerges, whatever its color: then dry it up by the superficial section, according to what I said about other pustules.
And if no humidity emerges with the Intromissum, then know that it is fatty: dry it therefore by a superficial section in the form of a cross, according to this form, as I taught you; and suspend it by hooks, and peel the skin from all parts easily; and guard the case, if possible, above it, so as to extract it healthy with its Knot.
But if the case is ruptured during the operation, and it is not possible to extract it healthy - for this happens many times - then extract it with difficulty, until nothing remains of it.
For if something little or much remains of it, the Knot returns as often as not.
But if it resists you, and something little remains, then fill the wound at your completion with some acute corrosive powders; and close the wound, and place upon it what sits as a hot pustule, and care for it with the rest of the cure, until it is healed.Et si accidit, ut non possis extrahere Nodon cum kisti, et disrumpitur apud operationem: et remanet in quoque parte aliquid, quod non possit extrahi cum facili, sed debet esse disrupta kistis, quod sit in uulnus: tunc extrahe ipsum cum Nodo frustatim donec non remaneat in eo parum.
And if it happens that you cannot extract the Knot with its case, and it is ruptured during operation; and something remains in every part which cannot be extracted easily, but must be broken up into a wound: then extract it with difficulty until there remains nothing in it.If then the Knot is large, then extract two of its lips, and cure it with that which incarnates.
But if the pulsatile vein is contrary to you, or not pulsatile: then hasten, and fill the place of the zeg with powdered rust, and leave it strict for two days, or three, until the wound putrefies, and the ebullition of blood ceases; then return to incising what remains from the Knot.Si ergo non est possile extrahere Nodon cum kisti, sed disrumpitur apud operationem: et non remaneat in eo nihil, sed redit in uulnus quod sit in parte corporis: tunc scies quod illud in quo disrumpitur Nodus debet esse incarnatum secundum partem corporis.
Chapter 46.
Of the instruments of cutting and piercing from without.
There are three kinds of forms of instruments for insertion:
The large ones, the medium ones and the small ones.
Let them be made of iron of a full-square cross section with rounded points so that they hold their place firmly in the wound.
And these are forms of instruments for experience, and no, that is, piercing; and one of them is called a borer, that is, piercing; and they are three kinds.
The large ones, the medium ones and the small ones.Utere autem ex eis secundum naturam experientis: nam magnus non convenit omni experimentis, sed magnus facit lites.
They join so as to be sutured by means of the apotems, and by means of the openings, and the fistulas, and the buboes that are in it from what is between them of the bones.
And others are made round, sharp, smooth, like large needles with which the cushions are sewn, from citrus wood, or from bronze, or iron, or silver.
And the best of them are those that are made from citrus wood.
And one also makes experiments with black lead; they are suitable for experimenting with fistulas of which there is a concavity, so that these concavities might be reflected, in conjunction with their suavity.
And there are again three kinds. For from them some are long, some medium, and some short, according to the quantity of the amplitude of the fistula and its constriction.Et sunt iterum trium specierum.
The shape of the forceps is also varied, and they come in many kinds.Quoniam alii fiunt rotondi, et alii tereti, alii quadriconi, alii sexconici, alii octoconici, alii deciconici.
For some are round, others are convex, others rectangular, others hexagonal, others octagonal, and others decagonal.For some of them are simple, that is to say they have a single curve; and there are three kinds as you see, large, medium, and small.Et sunt iterum multarum specierum.
And among them are blind men; and they are of three kinds.
And among them are men having two hooks, and they are of three kinds: and among them are men having three hooks, and they are of three kinds: and all these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of knives with which they cut and skin knots and abscesses; and they are of three kinds: for among them is one great, one middle, and one small.
The ends of these with which they cut are sharp; and the other ends are not sharp: and they are not placed so that it may be incised, unless to make an incision in the skin of a knot on account of the fear of cutting into a vein or nerve; and so that it may be healed by means of them, and find rest a little from the burning which it finds when the abscess is being excoriated.
They are made of brass, and they are similar to a razor with which the skin is shaved; and at its broad end there is hidden a fine point; and it runs to the inside, and to the outside when you wish, as you see.
The form of the spatulas which are hidden among the fingers when making an incision on abscesses: and they are not perceived by the sick; and they are of three kinds, great, middle, and small.Et faciunt adestum in excoriatione Nodorum et apostematum ut non curant: et si quispiam percipit eam per somnium ueneam aut nervum, non est salubris.
The forms of the phlebotomy instruments with which bloodletting is performed: and they are of three kinds, great, middle, and small.Et faciunt adestum in excoriatione Nodorum ut non curant: et si quispiam percipit eam ueneam aut nervum, non est salubris.
Let them be made of brass or citronwood, round and somewhat long as you see; and let them be very fine.Et faciunt adestum in excoriatione Nodorum ut non curant: et si quispiam percipit eam ueneam aut nervum, non est salubris.
And it is right that these species of leeches should be great and small with you, so that you may draw blood through them quickly in case of need, and then when medicine is not present to you.
However, you should not use them to draw blood in any place of the body, and you should not use them except in fleshy places: just as the legs of lizards, and the hips, and the wrists of lizards, and breasts, and bellies, and groins, and similar to these, out of fleshy lizards, moist.
And sometimes they are made into other small instruments similar to nutcrackers, according to their shape: with which blood is drawn when it flows from the place of phlebotomy, or at the incision of a vein, or artery; and sometimes they are made into rounds according to this form.
Chapter 47.
¶ Of the cure of the breasts of men which resemble those of women.
Sometimes the breasts of some men are swollen at the end of sleep (that is, when they begin to sweat in sleep) until they resemble those of women; and they remain foully pustulent.Et fiunt post modum utrumque, quod non debet esse: et praeteriae, et inflatio mammillarum, et apostema, cum pus multus intra est, et virga carnosa in medio, et lympha, et suppurationes intra mammillas.
And they become in both ways what they should not be: and suppuration, and swelling of the breasts, and pustules, with much pus within, and a fleshy rod in the middle, and lymph, and suppuration within the breasts.Whoever therefore abhors that, must cut on the breasts with a lunar incision, according to this form from line b to line g. Then peel off all the fat. Then fill the wound with the medicine of incorporation.Et si uoluisse post ea resistere cupiant: quod non debet esse, et ex inflatio fiunt utroque modo: et si suppurationem faciat in medio mammillarum intra carnes, sed non extra mammillas: et praeteriae similiter. Then bring together the two lips of the wound with a stitch, and dress it until it heals.
If it is drawn downward by its own weight and softened because of its size, as happens to women: then two cuts similar in shape to the moon must be made on both upper sides, each connected with the other at their edges, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this pattern from the line, b. towards the line, g. Then scrape off the skin between the two lips of the wound and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitches and powders which are necessary for curing, until it heals.
If you cannot complete the incision as you should because of the restlessness of the patient or because of the flow of blood: then you must fill up the wound with a cotton pad saturated with corrosive ointment, and leave it until it has corroded what remains of the fat. Then dress it, until it heals.
¶ On piercing a boil which occurs under the nipple.
CHAPTER XLVIII.
These boil which occur under the nipple are of a hard kind, which contain cysts, and from them are those which contain moisture.Si autem uiderint esse sub Titillico ut in Figura, n. 15: tunc oportet ut incidas illum quod est sub Titillico ad latere suo supremo, et excidendas sunt omnes humores qui intra se habent: donec intrant in lacte et sanguine, cum pulvere astringente; et intraunt inter uulnera.
Those then which are of the kind that contain humours, must be opened by a lunar incision, after this manner, from line b to line g: when therefore all that is in the ulcer has been evacuated, fill up the wound with old cotten, and leave it thus until another day.
Then the dressing must be taken away, and the wound must be treated with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
If the ulcer is of the kind which resembles nodules of Stranglewort, then it must be cut over just as we have said in the incision for Stranglewort.
If however the ulcer extends in order to discharge pus, then a cautery must be applied in it according to what we have already said.
Chapter 49.
Of the incision of an ulcer which has occured on account of an Artery and Vein.
When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it becomes hardened, then many times there results from this an ulcer; and similarly also with a vein so that there results in it an ulcer and a swelling.The cause of this is the arterial blood or venous blood which flows out into the surrounding parts. When therefore such ulcers occur they are very difficult to heal because of the blood which flows into them. For if the artery or vein is not tied, and the flow of blood is not stopped, then, as soon as the blood has been evacuated from the ulcer, it immediately returns again; thus the ulcer can never be healed because of this.
And the signs by which one recognises that an ulcer and inflammation are caused by an artery or vein are these: for when the ulcer is from an artery it is long, and collected in the depths of the body: and when you press on the ulcer with your fingers, you feel as it were a buzzing.And whenever you open such an ulcer there flows out a large quantity of blood mixed with dark pus; and you can tell it from other ulcers by its colour, for it is darker than that from other ulcers.
And what comes from a vein is round on the surface of the body.De sectione apostematis quod accidit propter Arteriam et Venam.
And an incision on this ulcer is a mistake and especially if it is under the armpit or groin or neck or many places of the body, and it is very serious.For there flow into it from all sides, through small vessels which branch out from the artery and vein, blood and dark pus in great quantity; and whenever the wound is opened, these flow immediately back again so that the ulcer can never be healed. Therefore it is necessary that care be taken of this with the knife and also what is in them in the extremities, or on the head, it is necessary to cut away.
Therefore for that which is in them out of the distention of the orifice of the artery, find in the skin a section in length. Then open up the section with hooks, afterwards the artery and free it from its tunics until it is uncovered.
Then insert the awl under it and make it penetrate as far as the other side, and tie off the artery with double thread in two places, according to what I taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples.
Then puncture the place which is between the two ligaments with a spatulum until all the blood that is in it comes out and the abscess dissolves.
Then treat with a medicine which generates pus until the ligaments fall away; afterwards cure it with suitable ointments to it until it heals.
If the abscess is due to a vein cut then you must hold in your hand as much of the abscess with skin as you can. Then insert an awl under the place which you are holding in your hand and make it penetrate; let there be double thread in it until you draw it out from the other side. Then tie the abscess with good ligament; according to what I said to you in the vein ligament, from two parts with two ends of thread.
If you are afraid that the thread will be drawn out then insert another awl with another thread under the whole abscess near the incision of the awl; press and tighten your threads in four places.
Then cut the abscess in the middle of itself until what is in it comes out; then cut away the superfluous skin and leave what was tied to it.
Then put on top of it a little poultice which you have soaked in wine and oil. Then treat with medicines made from linseed and ointments until it heals.
Chapter 50.
Of the disease that comes from twisting nerves.
Just as it happens to the artery and vein so also does it happen to the nerves when a blow occurs to them or when they are overstrained and similarly from excessive movement of their joints or at the heel and every place where the joints move and most frequently in the parts that assist motion; and this is a serious disease.
Its colour resembles that of the rest of the body and it is found in many parts without pain but when tightly pressed with vehemence then the diseased person feels in it something like a stupor.The nerve should be cut and a little part of the diseased flesh removed; for if it be not cut, the disease will remain in it.
It is not a deep wound in the body but under the skin and it moves to every part and does not go forward or backwards or sideways.And you will know that this is so when it does not go forwards or backwards or sideways; for if it goes forwards or backwards or sideways then there is no disease.
If therefore it is at the joints do not open it with iron.But cut and remove a little from the diseased part for if you do not cut it the disease will remain; and this is called the cutting of nerves.Et debet medicus cognoscere quid agatur cum apostemate quod est super Nerva, et quid cum ipso fit: nam si intrauit ad posteriora, oportet eum excisare. The physician must know what is done with the disease that is on the nerve and what happens to it; for if it goes backwards, he must excise it.For perhaps a contraction will happen.Et si intrauit ad anteriora, debet eum incidi.
And if it goes forwards he must split it.If therefore it is on the head or forehead find the skin with a spatulum.Si autem intrauit ad uelutras, oportet eum excisare: et si intrauit ad oculus quolibet, debet eum incidi cum ferro. If therefore it is a small ulcer, then hold it with forceps and cut it off at the root.
And if it is large, then hang it with a hook and scrape it; then take it away and close up the wound with a stitch; and dress it until it is healed.
CHAPTER 51.
Of the cutting of an ulcer which happens in the belly.
It happens to some men very often in their bellies, and in other parts of their bodies, warts, which are called Fungal warts, because they resemble fungi.
The root of these is slender, but the head is thick and there are lips on them turned outwards. It has a small head, and it sometimes grows very large.And it comes about thus:
And I indeed have seen a man whose belly had two warts resembling fungi more than other things; there was no difference between them, they were white and had a slender root, and the lips turned inwards.
So I cut them and found one weighed about 10 ounces and 8 drams and the other about 6 ounces; the operation in cutting them is that you ought to consider then if it is firm and moist, and the color of the wart white, moist and slender-rooted, then cut it with a wide spatula, and have cauteries ready heated.Quidam autem de his proficiscuntur ad apicem, quidam ad medium, quidam ad radices.
Some of these warts go towards the tip, some to the middle, and some to the roots; for very often a great deal of blood is driven out at the cutting, so if you are overpowered by bleeding, then cauterize it.Et si in medio est sanguis profusis multus, et non currit mox, et non concidit: tunc incide iterum ipsum, et luge eum, donec sanguis exeo: et concidere debet uterque caput eorum, qui erant in medio, quod per totam via non proficiscitur.
If you see the patient weak and fearful of the incision with the knife, then take a thread of decent lead, and bind it tightly around the vein: whose manner is whom we have said, and leave him for two days.
Then add to the binding of the lead. You do not cease therefore to tighten the lead, as often as it prints upon the vein, until it is cut off, and falls away by itself without labor.
If indeed the vein be of a gross root, then there is somewhat of fear and terror in its incision: especially that which is in the belly.
Nevertheless it is possible to cut off half of it. Then cauterize it, lest it return.
Then heal the wound until it is cured.
And beware lest you presume to cut a vein that is of a dusky color, of little sense, and foul in aspect: for this is an ulcerous aposteme: and I shall come with the remembrance of Cancer after this.
Chapter 52. [The end of Albucasis]
¶ Of the cure of the prominence of the navel.
Is made prominent Umbilicus from many causes. Either from fissures of the navel, which is above the belly: and comes out of it a hernia, or bowels, according as it happens in other rupture. Or from blood which flows from a vein, or artery, according as it is aforesaid. Or from the coarctation of windiness in it.And this happens not only through cold, but also sometimes through heat: for it is not necessary that heat should be present with every cold, or that cold should be present with every heat; since one may happen without the other.
But if it is on account of a rupture of the navel, and there is an issue of pus, then its color is like that of the body; and it is tender, without pain; and many parts appear. And if it is on account of the protrusion of intestine, then its location, with that which we before mentioned, is more violent and diverse.And there are two kinds of hernias; one whereof proceeds from the navel, but does not recede: and this is called hernia omphaliaca, and is caused by rupture: the other, whereof, proceeds from the side, and returns again to its place, which is called hernia lateralis. When therefore you press it with your fingers, it hides; then it returns and perhaps there is a noise with it; and it magnifies greatly at the entrance of the bath, and the effort is terrible.
If however it is because of humidity, it is sluggish; then when you press it with your hand it does not hide nor is constriction or addition made.
If however it is because of blood, then with these signs appears an ulcer towards blackness from the claw.
But if it is because of born flesh, then there is a grave, large, hard ulcer, and it is formed according to one quantity.Quod si propter uenam, tunc apparet apostema secundum colorem sanguinis qui in uiolenta est, et facit sonum cum claudicat; et non est dolorem magnum.
If however it is because of a vein, then its touch is gentle. If however it is because of bloodletting, then its touch is gentle.
And the operation on it is such that you should then consider if the prominence of the navel is because of an artery or vein or bloodletting; then you ought to abstain from curing it.Sed si est propter carnem, uenam, uentositatem, et non est propter sanguinem Arteriae, oportet ut curas, ne diutius maneat in corpore, quoniam multum laboris facit. But there is fear and terror, as I have taught you in the chapter where I said that pustules are caused by an artery or vein.
If the protuberance is caused by the intestine or a hernia, then you must instruct the sick man to hold his breath and remain standing upright. Then make signs with hot iron all around the navel. Afterwards instruct him to lie down on his back between your hands. Then surround the navel with a broad spatula all around the spot where you made signs with hot iron. Then extend the pus upwards towards the top of the pustule with a large hook. Then tie it firmly all around with strong silk thread or cord made of silk, and let the knot be tied tightly against the pus.
Then open the pus that has been extended above the ligature. If you find that it has been caught by the ligature, then extract the hernia and insert your index finger into it, and push the intestine back inside the abdomen; and if you find a hernia, then grasp it with a hook and cut away the swelling.
But if an artery or vein lies beneath it, then surround it widely. Then go back to your incision. And take two needles and thread them with two strong threads; then pierce the pustule all around where you made the sign with hot iron, making a cross.
Then tie the pustule in four places with the needles; and if you wish, take out the needles and leave it open, until the flesh putrefies and falls off by itself; or cut into it when it becomes suppurative and putrid.
Then dress the wound with whatever ointment is appropriate, until it heals.
If the protuberance at the navel is caused by burned flesh or humidity, then you must hollow out the pustule as we said before. And you will draw off the blood, or humidity that you find in it.Deinde fac ut sit subtegmen supra locum.
Then treat the wound with what will promote healing.
Chapter 53.
¶ On the treatment of CANCER.
We have already said in the section on the types of cancer, and how it is treated with remedies: and we have warned against hurting it while treating it with the knife, lest it be hurt: and we have spoken of Cancer generated in the matrix, and of cauterization for its cure.
And the ancients said, that sometimes Cancer can be eradicated from a place, such as Cancer which is in the breast, or in the hip, and those similar members located for removal of all of it; especially when it is small at the beginning.Et quandoque non est possibile eradicatio Cancri, nisi cum magna uelatione corporis, sicut qui est in renibus, vel in pulmonibus, vel in utero: et alibi.
When, however, it is old and large, you must not approach it.
For I could heal no one from it; nor did I see anyone else before me who succeeded in reaching it.
And the operation on it, when it is placed as we have said, is, that you go forward and heal the patient from the black choler sometimes. Then bleed him if you find him with a manifest fullness.
Then prepare the patient with a preparation in which he is to be operated upon.
Then probe into the ulcer with hooks that are appropriate for it. Afterwards hollow it out from every part with a scalpel according to the probe, until nothing remains of its roots: and let the blood flow, and do not cut it away quickly, rather press the places and wipe away all thick blood by your hand or by whatever instrument is possible there.
But if it opposes you with a flow of thick blood from the artery or vein: then cauterize the vein until the blood is cut off. Then dress it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
§ On the cure of Hydropsis.Et si uolueris aliquam rationem de hac infirmitate habere, et de curatione eius, vide Lib.
And if you wish to have some account of this disease and its cure, see Book 2, Chapter 54.¶ De cura Ulcerum malitiosorum. We have already spoken of the species of dropsy and how the accumulation of water occurs, and of all the signs of each species and its cure with remedies.Et de curis malitiosorum alibi per Libros multum habemus, sed etiam hic aliquid adiecimus quod in hac parte diuersum est: nam qui ante nos scripserunt omnes a se uere curari ulceras malitiosas non cognoverunt.
And we have much on the cures of malignant ulcers elsewhere in our books, but we have also added something here that is different from what those who wrote before us said, for they did not know that all malignant ulcers could be completely cured.And that which is cured with iron is only a species of scrofula: and it does not come close to the species of timpanitis or hyposarcu: for these are deadly.¶ De cura ulcerum malitiosorum cum ferro.
When you have already been treated for this kind of hydrops with medicine and your treatment has not helped, then consider this. Indeed, if weakness has already followed the patient or there is another infirmity with the hydrops, as in the case of a cough, or looseness of the bowels and similar conditions, then beware of treating this patient with iron, for it is dangerous to do so.
But if you see the patient overflowing with strength and there is no other illness apart from hydrops: and he is not a child or an old person; then there is a way of operating on him, so that you raise up the patient while standing between your hands, and a helper behind him expresses his belly by pushing with his hand, driving the water towards the lower part with a comb.
Then accept a spathule with spikes, in this form. It is to have two pointed parts, long and pointed at the end just like a spatule.Haec tibi faciunt fabri mechanici qui faciunt spatulas. This will be made for you by mechanical artisans who make spatules.However, there must be a certain amount of shortness in it, so that you do not go through it during the operation and hurt the intestines.Et sit illius extremitas sicut est extremitas Spatulamilis: sed faciunt eum ad mensuram unciae una, vel ad duos scrupulos.
Then consider. For if the generation of Hydropsis is from the intestines, then one should lengthen it by a cut from the navel the quantity of three fingers, to its lower part above his breastbone.
But if the generation of the dropsy is because of a disease of the liver, then let your cut be on the left from the navel by three fingers.
And if its generation is because of the spleen, then let the cut be on the right side; and it must not also be that there is a cut on the side over which the sick person wants to lie, so that superfluities do not flow to that weak spot.
Then pierce with an instrument all of the skin.Et postea adplica placidas palpas per totum hunc locum ubi fecisti sectiones, ut excitatibus illo in locis, ut fluant superfluitates: et sic fit remedium. Then insert into that cut, and raise your hand with the Spatulum between skin and subcutaneous tissue, as if you were flaying it; and let the amount which is flayed be the thickness of a fingernail, or about that.Nam si excoriatur multum, et si corium disciatur: tunc non curabit.
Then pierce the lip until you reach the hollow space; and this is where the water is. Then pull it out, and insert into the opening an instrument which has this shape. It is like a tube; it is made of silver, or bronze, or brass, smooth and polished, with a small opening at its lower end, and three openings on its sides, two on one side and one on the other; its tip is split, in the manner of the split end of a reed, as you see; and there is a ring at its upper end.
For when the instrument has reached the water, then the water flows immediately over the instrument, and thus it is emptied of water to the amount of half an hour.
For if you empty more than is proper, perhaps the sick person will die through loss of his animal spirit by evaporation; or it may happen that he will be overcome with a swoon verging on death.
But empty her according to the quantity of its strength, and according to what the condition of the patient indicates to you from the strength of his pulse, and from his good or bad condition.Et post uigilia nocte facta, et jejunia imposta, si necessitas est, tu uel utrique facias jejunium: postea perfora eam iterum locum qui est super ombelico ad ueterem locum, in quo antea fuerat uentralis uena.
And after a night watch, and fasting imposed, if necessity requires, you shall make him fast both day and night: then pierce her again at the place above the navel, in the old place where the umbilical vein used to be.Then take out the instrument, and retain the water.Et si peruenit ad locum uacuum, et non peruenit ad aquam, et habet uigour pulsus infimus: tu intromitte in foramen eius calamos aurichalcinos, facatos secundum modum instrumenti qui est intra.
This is because it will be retained immediately by the skin which retains the orifice that is above the sipho: about which I told you, to pierce it in that way.
Then use the instrument again the next day, if you see that he can tolerate it; and also withdraw a small quantity from the water.
Do this for several days without fear, and be careful to avoid mistake: until there remains almost no water.
But if you are afraid of the patient and let him out of much water: then treat him with a hot sand burial, and much sweating in the bath and sun, and let him thirst: and treat him with drying medicines, until he recovers; and cauterize over the stomach, and liver, and spleen, after the extraction of water: according to what I told you in that which preceded.
¶ Of the treatment of children who are born with their urinary passages not perforated.Si puerulus noui interueniuntur et ueniri non possunt: utrumque fac, vel cum lacero, vel cum instrumentum de aqua, sicut narraui.
Chapter 54.De cura doloris qui fit in inguine per retentiones et per ulcera eorum: et quomodo debet curari et qua medicinis: et qualiter debet faci de lacero.
When someone leaves the womb of his mother, and there is a plug in his urethra, or it is a tight orifice, or not in its proper place.Si non possunt egredi per illud, faciatur laceratio, vel usitetur instrumentum, sicut antea naraui: et extrahe eorum omnia.
It is necessary to help him immediately after his birth with a thin Spatumili needle, according to this form.Et postea trahe illum foras per illud foramen, et intrahe in ea spatulam de buccinis: et tenet sub talone pedis eius per dies aliquot, donec sit perforatus.
Then put a thin lead nail into the orifice and tie it; and hold it for three days, or four.Et si non pertingit illum ad urinam per foramen eius, trahe clauum, et repone in eo spatulam: et intrahe postea in ea clauum de auricula elephanti in foramine.
And when he wants to pass urine, remove it and let him pass water.Et si super illum resit, intrahe in eo clauum de ferro subtilem: et tene sub talone pedis eius per dies aliquot, donec perfora foramen eius. Then reduce it yourself.
And if you do not put a plug in it, it will now be possible for the urine that runs down over this spot not to allow it to heal.
However, the one whose opening is narrow will be treated with a plug, as we said, for many days until it widens.
However, those in whom there is an opening in not its proper place are harmed. This is because out of them there is an opening at the end of the head of the penis; therefore he cannot urinate forward until he raises the penis by his hand to the upwards. Nor can it procreate, because the sperm cannot reach the womb according to its straightness: and it is a very bad illness.
And the manner of operating on this is that the invalid lies down on his back. Then stretch out the head of its penis with your left hand a violent stretching, and cut off the head of the penis from the place of the glans, with an awl, or with a sharp spatulum: just as is the cutting of a reed, or as you split something so that the middle comes to be like the head of the penis: and let there fall a foramen in the middle according to what is proper.
And take care of yourself at your operation from the flow of blood. For it has often happened. Therefore stop with him with that which cuts off the blood, and dress the wound, until he is healed.
¶ Of Albather are things that happen in the foreskin and head of the penis, and corruption, blackness, and adhesions.
Chapter 56.
These things often happen in the penis, and there is an eminence of bad flesh.Et multum uolunt perire homines cum ea: sed oportet extirpabiles esse cum ferro, et caue tibi ut non erubescat sanguis in te.
And from it one is malignant and another not malignant.
Therefore the non-malignant one you should lift up with a fine hook, and cut it off until you have cleansed it entirely. Then place over it a pad soaked in Egyptian ointment. Then treat it afterwards with the diaphne ointment until it is healed.
If indeed the albather is malignant, of a foul colour, then you should apply to it cautery after its incision and scraping.
If the albather is under the foreskin of a circumcised man, and part of it is within the foreskin, and part of it without; then you must remove the albather which is inside first, until it heals, then treat that which is outside: because when you treat them both at once the foreskin does not heal.
And now they also occur in the testicles and foreskin, blackness and corruption. Therefore you must hollow out all which is already blackened or which threatens to become so, or indeed is already corrupted.Et oportet ut concaues intra testiculos, si cum albather intra testiculos concrescerit.
Then line over it with honey and flour of the husks of pomegranates, and ground herbs passed through a sieve.
Then treat it with the remaining remedy until it is healed.
But if bleeding ensues, then apply a cautery with a lunar cautery in this form.
For a cautery is applied to two purposes at once, namely, for the bleeding, and for the wound when it has been injured.Quod si non possit fieri, tunc iuuat cum vno solo cauterio.
If, however, the head of the ulcer is eaten away and the whole destroyed in a single hour, then one must introduce into the meatus priapi a leaden tube that the debilitated man may urinate upon it.
But if there is an adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the ulcer and this happens only when the foreskin itself is not cut and circumcision has not been performed upon him; and sometimes there is adhesion because of a wound, or an ulcer: then one must scrape it with a blunt Spatumili, until the ligament is released, and the head of the penis is freed from all parts.
If it is difficult to distinguish them accurately, then one must scrape something off the head of the penis and off the foreskin.Cum vero facit mola, et emittit sanguinem: non debet excoriare utrque, sed solvat eam cum oleo iuuae. That is because the foreskin, when it is thin, perhaps may be easily perforated due to its thinness.
Then separate between the foreskin and the glans with a strip of linen cloth, which has been softened in cold water, so that they do not adhere again.
It is then treated with astringent wine until it heals.
Chapter 57.
¶ On the purification of infants and on healing them when they are harmed by mistake.
Circumcision is not a cure for impotence, as are other wounds; however, since it comes from our action and our intention, and its use is specifically for children, we must try to perform the operation better and with easier treatment leading to health.De circumcisione infantum.
I say then that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they do not use it in their laws, and there is only what we have acquired through experimentation.De circumcisione infantum.
That is because I found most artisans and bloodletters using purification, by circumcising with a scalpel and tweezers; they also use cauterization, and ligature with thread, and incision with the nail.De circumcisione infantum.
And I indeed have already tried all these methods, and I did not find a better purification with tweezers and ligature with thread.De circumcisione infantum.
Because in purification with a scalpel, the skin often slips away.De circumcisione infantum. Because the skin of the foreskin has two tunics; therefore perhaps the upper skin is cut, and it tears the lower tunic: so one must be careful in making the incision to cut the other, and future pain.De circumcisione infantum. And when purification is done with cauterization, that is, with the finger, which surgeons use, it does not seal the incision at the end of the male member; because perhaps it goes into the foreskin.De circumcisione infantum.
But when purification is done with the nail, perhaps the iron goes in, and it ruins your operation; and indeed the skin of children is short by nature, and many are born like that, so that they do not need purification; and I have seen that.De circumcisione infantum.
The experiment with tweezers and a ligature with thread has proven good to me, because the tweezers are proportioned to the incision; therefore, the acute part above is like that which is below. When therefore you apply your hand thus, the two acute parts are proportioned, and they incise in accordance with a single operation at the same time; and compression is made with similar figure, holding the skin of the vein from every part, with which no error at all arises.
And the mode of the proper operation is that you estimate, especially the boy, if he is among those who understand a little, that you do not do, unless you tie the thread in its vein only; and you leave it until another day.
Then let him rejoice and be glad in every way that is possible to you from what he receives from his understanding.Et postea ut veniat ad te, fac eum ut trahat et detrahatur uirga, et videbitis quod non cadit sanguis in omni parte, sed per modum ligaturae solum: Then let the child stand between your prepared hands, and not be seated; and conceal the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot, so that the child sees them not at all, nor any of the instruments.
Then introduce your hand to his penis, and blow on the skin, and draw it up, until the head of the penis emerges. Then cleanse it from that which gathers in it as filthiness.
Then tie the marked place with a double thread. Afterwards, tie below a little lower with a second ligature. Then hold with your index and thumb the place of the lower ligature well, and cut between the two ligatures. Then raise the skin up quickly, and draw out the head of the penis. Then let the blood flow slowly (for it is better thus), and place powder over it; and over the powder a cloth in which the white of an egg has been spread out with rosewater, shaken up with rose oil. Fresh is better; and let him wear it over the wound until another day: and take care of him with the rest of the cure, until he recovers.
But the form of the scissors for the cleansing is as follows.
Let there be two blunt points, and let them be incident; so that the branch of the nail does not come out in them: and let the length of the two acute parts be equal to the length of two thumbs.
But the mistake that falls upon the cleansing is this; for perhaps all the inner skin escapes, or a part of it, at the incision.
Therefore you ought to stretch it with your nail an hour before the apostome of the place; and cut it according to equality.
But if you cannot hold it with your nail, then pull it out with a hook, and cut it.
But if three days have passed, and there remains what is under the penis swollen, an apostome; then let it be, until the apostome sits cool, and scrape it off with ease, and cut it according to how it is prepared for you; and beware of the head of the penis. For that will not harm him.
Therefore treat that with him which consolidates the wound out of powders, which we mentioned in the treatise on powders: and if it is cut out from the skin above the measure, and oozes out to the upper parts, that also does not harm him.
Therefore treat that with him which we said, until he is healed.
Chapter 58.
¶ On the extraction of a retained thorn in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder, is from a clot formed from stone, or frozen blood, or pus, or congealed flesh, and similar things to those which we said from those modes of cure in division.
And if the Bladder is not relieved, and you see that retention of it is on account of a stone which already is in the neck of the bladder: then it behooves that he be made feeble above his knees by cupping-glasses.Et oportet inceptum esse post coitionem, donec urina uadat. Then his feet are laid upon his back, and he extends his belly from the upper part of his back, and tightens his feeble breathing as much as is possible for him.Et uidebitur quod urina uadat per uesicum ex sanguine et pus, qui in uesica est: et tunc oportet eum curare de lapidibus qui sunt in collo uesicae super mensuram suam, quantum possibile sit ei curare illos; siue etiam cum pulueribus qui diximus. Therefore with a wound in the throat of the bladder for the expulsion of the stone towards the posterior: therefore is absolved Urina.
If it does not become free with what we said above and the matter be over the infirm man: then one must administer its extraction by instrument called a syringe, whose form is: Let it be of silver, and let it be thin, smooth, hollow as the cannula of an ostrich feather in thinness, long in likeness of the palm of one and a half: to which let the cannula be thin at its head.
And the way of exit of Urina through it is, that you take a double thread, and tie at its end wool, or linen, good ligature; and insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the Syringe; and cut with scissors if there be something superfluous from the wool, but true insert in the cannula with vehemence, just as with an enema.
Then smear the syringe with oil, or butter, and white of egg; and make the infirm man sit over a seat, and embrocate his throat, and his throat-string with oils moist, and olive oil, and tepid water.Postea trahe filum per siringam usque ad extremitatem, et remoue super eam, si quid in ea est: et postea deueho, et capes eam in uas, et luge illam.
Then introduce the syringe into the urethra with ease until it reaches the root of the ureter.
Then double it over itself from above the umbilical region.
Then push the syringe into it, until it reaches the bladder, and let the patient feel that it has reached a hollow place; and this is not done according to this order unless because the passage through which it goes has a bend in it.
Then slowly extend the thread with wool. For the thread will follow the wool.
Then draw it out, and cause the urine to flow through its passage; and repeat with the syringe, and do not cease doing this until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Of the quality of enema with the Clepsydra.De ordinando siringa ad uirgineum usum.
Chapter LIX.Of preparing the syringe for use on the urethra.
When an ulcer has formed in the bladder, or blood has congealed in it, or pus has gathered within it, and you desire to distill water and medicine into it: then this is done with a tool called the Clepsydra, and this is its form.De forma Clepsydrae.
It is indeed closed, that is, shut off.In qua sunt duae uases: una ad inferiosum, et illa quod trahat in eam aquas; et alia superius: et hac trahitur in eam aer. And in it are three openings, two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
And the hollow place in which is that which forces it to move is according to the amount with which it is filled without addition, until when anything is drawn with it something is attracted from the moistures; and when it is forced, it is expelled with it to a distance: according to what the klepsydra does, from which naphtha, that is, Greek fire in martial contests, is projected.
When therefore you wish to project moistures into the windpipe, introduce the extremity of the klepsydra into the moisture and draw up with it that which forces it towards the upper parts; for the moisture is drawn into the hollow place of the klepsydra.
Then introduce its extremity into the windpipe according to what we have narrated concerning the syringe. Then force the moisture with that which forces it; for that moisture immediately penetrates into the windpipe, so that the sick man feels it.
The form of a slender clyster with which the windpipe is clystered.
Let it be made out of silver or brass; let its head be higher and like a little pot, and beneath it a hollow between which the membrane falls.
Then take the windpipe of a ram and put in it moisture with which you wish to clysterize the windpipe.Et postea impelle eam cum eo quod impellit per illa ligamina: et si non possit per illa, trahe ea ad alterum laterem, et expelle per illum, donec quando ueluti concauitas clepsydrae sit repleta. Then tie it between the two sinuses with a strong double thread, and heat that moisture for a little while over the fire.
Then insert the tip of the enema into the anus, then squeeze your hand over the tube with a moderate grip until the patient feels that the moisture has already reached the tube.
If you do not have an enema tube available to you, then take a piece of parchment and make it into a ring by piercing it all around. Then insert a strong thread through those holes, as they wind around.Postea adstringe ligatura cum manibus tuo super illa ligatura. Then draw the ring together, just like a noose: after you have placed in it what you want of moistened and oiled waters.
Then tie it on the instrument: and make with it as you did with the enema, until you express by hand all the moisture to the tube.
CHAPTER 60.De extractione Lapidis ex Ueteri.
On the Extraction of Stones.
We have already spoken of the types of stones, and their treatment with remedies; I have also described the difference between a stone generated in the kidneys, and the bladder, and its signs as a whole: and we have spoken of that stone upon which surgery is performed by hand, and cutting: and it is that stone which occurs in the ureter specifically: and that which gets lodged in the urethra.
I therefore say that a stone generated in the bladder mostly happens to boys.Et multum tempus manet in eodem loco: et est in illa uretra, ubi cadit operatio cum manu.
And it stays for a long time in the same place; and it is in that urethra where surgery by hand occurs upon it.And from its signs is that urine emerges from the bladder like water in subtlety, and one sees white sand in it, and the invalid rubs his urethra, and struggles with it, and often hangs down.Et multum tempus manet ibi: et multum laborat cum ea, usque dum cadat operatio cum manu super eam ut extrahatur illuc. And it remains there a long time; and he struggles with it a great deal, until surgery by hand occurs upon it to extract it out there.Then he is raised up, and it emerges with him, in many of them.Et est Lapis generatus in renibus: et multum manet in eodem loco, et non cadit operatio cum mano super eam: sed cadit operatio cum filo forte per uesicam.
And it is easy to heal children until they reach fourteen years of age. Healing the elderly is difficult. For the young it is moderate; and it is easier to heal those who have the stone larger than the peewit's egg: but if they have a small one, the cure will be the contrary of this.
So when we come to healing, it is necessary above all that the sick should be cleansed with a clyster which will extract all the filth which is in their bowels; for this sometimes hinders the discovery of the stone at the examination.
Then let the sick person be received on his feet, and be shaken, and moved to the lower parts, that the stone may descend to the bottom of the ureter, or rise out of a high place several times.
Then cause him to sit between your hands prepared for it, and let his hands be under his buttocks, that the ureter may be all inclined down to the lower parts.Et fac ut apicem uesicae tenebis, et latus eius sub digitis: et fac ut in manibus tuis sedet, donec concutiatur eum per viam uesicae; et excitatio, quae fiit in ei, per viam uesicae.
Then examine and feel him externally.
If therefore you feel a stone in the space, then proceed at once with an incision over it.
If it does not come out at all under your touch, then you must wash the index finger of the left hand with oil (if it is a weak child), or the middle finger if it is a full-grown youth, and introduce it into his anus, and examine for the stone until you have it under your finger; then turn it slowly towards the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon it with your finger and push it outwards towards the place where you intend to make the incision; and tell your assistant to press the scrotum with his left hand, and tell another assistant to raise up the testicles with his right hand and push back the skin which is below the testicles in front of that spot where the incision is to be made.
Then introduce the spatulum with its edge turned upwards, whose form is as follows. And make the incision in the space between the anus and the testicles, not in front of the left cheek, but to one side; and let the incision be made over the stone, and your finger be in the anus: and let the incision be made across ways, so that it is wide externally and narrow internally according to as much as possible for the exit of the stone.
For perhaps your finger which is in the anus is pressing down on the stone near the incision and it will come out with ease.Et si non cadat, erga lapidem ad superiora, ubi est illa lacrima de qua loquebamur: et intromittes digitum indicem manu tua dextra in anum super Lapidem ad inferos usque sub os uterinus, et praecipies ministro, ut remoueat cutem a testiculis ad superiora.
And you should know that the stone has angles and edges, which is why it is difficult to remove it.
And from it there is a smooth one, resembling a gland, and round: and its exit becomes easy.
So if you have angles and edges, add to the split.
If it does not come out like that, then you should manipulate on top of it or tie a thread to it decently, whose end is like the moon, which ties to the stone and does not pull away from it: or put a subtle tool under it, curved at its end.
But if you can't get on top of it, then enlarge the hole a little. But if something from the blood beats you, cut it off with a razor.Et postea, si quid superest, extrae subtegmen, ut antea diximus.
But if there is more than one stone, then push the largest first into the urethra.Et quod ex eo est in medio, sicut glandula, extrae subtegmen, per eumque ueluti in buccam. Then cut into it. Then push a little behind it; and similarly do if there are several in pairs.
If it is very large, then it is ignorance to cut into it with a great incision. Because it happens to the weak one of two things, either that he dies, or it happens that there is a continuous discharge of urine; and because the place does not heal at all.
But treat its expulsion, until it comes out; or with tweezers on the fracture of it, until you pull it out a little at a time.
When then you have completed your operation, fill the wound with frankincense and dragon's blood; and bind it up, and put over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose-oil, and cold water, so that the hot boil sits.
Then fasten the weak one over his neck, and do not release the bandage until the third day.Postea, si volueris, resupina super collum: et, si placeat tibi, pone super eum olea calida et collyrium. Afterwards, if you wish, fasten it over his neck; and, if it pleases you, put hot oils and eye-salve on it. When then you release him, wash the place with water, and a lot of oil.
Then treat it with diafinic ointment and basilicon ointment, until it heals.
But if it happens that a hot boil is added to the wound, and corrosion and its likes; just as if blood congeals in the ureter, and it is prohibited from it by urine; and this is known by the flowing out of blood with urine. Then insert your finger into the wound, and draw out that blood.Pona super eum frangmentum lygamini, et oleum multum: et resupina collum. If this persists it causes putrefaction of the ureter and putrefaction of it.
Then wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt; and apply all sorts of medicines that are suitable, according to the cure, until it heals.
And during the hours of the whole cure you must bind two thighs and press them together, because of the medicines which are put on the place.
If it is a small stone and it is in the urethra and is stuck there, and passage of urine is blocked: then cure it with it as I have told you before you come to cutting. You will often be saved from an operation by this cure; for I have already tried it.
Take a perforator, made of steel; its shape is triangular at the end, acute, fixed in wood.
Then take a thread and bind it with the stone beneath so that it does not return to the ureter.
Then with ease insert the piercing iron into the urethra up to the stone; and twist the perforator in your hand in the stone little by little; and you will perceive its perforation, until you make it penetrate from the other side.
For the urine is immediately relieved.Et est aliud Perforatorium quod facit lapidem intrare uirgam: sed istum non accipies nisi postea.
Then press your hand upon what remains of the stone on the outside of the urethra.And take this other perforator, which makes the stone enter into the ureter; but you must not take it except after that. For it is broken up and goes out with the urine, and the invalid is healed.Ex hac cura multotiens est excusata sectione, et multoties per curam lapidem exuit.
If however you are not prepared for this treatment because of something that prevents it, then ligature the thread under the stone and another thread above the stone. Then cut above the stone in the very vein between the two ligatures. Then extract it. Afterwards loosen the ligature and clean away the clotted blood which is in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the thread under the stone unless so that it does not return to the vein; and another ligature above except as when you loosen the thread after the removal of the stone, that the skin returns to its place and covers the wound: and because of this it is needful for you when you tie the upper thread that you stretch the skin upwards so that it returns at your command and covers the wound, as we have said.
If then stones are seen in a woman among all those things which we have said that judges and other physicians do, that is in parturition and after parturition through the thigh, through the skin, through the colon and through the loins, through the chest and through the kidneys, as we have said:Chapter 61.
¶ Of extracting a Stone from Women.Si ergo lapides uidebantur in muliere inter omnia, quae diximus, quomodo faciunt iudices aliosque medicos, id est in partu et post partum per tonum, per cutem, per colicum et per lumbos, per caeli et per renes, sicut diximus:
Little are stones generated in women.Si itaque uidebantur in partu vel post partum per tonum, per cutem, per colicum et per lumbos, sicut diximus:
If then a stone is seen in parturition or after parturition through the thigh, through the skin, through the colon and through the loins, as we have said: But if this happens to one of them it is a difficult cure and is prohibited because of many ways.Si ergo lapides uidebantur in muliere inter omnia, quae diximus, quomodo faciunt iudices aliosque medicos, id est in partu et post partum per tonum, per cutem, per colicum et per lumbos, per caeli et per renes, sicut diximus:
One of them is: that the woman perhaps is a virgin.Si ergo lapides uidebantur in muliere inter omnia, quae diximus, quomodo faciunt iudices aliosque medicos, id est in partu et post partum per tonum, per cutem, per colicum et per lumbos, per caeli et per renes, sicut diximus:Si ergo lapides uidebantur in muliere inter omnia, quae diximus, quomodo faciunt iudices aliosque medicos, id est in partu et post partum per tonum, per cutem, per colicum et per lumbos, per caeli et per renes, sicut diximus:Si ergo lapides uidebantur in muliere inter omnia, quae diximus, quomodo faciunt iudices aliosque medicos, id est in partu et post partum per tonum, per cutem, per colicum et per lumbos, per caeli et per renes, sicut diximus:Si ergo lapides uidebantur in muliere inter omnia, quae diximus, quomodo faciunt iudices aliosque medicos, id est in partu et post partum per tonum, per cutem, per colicum et per lumbos, per caeli et per renes, sicut diximus:Si ergo lapides uidebantur in muliere inter omnia, quae diximus, quomodo faciunt iudices aliosque medicos, id est in partu et post partum per tonum, per cutem, per colicum et per lumbos, per caeli et per renes, sicut diximus:
And secondly, because you will not find a woman who reveals herself to a doctor when she is chaste or among those having husbands.
And thirdly, because you will not find a woman who knows this craft well, especially the operation with the hand.
And fourthly, because of the distance from the place of stone; therefore it requires deep incision, and there is fear in that.
If necessity forces you to do this, then you must take a woman doctor who knows well and is seldom found.Et quod non possit facere, siue per ignoraniam, siue per timorem: tunc debet medicus qui scit, et accipiet remunérationem.
If however you are poor and cannot afford to pay, then seek out a chaste doctor who is subtle and skilled in the parts of woman's anatomy, or a woman who has some knowledge of this art: let her be present and above all let her do everything you command her to do after you have questioned her about the stone.
First of all let her examine whether the woman is a virgin; then she should insert her finger into the anus and look for the stone.Et si non inueniat lapidem, sed tangat aliam partem: sed postea debet pervertere illum digitum in anum eius ut possit facere examinationem bene.
If she does not find it but touches another part; then afterwards she should turn her finger into the anus so that she can make a thorough examination.If she finds it let her grip it with her finger and then instruct the obstetrician to insert his finger into the vagina of the patient, and examine for the stone when he has put his left hand on the pubic bone and presses it hard.Et si non possit facere totum ad lapidem, sed tangat in parte superius: et praecipue debet pervertere digitum suum usque ad os anus, ne forte lapidem detrahat intra se: nam multum tamen trahit ad lapidem.
And if she cannot reach the stone but touches it in a higher part, and above all let her turn her finger towards the anus so that she does not push the stone back inside herself; for it is much drawn backwards to the stone.If then she finds the stone, let her move it from its opening towards the lower parts with all her strength until she has brought it down to the root of the hip.Et si non possit facere totum ad lapidem: sed tangat partem superius: et praecipue debet pervertere digitum suum usque ad os anus, ne forte lapidem detrahat intra se: nam multum tamen trahit ad lapidem.
Then he shall cut above him at the opposition of the middle of the hip at the root of the thigh, from whatever side it is prepared for him, and he shall feel the stone in that part; and his finger shall not be removed from the stone, squeezing under it; and let the incision be small at first. Then he shall introduce a wire above that incision.
Then he shall introduce a wire above that incision. If therefore he feels the stone, then let him add to the incision according to a quantity proportional to what the stone comes out from it.
And you should know that there are many kinds of stones.Quibus enim est superne textus albus, et subte viridescentem habet colorem, et medium est grosse, et infra tenem per se: ille est qui non possit egredi nisi cum carne. Of these, some have a white texture above and a greenish color underneath; they are thick in the middle, and hard throughout: this kind cannot be extracted without taking away part of the flesh also.For among them there are small ones and great ones, smooth ones and rough ones, long ones, and round ones with branches.
Know therefore its kind, so that you may be aware of it when you see it.Et postea faciat sectionem aliam, et facciat incisiones, et intromittat radium intra, et trahat illum.
If therefore you are bled of blood, then add in the place of the bleeding pounded zega, and keep it there for an hour until the bleeding ceases.
Then return to your operation until the stone comes out; and do that you prepare with you of instruments as I said in the extraction of stones in men so that you may help through them in your operation.
If you are bled with a flow of blood and you know that the bleeding out is from an artery which has been cut then put powder over the place and constrict it with a good ligature; and do not loose it and leave the stone, and do not draw it out. For perhaps the weak woman will die. Then heal the wound.
When therefore the sharpness of the blood is stilled after days and the place putrefies then return to your operation until the stone goes out.
Chapter 62.
Of the cutting away for a watery hernia.
A watery ramus is not unless an aggregation of moisture in a white skin which is under the skin of the testicle containing the egg; and it is named a sheath.
And it is sometimes in its own pouch which nature made for it in the part of an egg; which is another egg and it is the skin of the testicle between the white sheath we said and it does not become except rarely.
And indeed the generation of this ramus is from weakness which happens to the testicles; therefore that matter flows towards them.Et qualiterquaque testiculum fit cum ouo, quandoque in eo non est ouum: et multum per se debilis facit eum. And sometimes it happens from a blow above the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors. Or the color of it is a decline to citron yellow, or is blood red, or is filthy black, or is watery white, and that is what is most common.
And the signs by which one knows where there is an accumulation of water are these: For if there is a white lump that we have mentioned, then the pustule is round and rather long like an egg's shape; and the testicle is not apparent, because the moisture contains it on all sides.
And if there is moisture in its own membrane, then the pustule is round with a slightly oval shape and because of this man estimates that it is an egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testes and the white membrane, then it falls under the senses.Et si est in testiculo cum parte sibi propria, tunc cadit sub sensum et apparet quod non est ouum.
And if the moisture is in the testicle with its own part, then it falls under sense and appears that it is not an egg. When therefore you wish to have knowledge of the color of the moisture, then test the color of the moisture in the pustule with a inserted square whose shape precedes. According to that therefore which goes out into the impression of the insertion, judge about that which is between it.Et si apparet quod cadit sub sensum et sub tactu, et tamen color non mutatur, tunc certum est quia cadit in mortem.
When therefore you come to treat with iron, then you ought to order the patient to be bloodlet, if it is possible for him, and you see his body full of it.
Then he shall be laid on his back upon a high thing a little, and put under him many garments.
Then sit thou on his left side, and order the minister to sit on his right hand, who shall stretch forth his arm to one of the two sides of the skin of the testicles, and to the lower part of the belly.
Then take a wide spathe, and cut the skin of the testicles in the midst lengthwise, even to the root: and let the incision be according to the straightness of an equal line which divided the skin of the testicles, until it come to the white sinew embracing it: and peel it, and observe, or beware lest thou cuttest the sinew; and let thy peeling be on the side that hangeth down with the egg the more: and search sutilly with the peeling according to the quantity which thou art able.
Then pierce the white sinew full of water by a broad piercing, and draw out all the water.
Then separate between the two lips of the incision with hooks, and draw forth the sinew to the upper parts, and touch not the skin of the testicles which encompasseth it: and cut the sinew whatsoever way thou canst cut it, or in its entirety, or in part, especially the subtile side thereof. For if thou search not very sutilly, there is no security made in the cutting of it, but the water will return again.Deinde incide testiculum, et extrahe seminem cum sanguine suo: et fac haec cum altero testiculo, uti faciebas cum primo.
If however it projects externally beyond its skin at the time of your operation: then when you have completed the incision bring it back inside. Then sew together the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a suture.
Then treat it like the other wounds until it heals.
If you find that the testicle is discoloured by any other kind of corruption then you should tie off the vessels which are the suspension system fearing a flow of blood.
Then cut off the testicle together with its suspension system and extract the testicle, afterwards treat it as we have said.
If however water has collected into two parts then you should know that there are two branches: therefore cut the other part in the same way as you did the first one equally.
And if it is possible for you to make this an single operation then do so and afterwards wipe away the blood.Et postea liges uasa cum sutura quod diximus antea. And introduce the wool which is soaked in oil or in rose oil into the incisions; and place over the scrotum another piece of wool which has been soaked in wine and oil, and spread it out over both testicles, and inspect the abdomen; and place above them double linen rags, and these are small bandages; and tie them up above with a ligature, which is having six according to this form.
Then two pieces of linen are taken and are sweated and stuffed with wool dyed red, according to this likeness; and the ends by which it is pressed are made from the crotch, or with wet wool; and they are gathered up with a girdle around the waist of the arms; and one end takes hold over the buttock up to the back, and the second takes hold to the part of the breast; and two ends below on the two thighs, and two other ends over the two groins, and the whole girdle is gathered in the腰 of the arms.
And, whenever this ram's horn is artificially treated with a cautery in the place of an incision with iron: and it is, to take a thin knife-cautery, and cut the skin of the testicles with it; and it is heated, according to what we have narrated; until when it is taken off, the white leather holding water: then take the cautery, according to this form.
It resembles a Greek letter.
Then pierce it with it, and it is heated until all the moisture comes out.
Then extend the pouch with hooks, and scrub it with a hot, thin cautery, and cut it according to what is possible for you until you scrape off all of it.
And beware that the egg doesn't touch the fire.
And you should know that this operation is safer and farther from bloodletting, and better than the operation with an incision.
If, however, it causes you pain at the time of the incision, or at the time of cauterization with a hot blister, or a bloodletting, or something else: then it is necessary that you heal what is causing you pain from it with treatment that is appropriate for it, according to what has been mentioned.
But if the patient is timid and not expecting this operation due to its horror, then perform the incision as I will narrate it and as it is.
When you have certifed to yourself from that which we said about the signs that the ramie is watery, then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat.
Then pierce the boil in its lower part with a broad spathe; and make the incision according to the length of the body, and let the opening be ample, until all the water has run out.
Then put on a poultice over the site and bandage it, and let it run until the rest of the water has run out; then heal the wound until it is cured.
But if there is an obstruction to the flow of water at the time you pierce it; and this is not because the white membrane obstructs the opening of the wound and prevents the exit of the water, then you must insert a feather into the wound or an instrument such as that which precedes the shape for removing water from hydrops, or add something to the operation.
And know that the water returns and accumulates after six months or about that time. When it has accumulated, then it is pierced in the same way; and the patient will go through his days.
Chapter 63.
¶ Of the treatment of a fleshy ramie.Si autem ramex sit carnosus et grossus: post perforationem, quod facis ut currat aqua tota, deinde pona super eum cotum cum pulbere albus, donec pertransibit aqua, et perpauperet: deinde fac ad te per te quod fuit prius in corpori.
You should know that when cutting above this ramus there is the danger of going astray into many different procedures. Therefore, it seems to me that it would be better to leave this one untouched.
And I remember the procedure on it and the appearance of the ulcer.Quod autem non teneat de aere calido et frigido.
I say then that there are many causes of ulcers which develop in the body, namely from the testes.Et quia multum est de his, oportet scire ea, quae facientur in eis.
Or it may be from acute and sharp superfluity which is poured out on the testes.Et fit apostema et scrotum postea inflatum et ulceratim. Or from a blow.And then the scrotum swells and becomes an ulcer.Aut ex suppuramento, cum suppurat in testiculo.
Or it may be from a suppuration when there is a suppuration in the testes.And the colour of the ulcer is according to the colour of the body and there is no pain in it; and the ulcer is heavy.Et si dolores sint in corporibus, et non fit apostema, sed apostematum fit intra corporem: et non facit utrumque dolor intra corpus et extra: nam si dolores intra corpus sint, et non sit extra.
And if there are pains in the body and there is no ulcer, but the ulcer is inside the body: and it does not do both pains inside and outside; for if there are pains inside the body and not outside.And perhaps it is a stony ulcer, whose colour is brown, and there is no sensation in it.Et si sit extra corpus et non sint dolores intra corpus, sed sint dolores extra corpus: nam dolor est ex suppuramento, cum suppurat intra corpus, et est dolor intra corpus.
And sometimes it happens from a cramp in the arteries and their distention; as has already been mentioned above: or from the distention of veins.
That which therefore comes from them by reason of the distention of the arteries, is discovered by the disposition of the apoplectic spot, when you press it with your fingers. And you ought not to touch it at all.
That which however happens from distention of the veins, does not spread out when pressed with the fingers.
And now it is possible that incision may be made above this kind of spot, and on the other flesh; and there is room for making an incision of the skin of the testicles.Et illi tamen sunt superius, quia super eam partem carnis non potest fieri sectio, nec per se curari: sed oportet ut excidatur et excoquatur. Then draw the egg upward and extract it with a white thread; and release the scrotum from the testicles, and tie up the veins; and cut through the scrotum after you have released it on every side from the parts that belong to it.
If then the egg is固with those born flesh, then you must draw up the egg and cut it.Quod si non potest attrahatur, sed debet in loco suo manere: et debes facere incisionem per carnem quae nascitur cum illo ouum, ut excidat ova ex eo, sed neque disciantur illa.
And if the adhesion is between something of the head or in that which is between the utensils: then you must free all of that adhesion and cut it with a round incision.
If there is a growth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind: then you must cut all of it and take out the egg, just as we have said.
When therefore your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine; then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter 64.De ramica, quae vocatur Olea.
¶ Of the treatment of the Nettle-tree, which is with Wine.
Nettle is an ulcer without any covering, resembling a blain, with softening of the testicles; and it makes movement difficult for the sick person, and exercise and walking.Et fit multum in senibus: et si interueniunt medicamenta, quae diximus, bene curatur.
And in the cure of this disease there is fear because of that of which there has been a previous memory.
But we ought to say that an operation should be performed on it according to what the first ones did.
I say therefore, that you ought to make the sick person sit on a chair elevated. Then push the scrotum to the lower parts. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, with the shears which are near the cord; and another assistant ought to hold them, and stretch them with a violent stretching.
Then cut with a broad and acute spatulum in a cross-wise section along the line of the cords until the cords are exposed.
Then scrape off the skin from every part, as I have told you before in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Later insert into them a needle such that there is a double thread, and tie it in the first of the places where the veins occur; and tie it again in the last of these. Then cut them in a straight middle section according to the length of the body, and draw out what has accumulated from putrid moist corruptions.
Then treat the wound with the treatment of other wounds, from which pus is to be generated so that the veins which nourish one testicle may fall away.Deinde fac ut dormiat infirmus cum uirgis in eorum locis quibus accidunt usque ad diem septimus. Then let the sick person sleep with the cords in their places up to the seventh day, for there is no harm from that.
If however all of the veins are cut off, then it is necessary that the testicles with the cords be removed because there will not be nourishment from the egg, because of the incision, and so it will not become swollen or shrivelled or putrefy with them.Deinde extrahe testiculum cum uasis eius, et oportet quod facias ut cadant: quia non praesumit quod illo locum ouum in eo, propter excisionem.
Chapter 165
Then draw out the testicle with its cords, and it is necessary that you make them fall away because it does not expect from that place of the egg because of the cutting off.
The outcome of this hernia is due to a section which occurred while extending the testicles over the abdomen in the inguinal region from the navel.
Therefore the intestines descend from that rupture into one testicle. And this rupture is either from the scrotum or its extension.
And these two types occur due to many causes. Or due to a blow. Or jumping. Or yelling. Or the lifting of a heavy object and similar things.
And a sign when it is from an extension of the scrotum: Is that it happens gradually over a long time and does not happen suddenly; and it is an equal wound turned deep because the scrotum compresses the intestine.And a sign when it is from a blow:It is that it happens suddenly and quickly, and there is a bruise on the skin of the scrotum.
And a sign of it when it is from the section of the scrotum, because it makes sudden and vehemnt pain happen at its beginning; and there is a different bruise, appearing under the skin and nearby: and that is due to the exit of the intestine, and its path outside of the scrotum.
And sometimes it goes out with the intestine, a hernia; and this is called an intestinal hernia, and a hernia of the scrotum: and sometimes it happens with flatulence.And when there is great heat in the intestines, it is called a Ramica calida, and when there is coldness, it is called a Ramica frigida.
And sometimes it runs into the intestine, and is retained there; and this is dangerous for the patient; because it makes sudden pain happen, and especially when it is pressed.And when it happens in the testicle, let a poultice be applied to the scrotum, and let it not be removed at all: and apply another poultice to the navel, and let it not be removed, unless there is great need for it.
And in the cure of the types of this disease, there is danger with the iron; therefore it is necessary to beware of complications in it.
And the mode of the operation is, that you command the patient to bring back the intestine by his hand into his abdomen, if it is obstructed in its return.And this operation is good and safe, when performed gently with the hand: and let it be done on a warm day; and if it happens on a cold day, then let there be fire nearby. Then he is laid back down on his neck between your hands, and you raise up his legs.
Then extend the skin which follows the skin upwards, and cut through the entire skin of the testicles along their length. Then fix two hooks into the lips of the incision according to what you need in order to open up the incision with them; and the incision is according to how much there is so that it is possible for an egg to exit from it.
Then peel the scrotum and what is under the skin of the testicles until when the white scrotum is stripped away hard from every part: then put your index finger into that which follows the testicle, in that which is between the white scrotum, which is under the skin of the egg, and between the scrotum according to its second, and finish with it the adhesion which is in the posterior part of the egg.
Then move with your right hand into the inner skin of the testicles: and with this extend the white scrotum upwards with your left hand: and lift up the egg with its scrotum to the part of the incision: and instruct the minister to extend the egg upwards: and you loosen the adhesion which is behind with a complete solution.
And seek with your fingers that there is nothing there of the untreated intestine in the hard white scrotum. But if you find anything there: then push it down into the abdomen below.
Then take a needle in which is a thick thread, made of ten threads: and insert it at the last scrotum, that is, of the membrane, which is under the skin of the testicles which follows after the incision: then cut off the ends which project out from the thread until there are four threads. Then tie some of them over some with a figure which is in the form of a cross: and ligate with it the scrotum of which we spoke, because it is under the skin of the testicles with a violent ligament, until it does not allow any of the veins which nourish them to send something to them: so that there does not happen from it a hot wound. And put again the second ligature outside of the first ligature, distant from it by two finger-breadths. And after these two ligatures leave from the siphach, which is under the skin of the testicles, the quantity of the magnitude of a digit: and cut the remainder all according to roundness, and take an egg out of it.
Then dry up the lower part of the skin of the testicles in a cut, from which blood and pus flows, just as we related in what is above.
Then give the lambs wool soaked in oil, and apply it to the wound: and give the ligature which we related. And whenever the white siphach is cauterized, after its incision, fearing the flow of blood. For it often happens. And leave the ligature until it falls off by itself.
But if its falling is delayed, then it shall be broached with hot water: and put over it that which we said, until it falls off.
Then treat the wound with the remainder of the treatment of wounds, until it is cured.
Chapter 166.Antistix sangunuris per vulnum.
Of a blood-letting nettle.Antistix sanguinis per uulnum.
In This Nettle I Have Not Seen Anyone Dare To Use Iron Over Its Treatment.
And first indeed they said that it is done just as we related in the nettle which is with wine.Et postea ut uidi alios qui uenerant ad curationem eius: utramque manum in capite posuerunt, et tenuerunt sicut diximus: et steterunt ita donec sanguis coaegeretur cum ramice: et postea abstinerent. That is, to tie up the vessels after an incision above it with ease; then dry in the middle and care for it with what opens it up, until the vessels fall: and care for the wound as we said, until it heals.
Chapter 67.
Of the disruption which takes place in the groin.
When a rupture occurs in the groin as we have said, and a lump protrudes which does not descend into the scrotum along with the intestines; but if anything does descend, it is slight and returns within a few hours: however, if time is prolonged with this condition, a fissure is added to the scrotum, until the intestines descend into the scrotum.
And it happens from the stretching of the scrotum, which is in the groin as we have said. That is because it extends in a siphage; then the part softens and suppurates, and protrudes.
And its cure is with cautery, as has been related above.
And sometimes it is cured with a hot iron in the following manner: one must lie on his back between your hands. Then dry the area of rupture and protrusion by cutting it across its width, to a depth of about three fingers.Et postea fac incisiones tres cum lieve cauterio circa locum huius rupturae et suppurationis.
Then make three light cuts around the area of the rupture and suppuration. Then press on the siphage under the skin until you can see the white flesh beneath it.Et postea cum tenaculo trahe os et cutem quae superest usque ad radicem.
Then take a radiol, and place it over the protruding part of the siphage, and press it down to the bottom of the abdomen.Et postea cum tenaculo trahe cutem quae superest usque ad radicem: et tene, donec quando detur sitis.
Then pull up the remaining skin to the root with a forceps and hold it until it dries out. Then grab two prominent places on the end of the radiol, and tie one to another with a stitch; then pull out the end of the radiol.Et tene, donec quando detur sitis: et quandoque debet esse tenens cum manibus usque ad radicem quae est in ventre.
Hold it until it dries out; and sometimes you must hold it with your hands to the root which is in the abdomen. And do not cut or stretch the siphage at all, nor anything else, as I have made you aware when I described the cure for intestinal hernia.Et cum venenum de creta percurite locum rupturee et suppurationis cum spatula: et postea de ligno noli tangere locum istum usque ad tertiam dieem.
And on the day of rupture and suppuration, spread some powdered chalk over the area with a spatula; then do not touch the area with wood until the third day. Then cure it by curing wounds.Et cum creta et oleo fac plastron illi: deinde ponito supra plastrum per unam noctem ad secundam dieem. Make a plaster for her with chalk and oil; then put the plaster over the wound for one night until the second day. When you cut the thread, clean it and dress the wound, until it heals.Et cum creta et oleo fac plastron illi: deinde ponito supra plastrum per unam noctem ad tertiam dieem.
The wound is closed and not left open for drainage.
And a cautery is better in this place, because it is more conducive to recovery.
Chapter 18. On the treatment of open wounds on the testicles.When therefore all sides of the testicle are injured, you must apply oil and ointment afterwards to soften them.
On softening the skin of the testicles§ Cum ergo omnes facies testiculi sint aperte vulnerati, postea facies utereris cum oleo et malagma ad mollescendo.
The skin of the testicles is often softened in some men, because of which the flesh between them softens and becomes deformed.Et si volumis ut resit et non mollificet, facies ita: postea frictiones cum oleo ad mollescendo facies testiculi, et omnes partes eius usque in summum.
And if you wish for it to harden and not soften, you must do the following: afterwards rub the oil into the testicle to soften it, and all its parts up to the very top. Therefore it is necessary for him who is asked about its cure to cause the invalid to lie on his back, and cut away all the softened skin on the natural skin.Et faciat ut iaceat super dorsum suum plerique dies ad resuturam eius, et postea non faciat iacere super latus seu ventrem sed post modum super dorsum.
Then sew together the two lips with a stitch: and if you wish, first trim away the surplus skin softened by the poultice with three stitches or four, and then sew firmly.
Then cut between the stitches.
Then treat the rest of the wound until it heals and the threads drop out.
If you wish to castrate a boy, as we shall see later, wait until the strength of his body reaches its peak.Chapter 69.
On Castration.¶ Si castrare voles puerum, postea ut disces, quando corporis potentia uenerit in suam maximam.
Know that castration is banned under our law; therefore, I could omit any reference to it in this book of mine; and there would be no need to mention it except for two reasons.Quod enim neque medicum habemus, sed medicamenta non habemus, quae castrati posunt sumere: et quia, qui castratus est, multum de necessariis medicinis scit: quomodo potest medicus castrare uiri?
For we have no medicine for a castrato, nor do we know of any medicine that a castrato can take; and because a castrato knows much about the necessary medicines; how then can a doctor cure a man?One reason is so that the knowledge is available to the doctor when he is asked about it; and so that he knows how to treat one who has suffered this.
And the other reason is that we often need to castrate certain animals for our food, such as rams, horses, and similar animals.Et quia non possumus eorum omnium castrare per nosmet, sed sumus debiles: quod si potes castravit, et nobis remisi ueterem laborem.
I say, therefore, that castration is performed in two ways. Or by abrasion. Or by opening and cutting.
But the way to perform the castration by abrasion is to make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles become soft and relaxed and hang down, then abrade them with your hand until they are separated and do not appear under the touch.
But in castration by opening and cutting, you must hold the animal, and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.Et manum tuam dexteram ad faciendam solutionem super eadem, et incidas per medium usque ad sperma.
Then tie the suspensory ligament and cut above all in a single section until when two eggs come out: then cut them after you have peeled both, and do not leave anything on them except for a thin membrane which is above the egg.
And this mode of castration is better than that which is done by attrition; for perhaps some of the testicles remain in the attrition, so that the animal desires coition.
Then heal the wound until it is cured.
Chapter 70.
¶ Of the cure of a Hermaphrodite in two ways.
A Hermaphrodite from man is according to two types.Si autem mulier interuenerit viro et non cognouerit, sed postea inuit, et si eandem inuitus iterum cogat: hermaphroditas est. One of them is, because it appears in him that which follows the space, or in the skin of the testicles, in that which is between the two testicles, a figure almost like a woman's vulva, in which there are hairs: and sometimes urine runs from that which is in the skin of the testicles.Si quae mulier interuenerit cum uiro et cognouerit, et postea inuit, sed iterum conuigit eam et cognouit; et si postea iterum inuit: hermaphroditas est.
But in women there is one kind only, and it is the vulva of a woman above the pubic bone like the scrotum of a man but very small, protruding outward: one is like the penis of a man, and two like two testes.
And the treatment of these three kinds is as follows: for the two of men and the one of women, you must cut away the flesh added on until its pressure is relieved. Then treat them as with other wounds.
But as for the second kind of men, from which urine passes out, that is in the skin of the testes, there is no operation, nor any treatment at all.
Chapter 71.
On the incision of a tent and prominent flesh on the vulva of women.
A tent may perhaps be added over the natural object until it becomes disfigured and its appearance unsightly; also in some women it grows to such a size that it extends like men's and even allows intercourse.
You must therefore grasp the superfluity of the tent with your hand or a hook and cut it; especially when cutting deeply into the root so that there may not be bleeding.
Then treat it as you would other wounds until it heals.
But the meat that comes out is the flesh that is born in the opening of the matrix until it fills itself up; and sometimes it extends outward like a tail, and because of this some call the disease 'tailed'. You must therefore cut it as you would a tent, and treat it until it heals.
On the treatment of Alraticus, which is the non-perforated vulva of a woman.
Chapter 72.Alratica fortasse fit ex superfluitate carnis multum additae, et ob immoderatem fluxum sanguinis in eo, qui est in medio eiusdem: et non cadit carnis ad exteriora usque, et non facit uulua perem.
It is a hernia when there is no perforation in the vulva of a woman or it is a small opening. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental hernia results from a previous illness; it is caused by either extra flesh growing on the body, or by a thin membrane, or by a thickening of an organ. It can occur in the depths of the womb, its sides, its upper parts or its lower parts. It prevents intercourse, conception and childbirth, and perhaps menstrual bleeding as well.
Its diagnosis is made by examination of the midwife if the hernia is about to emerge.
If it is not apparent however, then feel for it with your fingers or a stick.
But if the hernia is from a thin membrane and is near the two lips, then hurry and burst it open.Et quod in lateribus matricis est, et in profundo eius, et in superiore eius, et in inferiore eius: omnes hae positiones opilationum non prohibent menstrua vel partus, sed prohibent coitum et impregnationem.
And it is used when you put it above two lips.
Then place your index fingers of both hands together and the woman lies on her back with her legs spread out. Then stretch the two lips firmly until the delicate slit is broken open and the opening is revealed.
Then take wool and soak it in oil, and place it over the area; and the woman should do this every day so that the spot does not become dry with another man's seminal fluid.
If however the slit is thick and coarse, then it must be cut with a wide spathe similar to a myrtle leaf.Et postea deponas folium myrte, et puluillos super locum.
If however it is a flesh wound, then hang it up with hooks and pierce it; and there should be with you medicines which stop blood flow without biting, such as myrrh, and dragon's blood, and crushed gum gathered with egg white.
Then apply a broad tube of lead so that the wound does not close up quickly; hold it there for several days. Then apply linseed oil, and then cure it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.Et si per accidens puluillos cadunt intra uulnem: tune teneat, donec exeat cum urina, et non debet pulvere induratur.
And when there is a birth of other flesh in the womb, it should be cut in this way, for if there is no ulcerous pustule on the ulcerous pustule that is in the womb, then there will be no contradiction with the iron at all.
Chapter 73.
¶ Of the cure of hemorrhoids, Athehelil, and Bothor red in warts in women's genitals.
Hemorrhoids are indeed an opening of the veins, until there flows from them much blood constantly.Et quicquid in huiusmodi morbis quaeritur per accensum ferum facienda est, si non est apostema cancerosum super uenam: sed si habet apostematum cancerosum, qui non est super uenam sed intra aliam carnem, sic debet adire quod omnia carnia circa eam carnem, cum ferro incidiant.
When therefore they are incised, they become thetil; and I have already spoken of their kinds and signs; and I will speak here of what receive cure from them, and what do not.Si autem hemorroides super uenam habuerint apostematum cancerosum intra carnes, sic debet procedi ad curam: omnia carnia circa eam carnem cum ferro incidiant et ad uiuacitatem reducantur: deinde in ea parte carnis, ubi est apostema cancerosum, faciat sibi domus per accensum ferum, et omnia carnia intra domum ad uiuacitatem reducat.
I therefore say that the hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the womb, and do not appear to the sense; then there is no cure for it with iron.Sed si apparuerint sensui, et intra orificium matricis sint, ut in partum habentur cum ferro incidiant, et ad uiuacitatem reducantur: sed nisi apparebunt sensui neque intra neque extra orificium matricis, non debet per accensum ferum incidi.
And those of them which are in the opening of the womb over which the sense falls, are they that receive cure.Sed si intra orificium matricis sint et non apparuerint sensui, sed sint extra orificium matricis: si per accensum ferum incidiant ad uiuacitatem reducuntur.
It is therefore necessary that you introduce the woman into a cool house.Et postea quod sit intro eam cum ferro intra domum, sic faciatur sibi domus intra carnes de quibus dixi antea et omnia carnia extra domum ad uiuacitatem reducantur: sed si hemorroides non sint in orificio matricis sed extra orificium matricis super uenam: oportet ut incidantur per accensum ferum. Then extend the Athehelil with tweezers, or with a rough cloth, and cut them from their roots.Postea ut sint incisa, ad uiuacitatem reducantur: sed si hemorroides sint extra uenam in carnibus quibusdam carnosissimis: cum ferro incidiant et ad uiuacitatem reducantur, sed non debet per accensum ferum intrare intra domum.
Then powder over them at the flow of blood from an incision without biting: as acacia, dragon's blood, pitch, and similar to these.
Then press his feet against the wall for a single hour. Then place him in cold water.
If the flow of blood continued: then have her sit in a decoction of sumac, and bark of pomegranates, and gall-nuts, and similar things.Postea fac eam ambulare ad calidum solis radians in loco aperto.
Then have her walk about in the warm sunshine in an open place.Then take barley meal, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it over his back.
If then the flow of blood is stopped by this, it is well; and if not, have leeches applied to his back and breasts, without scarification.Deinde pulueriza super eas apud fluxum sanguinis ex uno puluerum incisiuorum absque mordificatione: sicut acacia, et sanguis draconis, et thus, et similia eis.
Then powder over them at the flow of blood from an incision without biting: as acacia, dragon's blood, pitch, and similar to these.Then take wool, and soak it in tar-water, or water in which arnoglossa leaves have been soaked, or in water in which branches of alautum (that is, glanster), Pontic wine, and make it adhere to the wound.Postea fac adhaerere super illum uentosas absque scarificatione.
Then have leeches applied over him at the flow of blood without scarification.When then the wound has become quiet, then treat the spot with ointment until it is healed.
Albaroth, however, is red like the heads of alhass, and has a rough appearance.Quod si non potest tollere os uterum per fluxum sanguinis: tunc fac adhaerere super illum uentosas absque scarificatione, et impellat pedes eius ad parietem hora una.
If he cannot remove the womb by reason of the flow of blood: then have leeches applied over him without scarification, and press his feet against the wall for a single hour.He must then cut away what appears from it, according to what I said in Thetilil equally: and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter 74.
¶ Of the Perforation of the Exit which happens in the Matrix.Postea fac adhaerere super illum uentosas absque scarificatione, et impellat pedes eius ad parietem hora una.
Many kinds of sores occur in the uterus, such as cancer, and the stone sore, and ulcers, and suppurating sores, and cold sores, that is, herpes, blisters, and fistulae, and hemorrhoids, and frostbite, and warts, and hot sores.
And I have indeed already spoken of all these diseases and their kinds and signs and cures in my book on surgery: I must now speak in this tractate of hot sores which occur in the uterus, when they are from sores collecting pus, and you will wish to know how its opening is made with a knife.
You ought therefore to consider. If then the pain of the sore in its beginning is acute with its beating, and flame, and fever; and you see it turn red: if there falls upon it a sense, then you must not hasten to open it: and cure it with that which is helpful over its maturation, until when its acuteness rests.Et si est apostema calidum intra matrix uterque in parte sua alta et in parte sua bassa.
And if there is a hot sore within the uterus both in its upper part and in its lower part.Then you must have the woman sit on a seat which makes two saddles, and recline, or lie over her back, and bring her feet up to her abdomen: and let her hips be expanded, and she place her arms under her knees, and tie both by convenient bandages to it.Et ponat utramque manum super caput suum, et liget eo quod faciat per eam fluere sanguinem ad terram.
Then let the midwife sit on the right side and use the instrument with which the opening of the womb is opened.
And it is necessary when you wish to use this instrument, that you insert with the staff into the depth of the womb of the woman: so that that which goes inside from the instrument may not be more than the depth of the womb, and hurt the weak one.
But if the instrument is more than the depth, then you must place bits of cotton on the roof of the depth of the womb: in order to prevent the entry of the whole instrument into the depth of the womb; and it is necessary that he who assists should apply the unguent which runs on the instrument from above, and hold the instrument and twist the assistant until the depth of the womb is opened.
When then the place that gives birth appears and is touched by hand and feels smooth and soft, then it is necessary to cut it at its head with a wide spatulum.Et si postea non pertingatur Exitura, sed tangatur et paene uideri, et tamen durior sit: ut cuncte faciat, quod non possit pertingere ad caput Exituræ: oportet ut recidat Exitura, donec possit pertingere caput Exituræ.
When the pus is evacuated, then it is necessary to place on the wound linseed oil which is submerged in rose oil, or green oil, in which there is a certain astringency; and put the linseed oil and withdraw the incision from the depth of the womb.Et quoddam licinium superfundens olei: et cum uertiginem recidat Exitura, recedatque uertigine, et videatur quod non possit recidere plus, nisi recederet: et tamen tangatur Exitura manibus, ut sit molle: tunc oportet ut ponas super Exituram et super fundum licinium: aut olea rosaceo: et superfundens olei.
And spread some linseed oil over the oil; and when the place that gives birth recedes because of the unguent, and recedes because of the unguent, and it appears that it cannot recede any further except by receding; and yet is touched by hand, and feels soft: then it is necessary to put on the place which gives birth and on its depth some linseed oil: or rose oil, and spread over the oil.And put the external one outside over the womb, and over the comb clean wool which has been submerged in water in which there are cooked peas.Et superfundens olei, et pone super exteriorem super fundum lanam mundam, et super fundum licinium, donec possit recidere Exitura: et quoddam licinium superfundens olei.
Then it is treated for two days with ointment suitable for that wound until it heals.
And sometimes the wound and the womb are washed so that an enema is administered with water and honey; then with water in which lily root has been boiled, or long aristolochia; then return to the ointment.
If the wound has been hidden inside the womb, then you must be prohibited from curing it with iron, rather cure it with what we said in the division.
Chapter 76.
The teachings of obstetrics, how to treat children born in an unnatural way.
It is necessary for the obstetrician to know first of all the form of a natural childbirth.
From the signs therefore of this, when you see a woman pressed on her bottom, and desires to breathe air, and is put under her what is over her from childbirth, and hastens the exit of the embryo: then know that this childbirth is according to natural form, and its exit is above his head, and secundine with it; or suspended, or hanging by the umbilical cord.Et quod est super caput eius, et in medio ventris eius, quae secundina vocatur, sicuti de partu ante diximus: et tunc est necesse ut uelaminem super caput eius, ne per accidens ad mortem ueniat, ubi exitus embrionis fit.
And what is above her head and in the middle of her belly, which is called secundine, just as we said before about childbirth: and then it is necessary to place a bandage on her head, lest by accident she die when the exit of the embryo takes place.When therefore you see these signs, then it is fitting that her belly be pressed, so that the embryo may descend quickly.Et quod in illo est super caput eius et secundine: sicuti paulo ante diximus: et cum uides quod ex omni parte contrahitur venter eius et uelaminatur super caput eius ut ante diximus, tunc ad mortem perit.
When it has descended over its head, the afterbirth descends with it, and is cleansed of those overflowings by a good cleansing.
But he who is beyond this delivery, is unnatural, unpraiseworthy.
For when the fetus goes out on its feet, and its body comes out before its head and its feet and hands together, or one foot only; or its head and hands come out: or it comes out bottom upwards; and perhaps it turns over on its neck, and like figures unpraiseworthy.
The obstetrician therefore needs to be wise and subtle in all these matters, and beware of error and deception: and I will show every figure out of them, and how the nature is in it, and what will be indicated by it, and stand over him.
When the fetus goes out on its head its natural egress, and it becomes fainting on her, and a difficult delivery is made for her, then you make her sit on a chair, or women hold her: and they vaporize her vagina with fenugreek cooked, and with moist oils.Et si post partum ueniat luctus in oculis eius, et lacrima, fac eam bibere decocctionem de semine uitis: et si uellet, et si uolt ad uiuendum, et si non mortua sit foetus; quod tamen non debet fieri: sed quia natura uoluit.
Then the obstetrician shall insert his spathula a little among her fingers and feel with it for the afterbirth, and cut it with his nail until he has removed what is moist in it; and he shall press on the woman's belly until the fetus has come down.
If however it does not come down, then the woman must be given an enema made from fenugreek with oil of sesamum.
Then order her to be pressed after the enema and make her sneeze with snuff, holding both her bones and nose at once. For immediately the fetus will come out.
If however two hands of the fetus emerge first, you must carefully push them back again little by little.Et si celeriter non possint redederi, sed egrediantur iterum, et ne forte infantes periantur et moriantur in utero et mortem inveniant: And if it does not obey when it enters, then put the woman on a chair and raise her feet upward; then shake the chair over the ground; and have the woman held so that she does not fall when you shake it.
If then the hands do not emerge and the fetus dies; cut them and draw out the rest of the fetus; and tie its hand with cloth and draw it out level by level; for it will come out.
The exit of an embryo on its feet. When the fetus emerges on its feet, then you must push them upward; then turn the fetus little by little; afterwards level it.Quod si non obaudiat in hac positione, sed vertatur capite ad pedes et mortem inveniant:
And if it does not obey when placed in this position, but turns head to foot and dies; then take one of its feet and pull it gently little by little.Et si non obeat: extende iterum pedem suum, donec obead: nam obaudietur.
When therefore it has reached up to the buttocks, then bid him press upon it and cause her to sneeze with pepper: if God will it will go out.
And if that which we have described does not come out with it, then gently draw back the fetus until you place it in its natural position. For by itself will exit easily.
If this is prohibited from being driven out by that with which we have been speaking, then take mallow mucilage and oil of sesame seeds, and gum dissolved, and pound the whole in a mortar, beating it well: then wash the woman's vulva with it, and apply it below her womb. Then let her sit in tepid water until she has a laxative effect.Et si non egreditur cum illa, quod prius fuit in ea, tunc fac eam sumere potum, qui est de radice de zingiberi, et de manna, et de malabathro, et de succo datile: et potum illum bibat, et egredietur.
And if it does not go out with her, what was in her before, then let her take a drink which is from the root of ginger, and manna, and malabathron, and date-wine juice; and let her drink that drink, and she will go out. When you see therefore that her bowels have been made warm, then let her put on myrrh: and sup up upon it. When she has held the suppository for an hour, then let her sit above a seat.Si tamen egredierit cum eo quod prius fuit in ea, et non omnimode poterit egredi, non dubites: sed fac eam sedere super sedem supra aquas calidas, donec consequat hypocundriam: et si omnimodo non egredierit, et tu autem scis quod cum eo est quod non debet egredi, ut ex viscera vel uterum: tunc fac eam iterare suetam, et in loco suo reponere. Then cause her to sneeze; press on her bones and nose; and compress the lower part of her abdomen with a gentle pressure. For the fetus will come out at once.
The exit of the fetus is above the knees and hands. When it comes out in this way, then he will insert his hands little by little in introducing them.Et si non possit egredi super genua et manus, et ingenio in introitu manum suam, sic est finitus foetus inter os uterque et os sacrorum; et postea exspecta usque quando mortuus esset, quoniam vivere non potest. If it cannot come out over the knees and hands, and he cannot introduce his hand because of the fetus, then the fetus is between the os uteri and the os sacrorum; and afterwards wait until it dies, for it cannot live.Then let the woman lie on her back with her feet hanging down to the ground; and she shall lie on a bed, and fold her hands.Et si foeus esset mortuus intra uterum, et ingenio in introducendo manum suam non possit, quia mortuus esset foetus, facit per eam sese stringere, et per os eius introiit manum suam: et per os uteri trahat eum usque ad os sacrorum. And if the fetus is dead in the womb and he cannot introduce his hand because of the dead fetus, then let him make her sneeze, and through her mouth he shall introduce his hand: and through the os uteri he shall draw it up to the os sacrorum.Then press gently upon her lower abdomen above.Et ubi egredietur foetus, per illum trahat eum usque ad os sacrorum, et extrae eum per os uteri: et per os sacrorum extraiat omnia quae intraverunt per os uteri. Then extract what is under its feet from the pulpits, until it is prepared in the lower part. If the fetus will not come out, then take hold of its feet and move them violently. Then press what is above the hypochondrium gradually, until the fetus rises to the top. Then insert his hands and adjust the fetus gradually: and tell the woman to press down, until the fetus comes out.
The exit of the fetus hanging widthwise from the hands. It is brought about by the insertion of his hand. But if he cannot reduce it, then lift up the woman and make her walk around.¶ Exitu foetus vertice primo egreditur.
The exit of the fetus is brought about by its vertex first coming out. But if she cannot walk, then have her lie down on a bed and strike her thighs with a vigorous blow.
Then apply the poultice which you prepared from the mucilages.
If she receives childbirth, then have her sit on a seat.Et concute uentream eius concussione uehementi. And strike her womb with a vigorous blow. Then work at reducing the hand and adjust the fetus according to its natural shape; and make the woman sneeze and tell her to press down until it comes out.
The exit of the fetus is above its neck with its hands spread out and its face towards the back of its mother. The midwife must hold the fetus's hand, then gradually turn it around and adjust it with ease.Et postea praecipio ei, ut concutiat crura matris: quoniam multum adduxerit in exitu foetus.
And then I tell her to strike the mother's thighs, because it has brought about a great deal of exit.When he is adjusted, then place on its navel what we have mentioned from oil and mucilages.Et facit ut ambularet postea, et pulsat crura eius motu uehementi, donec efficiat luctum: et si non potest ambulare, tunc facit iecere super lectum, et concute crura eius motu vehementi.
And make her walk around afterward and strike its thighs with a vigorous motion until it cries; and if she cannot walk, then have her lie down on a bed and strike her thighs with a vigorous motion.Then tell her to move about gradually. When you have done this, then let her sit upon a seat and order her to incline herself to the right side. Then order her to compress [herself]: and make her sneeze with pepper.
The exit of the prepared fetus upon the side. When it descends to the opening of the womb in this way with afterbirth, then split the afterbirth with your nail until it is evacuated from moisture.
If therefore it is suspended above the face of the fetus and its neck, then cut her from the navel so that she is not retained and does not die.
Then drive the fetus into its innards until you place it as it ought to be, and order the woman to compress herself several times; for itself will go out by an easy exit.
The exit of Twins or Many Foeti. Know that twins are often born and sometimes three and four are born.Vellem enim facere illam per omnia praesentiam tui: et in his rebus multum laboras, qui omnia per te fiant. I would indeed have her make you present in everything and in these matters you are much labouring who desire all things to be done by yourself.However that is strange and seldom happens.Quo facto cognoscendo scito, quod nascere gemini, quandoque per se fiunt ex uno foetu: et quandoque geminatus est ex foetu dupli, vel tripli, ut dixi.
Indeed, these five are alien to nature and do not live altogether; and they contain one secondina each, even though they may be multiplied; and they are separated by the navel that distinguishes them from one another by a thread tied around it.
And sometimes they emerge as does a single fetus through the normal exit easily, and they emerge through an exit most to be praised, as we have described.
But if some of them are difficult at childbirth, and they come to what we have said from unnatural shapes, then treat them as we have told: and let the midwife be subtle, and do with ease what she does with delay, and bring them into a shape according to whatever is prepared for her out of the skill leading toward health.
Recollection of that which is formed in the womb from embryos, and is aborted.Et quandoque omnes quintuplices secundinae simul egredientur per exitum naturalem sicut foetus unicuiusque: et non diuersificate sed simul, utpote una res: quod etiam est ex natura.
And sometimes all the quintuplet secondinas emerge simultaneously through the natural exit as does a single fetus; and they are not separated but together, as one thing; which also is from nature.And sometimes one is formed in the womb, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten: and now it has been verified with me that a woman having an abortion gave birth to seven, and another to fifteen, all formed.
Which was done by the measurement of the glorious wise one.
So all this ought to be in the knowledge of midwifery.Et quandoque secundina una habet quintuplices, et multas uires quae sunt in eis et quae ex eis procedunt. And sometimes one secondina has quintuplets, and many forces that are in them and proceed from them.Perhaps indeed it will come to be like that; so oppose to it with that which is proper.Et quandoque secundina una habet quintuplices, et multas uires quae sunt in eis et quae ex eis procedunt.Fortasse enim perueniet ad eam simile illius: opponat ergo ei cum illo quod oportet
Chapter 76.
And sometimes one secondina has quintuplets, and many forces that are in them and proceed from them.Perhaps indeed it will come to be like that; so oppose to it with that which is proper.Et quandoque secundina una habet quintuplices, et multas uires quae sunt in eis et quae ex eis procedunt.Fortasse enim perueniet ad eam simile illius: opponat ergo ei cum illo quod oportet
When you treat a dead fetus as I said above in the section on medication, and it does not exit, and you are forced to use manual surgery, then you should act with caution.
If then the woman is of sound constitution and free from any of the accidents from which there is fear of her losing her life, let her be laid on her back, with her head inclined downward, and her legs elevated; and let the midwife hold her by both sides, or let her be bound to the bed, that her body may not be moved at the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the uterus with moist oils, with mucilage of linseed and fenugreek.Et sicuti facit haec, manibus suis teneat uterum: et ita uterum in manibus eius sit, deinde oportet ut percutiat uterum multum fortiter cum palmite vini robusti, et postea iterum percutiat cum oleis humidis.
Then the obstetrician should moisten his hand with these oils and mucilages, then introduce it into the matrix with ease. Then he should look for the places where he can insert hooks from the fetus, and convenient places for that purpose.
Consider then if the fetus is ready to descend over its head; then insert hooks into its eyes, or throat, or mouth, or palate, or under its beard, or in its armpit, or on its chest and under its ribs.
But if the descent is over its feet, then in its breastbone and middle ribs.
And one must hold the hook with his right hand and place its loop between the fingers of his left hand, and introduce it with ease and attach the hook to some part of those places which we have mentioned until he has reached a hollow space.
Then fix another hook opposite it, or a third if necessary, so that the contraction is equal and does not turn to one side.Et postea trahat ambos uigorosamente equitatiuamente, et sic proderit foetum ut descensum sit.
Then it is stretched equally, and the stretching is not according to a straight line only but also towards all parts so as to alleviate its exit, just like when a tooth is extracted.
And what is between them must be softened by the stretching. If a part of it is retained inside, then the Obstetrician must grease some fingers with oil and insert them from the side in order to twist with them what is retained.
If a part of the fetus emerges, then the hooks are moved to another place which is higher: do this until the whole fetus emerges.
If therefore a hand comes out before the rest and it is not possible to pull it back because of the constriction, then one must wrap a cloth over it.Et si postea coarctatio illius redierit: tunc oportet ut recidere uncinos, et adlocare eum super locum qui sit altior. Then extract it until it all comes out, cut it either at the junction of the hand or at the elbow; and so you must do with the other hand and both feet.
If however the head of the child is large, or there is contraction upon its exit, or there is water gathered in its head: then you must insert between the fingers a thorn-spoon and break up the head with it and draw out the water; or you must split the head with an instrument called a misdacy which has the same shape as the other instruments described in the chapter that comes after this.
Likewise if the child is of a large head nature, then you must cut it with an algengematus; or draw it out with a misdachy as we said. Then you will draw out the bones with forceps.
If the head emerges and is constricted at the collarbone, then it must be broken up until the moisture that is in the chest runs out.
If however it does not constrict or prevent the head from emerging, then cut the head a little at a time according to what you are able.Et si autem in manibus aut pedibus complicatur: incide osse in iunctura plantae, et extrahe eam cum tenaculo et forcipe.
If there is a boil on the lower part of the abdomen or an accumulation of fluid, then it must be pierced until the fluid runs out.
If, however, the fetus is lying on its feet, its extraction is easier and its passage through the birth canal is less difficult.
If the fetus is stuck in the abdomen or chest, then you must pull it out with a cloth which you have wrapped around your hand and push against the abdomen or chest until what is inside flows forth.
If the other limbs are being removed and the head returns, then the midwife should insert her left hand. If the opening of the birth canal is wide, then she should insert her hand deeply into the canal and search for the head with it, and pull it with her fingers up to the opening of the canal; afterwards, she should insert a hook or two hooks into it and pull it out with these.Quamuis enim caput pueris nasciturum est magnus, tamen multum valemus ad trahere eum per os matricis, si sic faciamus.
If the bone of the pelvis is cramped on account of a hot wound which has occurred to it, one must not then apply pressure upon it, but rather one should then administer an effusion of moist things, fatty substances; and apply plasters: and let him sit in waters which mollify and humidify.
If the fetus is on its side, then it is possible for it to be equalized; then let what we have said about the living fetus be administered.
If that is not possible, then it should be cut a little and extracted.
And one must not leave anything at all of the afterbirth inside.
When therefore you have completed your operation, then let what we have said about hot wounds which occur in the pelvis be administered.
If there is bleeding, then let him go into astringent waters and administer the other cure.
And indeed I have seen a woman whose womb contained a dead fetus; then she became pregnant again from the same man and another dead fetus was also born to her. Then it happened to her a long time later that she had an abscess in her navel; and it became swollen until it was opened and began to discharge pus.
I was called to cure her, and I treated her for a long time; yet the wound did not heal.Et postea mortua est ex apostematis, quod in umbilico eius erat.
And later she died of the abscess which was in her navel. Then I put some strong atrapressive plasters on it, and the bone came out of its place. Then after a few days another bone came out.Et deinde mortua est mater: et mortuus est etiam foetus, qui erat in utero eius. I therefore marveled that there was no bone in the abdomen.
I therefore thought, because the fetus was of bones dead.
I therefore searched the wound and extracted many bones while the woman was in better condition; and thus she lived for a long time, and sent forth little pus.
And I was not astonished at this strange thing, unless because there is knowledge in it and help to that which the expert physician administers with his hand out of healing.
Chapter 77.
Of the forms of Instruments necessary for extracting a fetus.
The opening for vertigo is found in the mother.
Here below is the form of the Stretcher, by which books are measured, to which two cords are equally applied at the two ends of two pieces of wood.Et est latus eius sicut latum librum; et in medio eius est uirga utrimque flexuosa per mediam lineam ad modum S. However the Vertigo should be thinner than the Stretcher; and that it is made, either of ebony, or of box-wood.Et debet habere duo pedes longitudinis, qui possunt esse ad modum libris.
And let the width of each wood be two fingers, and the thickness of each is a finger, and its length is a palm and a half; and in the middle of the two woods there are two additions of the same kind of wood, which are already nailed on both, whose length is half a palm, and their breadth is two fingers, or less.Et sit super uirga quae est flexuosa medio lignorum ad modum S, quasi palmus et medietas, et in medio eius quasi digitus: et sit in fine eius quasi digitus: et postea fit altior utrumque additamentum pro parte sua circa finem quod est super uirga.
And upon the rod which is curved in the middle of the woods like S, let its length be a palm and a half, and its breadth a finger; and after that, each of the two additions is made higher for its part around its end which is above the rod.And these two additions are inserted into the bone of the mother, so that it opens with them when you turn the two Vertigos.Et faciunt ut mater aperiat os suum cum eis: et extrahitur foetus per istas uertigines ad modum stramen.
Another form, similar to it but smaller and lighter.
It should be made of ebony or boxwood, in the shape of a pair of forceps.Quam primum erumpere videbitis spiram, vertigemque remittentem, statim eam comprimeatis. As soon as you see the breath coming out and the vertigo subsiding, squeeze it at once. However, there should be two projections at the end, as shown above; and the length of each projection is about the length of the palm, and their width is two fingers each.
Now, when you see it opening the matrix with that, then have the woman sit on a bed with her feet hanging down, and open what is between her thighs.Ibi imponatis extremitates additamentorum, ut sint super caput mulieris, et manent circa uerticem eius: et sic apponitis extremitates illa ad eam, usque cum uelletur matrix per totum, et erumpat spira. Then place the two projections of the instrument on her head and keep them around her crown, and so apply the other end to her until the matrix is completely opened and the breath escapes. Then insert these two joined projections into the matrix; and you hold the lower end of the instrument between her thighs.Sic apponendo et trahandelis, usque cum uelletur matrix per totum. Then open your hand with the instrument as you would do with forceps, equally according to the amount that you see coming out of the opening of the matrix, until the midwife does what she wants.
The form of vertigo from which the fetus is driven by the ancient writers called Forma Impellentis.
The form of Almisdic, by which the large head is crushed; and it resembles a pair of forceps with teeth at the end, as you see.Forma vertiginis qua aperitur matrix.
The form of vertigo by which the matrix is opened; and sometimes it is made oblate as a pair of forceps according to this form, as you see, with teeth like a sawtooth, with which to cut and crush.Quam primum erumpere videbitis spiram, vertigemque remittentem, statim eam comprimeatis.
Form of a Wound Having One Spine.
Form of a Wound Having Two Spines.
Form of the narrow spatula having two ends for cutting off the head.
Form of the long spatula and also of two spatulas.
These instruments are all used, and the more their kinds are multiplied, and prepared by the artificer, the more is he ready for his operation, and esteemed the more able among men, because of their multitude.
You shall not therefore despise any of these instruments, unless it be prepared by you. For the necessity for them is inexcusable.
Chapter 78.Of the Head [of the Fetus].Postea cum vis lumina foetuum, si in hac vita sint, uti solebant, iter faciant per vagonem ad pluteum et illa cadaveris omnium, quae sunt mortua, ad primam placentem, quae est contra eam partem ubi sanguis et animus loquitur.
Of the Extraction of the Secondary [Tumor].Secundina est quidam massa carnis in parte uteri ad placentas adherens, ex qua multum sanguinis efficitur, et facit partem corrodere.
When the secundine is retained in childbirth, then you ought to command that it retain its breath.Secundina est massa carnis adhaerens ad placentas et ad uterum, quae facit partem corrodere, et sanguinem profusiui facit. Then cause it to sneeze with incense: and press your hand over its mouth, and its nostrils.Si non potest liberari secundina per stertim, tunc faciatur ad modum quod suprascriptus iussit, et super os eius ponatur spatula, ut praecipimus. If it then leaves through this, it is good.
If not: then take a pot and make an opening in the cover: and put into it herbs that open the mouth of the womb, such as calament, rue, fennel, camomile, seseli, cassia wood, and centaury: take all these herbs, or some of them, and soak them in water, and place them over the fire.
Then place a reed-stopper over the opening of the pot's cover, and the other end into the mouth of the womb; and hold it there until the vapor reaches the hollow of the womb.
Then make her sneeze, as we have said. For the second will come out with ease.
If however it remains after this treatment and does not come out; then tell the obstetrician to soak his hand in castor oil or in a poultice of mallows. Then he shall enter into the womb, and seek for with it the second child.Cumque egredierit: tunc praecipe Obstetrici, ut tangat primam Secundinam uulvam manu sua oleata. When it comes out; then tell the obstetrician to touch with his oiled hand the mouth of the womb of the second child.And when he has found it, then let him take hold of it, and draw it forth little by little.Et cum protraheret illam: praecipe Matre, ut stet cum pedibus ad modum crucis, et resipere inuolutam.
If however it is attached deep within the womb then, as we have described, he should insert his hand until he finds the placenta and draw it out gradually with care so that the womb does not fall when there is a strong吸引力; rather he ought to move it easily to the right and left sides; afterwards he must add something to the amount of 吸引力. It indeed then obeys, and is saved, and escapes from adhesions.
If the os of the matrix is constricted as we have already described let him treat it with sneezing and with the ointment of herbs.Quod si post partum uenerit fluxus sanguinis: tunc fiant spissae moxas, et fiunt compressiones frigidae ad uterum.
If after childbirth there is a flow of blood: then thick moxas should be made and cold compresses be applied to the womb.But if it does not come out with all that we have described, then beware lest you weary yourself over her in repeating the extraction.Et si post partum uenerit fluxus sanguinis: tunc fiant spissae moxas, et fiunt compressiones frigidae ad uterum.
Indeed it is necessary that when what comes out from the os of the matrix, you should tie it to the hip of the woman.Sed si fluxus sanguinis non cessabit: tunc fiant compressiones calidae ad uterum, et moxas. Then you cleanse her with a clyster made of the four-drug ointment. For this will rot in her after days and be dissolved and come out.
However, when it rots, a foul smell will be raised from it to the stomach and head and harm the sick person. Therefore, incense-smokes convenient for this must be administered.
Certain old men have already tried a smoke of nasturtium and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which the woman is smoked at detention of the secundine and menstrua.
Let it be made of brass or copper: and put the wide end over the fire: and let the smoke-stuff be placed over the figs: hold her, until that smoke is consumed: and repeat with another.
CHAPTER LXXIX.
¶ Of curing of a not-perforated anus.
Many children are born, and their anuses are not perforated, whom the subtle pus has already made foul. Therefore it is necessary that the midwife pierces this with her finger; and if not, that she pierce it with a sharp spatulum: and she guard the foreskin, lest it touch it.
Then put over it wool soaked in wine and oil. Then heal it with ointment, until it is cured.
But if you fear that it will rot, then put a lead tube into the foramen for many days, and take it away when the child wants to move about.
And the rotting of the anus has also happened from congealing of a wound or pustule. Therefore it is necessary that the congealing be cut away, then healed with what we said about curing and lead.
Of curing of fissures which happen on the lower parts.
CHAPTER LXXXI.
The fissures that happen on the lower parts are Knotting and Swelling which happen near the anus of women or on the space of one side; and it is one fissure or more.¶ De curatione fistularum quae accidunt in inferioribus partibus.
When therefore that nodule is opened it lets out a watery white humour, or thin pus.
And sometimes these fistulas are penetrating. Penetrating fistulas are known by what comes out with the emission, and windiness, when the weak person uses an emission; and perhaps worms come out of them.
And there are fistulas from them when they are penetrating into the bladder, and into the urethra. And there are from them penetrating to the junction of the hip, and to the tailbone joint.
And also from this you may know a penetrating fistula as far as the anus, even when it is not penetrating, by putting your index finger into the anus; and put a thin probe into the fistula made of brass or iron: when there is no twisting.Quod si tortuosum sit, neque intromittas tentem, ne tortuosior fit: et per tortuositas non intromittitur tentum.
If it is twisting and you cannot put in the probe so that it becomes more twisting; and through twisting the probe does not go in.If there is twisting in it, then put into it a thin probe made of lead or an arrow from horse hair until you feel the probe or arrow in your finger.Quam ob rem tentet tentem per tortuositatem usque ad nodum caudae.
If you do not feel it deep inside, and nothing comes out of the opening, neither wind nor worm as I said: then know that it is not penetrating. So go quickly to the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating to the ureter, or to the passage of urine: then its sign is the exit of urine from it, and its prohibition from this that the place be consolidated with medicines.
If, however, it is penetrating to the joint of the hip, or to the hip bone: then its sign is that the probe will pass through there up until it, if there is no tortuosity up to the bone; and the finding of pain in the circumference of the part, and that pus always comes out of it; and that medicine does not take effect on it, nor does it consolidate with ointment.
And for all these penetrating fistulas there is no cure at all; and their cure is toil and futility from foolish physicians, over whom the fistula is formed.
But for the one which is not penetrating and is not ancient, there is hope of a cure with cauterization; according to what I tell you, and I have already approved it: and it is that the sick person lies in your hands on his back; and raise his legs up above his hips, and may his hips be inclined towards his belly. Then they will insert a probe of lead, or of brass, if there is tortuosity in the fistula, until you know where it has passed through.Et quaecunque uenierint ex ea, eruantur, et non permittantur in illa permanere: neque omnino pernoctet in ea tentum.
If however he feels it near the anus, then you must put your finger index into the anus.
If therefore you feel with your finger that the ulcer has already broken through by itself, as well as what you felt between your finger and the buttock or flesh, then know for certain that it has perforated. Do not worry about it because there is no cure for it as we have said above.
They say however that the flesh is healed in some men by cauterizing with a fine caustic according to the size of the ulcer as said above, and the hot caustic must be put into the ulcer until it comes out around the anus. Then repeat this twice or thrice until you know that all the added flesh like a feather pipe has been burnt away.Et postea deinceps intromittas in eam unum linteamentum iuxta modum praecedens, et facias illum in ea permanere circa dies IV.
Then afterwards put on it one poultice according to the former manner and let it stay there for four days.Then treat it with soft linen wrapped in butter until the burnt flesh comes out, then treat it with ointments that generate flesh and solidify it.Si autem sentit eam infirmus circa anum, tunc oportet ut intromittas digitum tuum indicem in anum.
If he feels it near the anus however, then you must put your finger index into the anus. If it is healed, that is good.Et postea, si sentit eam iuxta caput iuxta caput: tunc oportet ut intromittas in eam digitum tuum indicem.
And afterwards if he feels it near the head near the head, then you must put into it your finger index. And if not, then it will never be healed with any other cure.
And if the ulcer breaks through and does not reach your finger which is in the anus, and between it and the ulcer there is a thick membrane of flesh or buttock, and you see the ulcer following the surface of the skin, then dry up the skin from the beginning of the ulcer, and you scrape away with the ulcer what is in the ulcer until the scraping reaches where the end of the ulcer is, and the ulcer is freed and falls out.
Then cleanse the filtered meats that resemble the feather of a bird, so that nothing remains in them.
But if blood beats you and dissolves between you and the operation of your cut, then it is better to quickly cover, cauterize it with fire or with a sharp medicine.
Because cautery with fire brings good habits, it adds the scorching of those meats and the cutting off of blood and the drying up of moisture.
Then treat it with soft linen folded into butter or pounded herbs until the wound emits pus and those burned meats come out in pus.
Then treat then wound with ointments that bring about hardening of the flesh, and they are medicines in which there is contraction and drying out.
For when they have been restored, then it has already healed, and you should not fear repetition.
But if the fistula has already reached to the depth of the anus and is stretched out by the surplus of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and probe with it.
But if you feel a membrane between yourself and it, and is close to penetration, then there is no operation on that, unless according to the way of trust and hope.Quod si est carnis et in profunde est: tunc debes operari per fiduciam.
What is, because one of three things is administered in it: either that you cauterize it as we said or cut it off until you reach its hollow so that it be possible for you to insert linen and cure from nearby. And do not go too far with cutting so that you will not cut the membrane containing the anus and have a bad outcome of the action without willingness.Et quando non potest procedere secundum uiam fiduciae, et sperans est in illo exitus mortis: tunc debes operari per fiduciam. And when it cannot go according to the way of trust and hope is thought to be an outcome of death, then you must operate with trust.Then treat it as we said.Et quando facis operatio, quae debet esse in medio: postea mundifica locum cum liciniis iuuis et superficies carnium, et ponas eam in locum curatiue.
For perhaps it will heal up; or cut away the ulcer itself, and clean it after you have dried it up to near its root, as we said, either with a tent or with another instrument with a sharp end. Then cleanse the raw flesh which is in the wound, as far as you can reach, with an irrigating syringe.
Then try for the restoration of the whole wound with the opening and where it is consolidated: And the fistula will remain open in the inner part of the anus, and it will be easier over the weak person.
And sometimes the fistula follows this mode: and it is, when you introduce a tent into the fistula; and it is on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with skin and margin of the anus: then take a tent of perforated end, which is like a skewer of aleskef, that is, preparing leather, according to this form. And introduce into it an unwound thread made of five threads, and wind it around her. Then introduce the tent with the thread into the fistula until it reaches its hollow.
If it is then penetrating on the inner side of the anus near the rim, then pull out the thread from that hole so as to introduce your finger into the anus and pull out the end of the thread and bring together its two ends; and tighten both, and leave it for a day or two days, and the more the thread penetrates into the flesh, tighten it well, until the flesh between the two ends of the thread are pressed and fall: then heal the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in whatever way you can prepare for yourself, unless it is very deep. For there is no need for you to cut it on account of the scale, so that you do not cut it.
Then do with it as we said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spatulum with which the fistula is split, whose curve is very acute, and the other part not acute, so as not to cut what is not necessary, as you see.
You've reached the end of this text.
Of the sewing up of hemorrhoids from which blood flows after they have been cut: and of the treatment of fissures.
There are two kinds of hemorrhoids. Either they are inside the anus, like pieces of charcoal or plums, or they are like individual grapes. And from them are small and large; and blood flows from them always, and there is one, and they are many. And they are outside the anus, and at its ends.
However, those which are outside the anus are for the most part few in moisture, from which flows a yellowish water or little blood with constant flow; and they are according to the color of the body.
And its treatment, that which is within the anus, is as you order the weak horse to move; and it is pressed until the anus exits, and there appear to you [the hemorrhoids]. Therefore, then, suspend them with hooks or hold them with your nail. Then cut them at their roots.
If however they are not retained by the hooks because of their moisture and softness, then seize them with a rough cloth or with felt out of double-woolen cloth, and draw them out with your fingers. Then cut them, and powder over them some hot powders after the cutting, so that they may be cured in place. Or cauterize them according to what precedes in the chapter on cauterization.Et si fuit intra anum quae extrahatur, et non potest durare extra anum neque in loco suo: aut cum illa extrahieris, cadat, aut morietur postea. And if there is one within the anus that must be extracted and it cannot endure outside the anus nor in its place; either when you extract it with it, it falls or dies afterwards. Then treat them with the remaining cure until they are healed.
If the anus does not yield to emission, then enema the weak enema in which there is a small bite, so that it may be healed with it that is in the anus and quickly yields to emission when the weak person expresses himself.Et si non obedit clisteri egressioni, cum eo faciendum est sicut supra dictum est de ano: propterea quod clisteri est quasi ano.
If however they are external to the anus, then their condition is light and easy: and it is as if you were to seize them with your nail, or seize them with a hook and cut them. Then treat them with what we have said until they are healed.
And those who are averse to cutting with iron, then it is necessary that you should apply their stitch in this way. Take a piece of unwoven thread and insert into the needle. Then draw out the wound to the top and make it pass through with the needle at its root on the other side; and wind up the two ends of the thread in the lower part of the needle, and let them be parallel: and bind up the wound tightly. Then tie off the thread and pull out the needle.Et fiant hemi-spheres de cera, et fiunt uti quae fiunt pilos; et applicentur super athelil cum oleo.
Make half spheres of wax, and let them be used as those that are used as hairs; and apply them over the wound with oil.Do this with all the wounds, and leave out one: do not touch it, so that the flow of blood may go out from it.
Then place over the anus a piece of cloth steeped in rose oil, or in ceratum, and put it over the anus: and give orders to the patient that he rest.Et post id tempus, quando sanguis furit ex athelil, tunc fac ut tegatur cum linteo, et fiunt super eum spinae de cera aut de ferro, et sint ut pilos. Then leave him alone until he falls asleep.
When therefore the cuts or wounds are healed, then care for them with ointments and other remedies till they are cured.
CHAPTER IX. On the treatment of wounds.. Often indeed wounds occur from the drying up of pus and the contraction of nature.
When indeed they are old, and medicine avails not with them; then one ought to have them burned with the point of a spatule, or with thine own unguent, till they become moist, and the uppermost skin which hinders their healing be taken away from them. Then heal them, until they are healed according to what is fitting.
If indeed they do not heal; then repeat the burning with a stronger heat than at first, until they bleed much, and then care for them, until they are healed.
CHAPTER X. On the healing of wounds that are deep or not deep; and of burns; also of old sores and sore feet.
CHAPTER LXXXII.
Know that Almirmar is nothing but a round lump the colour of the body like to the head of a nail; and it occurs throughout the body, especially on the lower parts of the feet and toes; and it occasions pain when one walks.
Therefore it is fitting that what is around the nail should be cut away and held with tweezers or a hook, and eradicated from its root.Et siccorum, et pedum almirmarum cura ista est: ut erugentur cum spatula, aut cum rasorio, donec sanguis fluat multum: postea ueniat unguentum in ea loca, et faciuntur in eis ligatures, nec dimittantur nisi post diu.
Then tend to it: and if you wish cauterize it according to what was said earlier in this chapter.
A pimple however is a small eminence, rough, punctured, and rounded above the surface of the body. And often occur on boys' hands.
The treatment for this is to stretch the pimple and cut it; or tie it with silk thread; or with a hair until it falls out. And if you wish, cauterize it according to what was said earlier with fire or with a sharp medicine; and now both types of pimple are eradicated, the inverted and the non-inverted by means of this instrument.
A wart is also a small punctured eminence, thick and rough above the surface of the body, spreading deeply indeed; and when frost meets it, there is felt within it a sensation like that of the bite of an ant, and this spreads throughout the body; and most often this occurs on the hands.
The treatment for this is to take a feather from the tail of a goose or from a strong hawk's wing; and place this feather over the wart until it is held by the ring of the feather's parts. Then twist your hand with the feather until you've cut away the part around the wart; and put it deep into the flesh, and thus you will eradicate the wart from its root.And sometimes this same treatment is used for a mole.
And if you wish, do this with a copper or iron tube in this manner.
Let the top of the tube be drawn out to a fine point, so that it may not pierce or wound the finger in its grasp and in its twisting motion.
And if you wish, cauterize the wart according to what was said earlier in the chapter on cautery.
Chapter 83.
Of the forms of instruments which are used for the administration of enemas in sicknesses of the anus and for the dissolution of the belly and colic.
Sometimes a clyster is made of silver, or brass, or tin, or beaten copper, or bronze.Et quandoquaque utitur in Clisteribus ad solutionem uentris, faciuntur lamine subliminariorum: et illas laminas faciunt circa latum duodecim digitum.
And sometimes these instruments are small and sometimes large, according to those in which they are used.
That is administered for the treatment of children and infants should be small; and for those whose anuses are weak or painful, so too their enemas.
Large enema.
The upper end of the pipe, that is, where the gut is tied, should be wide according to this method and it should have a ridge so that the gut can be tied as you see fit; but its lower end which goes into the anus should be obtuse, i.e., not split, soft, very smooth, drawn out to extreme thinness; and on one side there should be two holes and on the other side a single hole.
And the size of the hole should be according to the thickness of the rods, and rather thicker than thinner; and it should have in it a gut from an animal's bladder, or a sheet of sheep-gut which is made into the shape of a small asafotida, whose root is a palm in length.
And let it be perforated with many holes as if it were pierced, and there should be between each hole the thickness of a finger. Then insert into those holes a strong thread made from raw gut, which is made from about ten strands, or more or less, and tie it with that gut just like an asafotida. When therefore the gut is put into it, tighten it at the head of the enema between the two ridges with a strong constriction.Et ponatur in anum intus, et ligetur uter per foramina superius, quod sit intra rectum. Then enema with it. And when you are done, untie the gut at the holes above, which is within the rectum.
This is the shape of the pipe depicted here, and its holes.Ista autem sit forma foramen in latere altero.
But this is the shape of the hole on the other side. As for enema with it, you should fill the gut or the bladder with medicine which has been warmed according to the patient's tolerance; and beware lest it be very hot, or very cold.Et infunde in eum in parte latere alteri: et quia est superius ligatura quae retentur medicinam intra rectum, ergo facit ut non effluat, sed permansit intra rectum usque ad tempus qua cum eo clisterizatur.
Then let the invalid be laid on his back and his legs be elevated upwards; place under him an inthaan, that is, a leather mat on which men lie, or a linen cloth.
Then anoint the end of the catheter with oil or with white lead, or with a mucilage of fenugreek, or something similar. Then introduce it into the anus with ease. Then let the assistant grasp the catheter with both hands and squeeze it firmly, until everything inside the catheter is discharged into the intestine.
Then withdraw the catheter, and elevate the invalid's legs against the wall.
If it makes him want to go to the toilet, then let him hold on as long as he can.Deinde resupinetur et eleuet crura sua ad superiora super dorsum suum. And if he sleeps with it all night, that is the very best way of using it.Deinde extrahitur Clistere et resupinetur infirmus cum eleuatione crurum suarum ad superiora super dorsum suum.
But if you are using the catheter for diseases of the belly and its discharge is hastened, then repeat the enema until he is cured.Si uero in egritudinibus corporis, et est uentulus clisteri: tunc teneat clistere, donec fit exitus.
But if there are hemorrhoids or painful sores in the anus, then let the catheter be very thin and gentle, such as catheters with which children are catheterized.Deinde resupinetur infirmus super dorsum suum, et eleuet crura sua ad superiora: et pone sub eo intthan.
And let this be the shape of the very fine catheter over which there is a tight skin.Et utrumque sint linae, et sinta cutis uel clistere, non multum differt.
Chapter 84. Of the curing of a wound to the head without any fracture of bone.Resupina infirmum super dorsum suum, et eleua crura sua ad superiora: et pone sub eo intthan: et resupinus pernocte in eodem loco.Et in prima uigilia post resupinationem infrigere caput cum linimento alyssae.
I have said in the division of the cure of wounds that it was convenient to the book, and I will say here the cure of them with the hand, and with medicines according to the complement.
I therefore say that wounds are distinguished according to that by which they are done, and according to the place upon which the wound falls.
Things therefore by which wounds are done are often as the throwing of a stone, or an incision with a sword or dagger, or a blow with a spear or wood or arrow; and similar to these many things.
Wounds however which fall according to the parts of the body are as a wound that falls upon the head, or neck, or chest, or belly, or liver; and similar among these members.Et quilibet eorum facit diuersitatem in cura seu conuersionem uulnus: utpote cum iactura lapidis aut percussio cum ligno faciat uulnus planum, et uastum, utpote cum gladio aut cultello faciunt uulnus profundum et contrarium, quod non potest curari nisi incisiue.
And I am describing the treatments for certain wounds so as to establish a rationale and rule for other wounds.
I shall begin with simple head wounds, since a description of compound fractures will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore I say: When there has been a simple head wound without fracture of the bone - and this is because of a blow from a stone or something similar, and it has only broken the skin - and you are afraid that there will be an evil issue of suppuration: then quickly bleed the head at once; do not delay. If nothing prevents phlebotomy, especially if it is blood which flows out of the wound in small amounts, let him lose blood. Let the bleeding be from the opposite side of the wounded part.
Let the bleeding be from the opposite side of the wounded part. And let the patient guard against fullness, wine and rich food.
But if something prevents bleeding, then he should take less food, and not draw near to meat or wine.
And if there is suppuration on the wound, place over it a poultice of cotton soaked only in rose oil, or wine which has an astringent quality to it.
If you are not afraid of suppuration then place over the wound if it is fresh and still has blood on it, and the air has not yet changed it, the powder which I will describe later; and if the air has already changed it, then place some ointments over it until it heals.
But if the wound is large or is due to an incision of a sword or similar weapon and its lips are not joined together with small sutures, then join it together with sutures as I will narrate later in the case of abdominal wounds.
But if the wound has been broken off from the bone and hangs loose without retention except by a small support, then open it up.Et si uulnus est cum fractura ossis qui fuit causa eius, et adest osseum ex contrario parte uulneri: tunc extrahe ossem, donec sanetur, ut non praeuat curatiui eius. Then heal the wound with remedies and restore to it the tough flesh of its place of skin, and bid the invalid take foods that are thick, such as heads of wheat and cooked wheat, until he is able to eat porridge; and eat similar foods.
If you find a putrescence in the skin and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all the putrescence and throw it out; then heal that wound.
If there is an artery or a vein in these wounds from which blood flows and it does not cease with remedies, then ligature the artery. If you find that it has not been cut, then dry it up with Spathumily or ligature it.Quod si inuenis in cute mortem, et non potest per medicinas expellere: tunc in incidia ea parte cutis et ossi, et extrahe mortem, et curat eam per medicinas. If there is death in the skin and it cannot be driven out by remedies, then cut away that part of the skin and bone, and draw out the death and heal it with remedies. If need calls for it when what we have said does not help, then cauterize it until the blood is stopped.Et si mortificatur eam cum medicinis, et non potest extirpare eam: tunc incide eam totum, donec venat omnem mortem, et postea curat eam per medicinas.
If these wounds are slight and simple, then their cure is easy and quick; one need only powder them with this powder, for it hardens before it can be acted upon by the air.
The method of preparing powdered flesh. Take one part of olive oil and two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unslaked lime; rub all these together well, and sift them through a fine sieve: fill the wound with some of this powder and bind it up tightly, until it adheres well and coagulates with the blood.
Then press it from above with pieces of cloth, and leave it untouched while it remains, so that it may not come out. For the medicine will not be rooted out of it until it is healed.
And sometimes lime alone will do this when you have no olibanum and dragon's blood; it will also produce the same result in many large wounds which are fresh and still contain their own blood, if lime is put on them and they are bound up, so that the air cannot get at them.
If the air has already altered them in some way, particularly when it is summer time, then this powder should not be used; instead, treat the wound as we have said, so that you may apply to it certain digestive ointments or poultices made of barley flour with water and honey, until they emit pus. Then proceed to cure them as they begin to heal.
But if a bone is fractured with the wound, and it is slight, then draw out the bone with a pair of tweezers; and I will shortly tell you how to cure a fracture of the skull.De fractura ossium.
Of wounds in the neck.
If a wound occurs in the neck, it makes no difference whether it is treated as a neck or head wound, provided that it is simple.Poni autem debet super ipsum olibanum, et sanguis draconis: ac constringi cum puluere gesti, et cum fasce: sed quod non debet stringi ita ut inhaerescat, neque ut opprimatur uulnus nec ossibus, sed ita ut faciat constrictione bonam, donec adhaereat bene.
If the nerve or artery of the neck has already been cut, then if it is a nerve, there will be no feeling in it unless treatment for its cure is performed with something which causes great constriction, such as zinc, and other similar substances. Because they harm nerves and constrict them.
And do not place anything cold at all on the wound; because the substance of nerves is cold and their continuance is with the brain, which is the most exalted of the members; and let that by which it is cured be from medicines gently, as lime washed many times with sweet water, or with rose-oil, and thuthia, when it is also washed with sweet water: and other mineral stones, in this manner, and moist ointments.
But if the wound is large, then give a suture; or close its lips with threads. Then cure it until it heals.
But if the wound is deep, or a sinus occurs in its lower part in which pus has already gathered, then pierce it in a more depressed place therein.
But if an artery has been cut in the wound and a flow of its blood has followed; then separate, or cut it off and tie it: or cauterize it, if necessity leads to that.
But if the windpipe or throat has been cut through and all is well; then close the lips of the skin with a suture above the cane of the windpipe, and do not touch the windpipe, but rather raise it up, and bring it back to its natural form. Then bind it with a decent constriction, and leave it for several days. Then cure it with ointments in which there is constriction and drying until it heals.
But if the wound has made an impression on bone, then probe it; and if in it there are fragments of bone, take them all out, or as many of them as you can: and what does not prepare itself, leave it until the wound putrefies, and is separated, and its egression is cured.
If the wound is fresh, then powder on top of it the powder which I have described. But if bone be seen in the wound and a fistula forms: then treat it as is written about in its own chapter.
Of wounds in the groin
If it is a wound from a spear or dagger, and you can see its depth, then consider this.Quamvis non sit superflua sanguinis effusio, sed in uulnere parum est: tamen scies per eius profunditatem, quo locum tenet, et quod modum habet. If therefore a wound bleeds profusely, when the invalid pants from it, then know that the wound is mortal.
If it be not deep and is fresh with its blood, then do not put powder on it at the first hour, nor press it together so that the blood be not held back in its depth and return to the heart and destroy the invalid; but put an astringent ointment on it and loosen it twice a day.
If you do not have the ointment at hand, then put an old cloth on the wound's opening so that it sucks up what flows out of it from moisture; and let the invalid sleep with his wound turned upward so that what collects in it may flow out.
If three or more days have passed since the wound and nothing has happened to the invalid like a spasm, nor a bad trembling of the heart, nor breathing with difficulty, and you see that its other signs are good; then know that the wound is sound. Nourish it therefore and dress it with bandages and other treatment until it is healed.
If its healing is delayed and it is always open then know that it has become a fistula.Quod si uelletur uterque latus carnis, namque in medio est os, et non potest carnis ad uulnera sufficere: tunc scias, quia facta est Ulusio. Therefore treat it according to its own chapter.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision and it is simple on the surface of the breast or back: then treat it with what precedes it by sewing it up, if it is large; or with powder, if it is small.
But if it has already made an impression on the bone and broken splinters have come out of it: then probe the wound and hasten to extract those splinters, if they are separate.Et omnes partes uulnus, quae in interiora penetrat, extrahe cum capite ensis aut cultelli, ut non demoremur a cura uulnus, et omne instrumentum ueteri, postea ad seram remittatur. If they are not separated, then leave them until the wound turns green-black, for their extraction will be easier after that.
As to other wounds and accidents of the rest of the limbs, the judgment of cure is that which we have already stated.
Of Wounds in the Abdomen, with Evacuation of the Bowels, and of their Treatment.
The disruption which happens to the abdomen is great, or moderate, or slight.
Therefore when a great disruption has taken place, sometimes the intestines themselves will protrude, or their number.
For this reason their reinsertion and sewing up is more violent and more difficult.
And a slight disruption also happens in another way, which is difficult. Nam quae in medio fit, modica est, sed multum laboris quaerit. It follows that it is more difficult to reduce it if you do not go straight ahead in its introduction into its place: for it swells, opens up, and becomes dilated; hence the difficulty of introducing it.
Therefore, this is why a longitudinal incision is better than a transverse one, because it does not make the reduction of the intestine difficult as it does in these two cases.
You should know that there are four kinds of suture: the first, which has no name; the second is called a continuous suture; the third, an interrupted or stiching suture; and the fourth, the knot suture.Et hic finem habemus capituli de suturis.
Two common sutures are used for the suture of the abdomen and for the suture of other wounds on the body; and two other sutures are specifically suited to other kinds of wounds.Here ends the chapter on sutures. However, they are more properly used for the suture of the abdomen; and I will tell you about each one, with an explanation and description.
I say, then, that when the wound is small and something exits from it from the intestine, and its reduction becomes difficult, this is due to one of two reasons.Et quod si ex inflatione et apertione non facit difficile introituem, sed facit difficulter redactionem post entrytum: tunc illud fit propter alterum duorum modorum. Or because the inflation and opening do not make entry difficult but make reduction after entry difficult, then it is due to the other of the two reasons. Or because of the smallness of the disruption, as we said; or because there is inflammation in the intestine due to the coldness of the air.Et si non facit difficile introitum post entrytum: sed facit difficile redditionem intestini ad locum suum: et facit quod uentere inflat: et aperitur: et ingrossatur: et non potest reduci ad locum suum, et non potest uelari: sed aperitur, et fit difficultas introitus eius.
When therefore this is so, then you must heat it so that you may dip the sponge or a wet cloth in warm water only. Or you boil them in water with squills, and cyperus, and the spice, and embrocate with it the intestines until the inflammation is resolved.
Sometimes he uses wine as a vehicle for the styptic; this is better than water alone for resolving an inflammation.
When therefore you see the inflammation already resolved, then moisten the intestines with the water in which the alder or mallow has been boiled. For by this the entrance of it is soothed a little.
But if its return is excused after this treatment, then find a little in the disruption, with an instrument used to cut hemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is better when it is prepared, than incision; and there is no compulsion to cut after necessity and lack of instrument.Et si excusatur reditus eius post hanc curationem, tunc finde in disruptione parum, cum instrumento quo secantur hemorrhoides.
And if its return is excused after this treatment, then find a little in the disruption, with an instrument used to cut hemorrhoids.Let one part of it be torted and acute, and the other not acute; and let the fine end not be with the fine Spatumilis, but rather obtuse a little: and it is that which resembles barley, as you see.Et si excusatur reditus eius post hanc curationem, tunc finde in disruptione parum, cum instrumento quo secantur hemorrhoides.
And if its return is excused after this treatment, then find a little in the disruption, with an instrument used to cut hemorrhoids.When therefore the wound is enlarged and enters into the intestines, then it must be reduced according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible; for that is better.
But when the disruption is large at the lower part of the abdomen, then you must cause the patient to lie on his back and lift up his legs above his head.Et clysterem uis, ut facias intrare intestinum, et uelocium in illo sit, donec introeat: quoniam post hanc curationem non debet redire ad locum suum. And if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place its head and chest higher than its lower parts.
And likewise if the wound is on one side of the abdomen, then always pay attention and consider that the part with the wound be higher than the other part.
And you should do likewise for large wounds and medium-sized wounds.
For small wounds, however, place it according to how it is being prepared for you.
Then have a skillful assistant hold the wound with one hand and bring the lips together. Then expose to him who is following, something after something; and this is the common method of sewing in a single layer.
And it is to take the needle or needles according to the quantity of the width of the wound. Then leave off at the end of the wound the quantity of a thumb, that is to say, of the doctor; and insert a needle with thread into both ends of the skin from under the skin down to the inside, until you make it penetrate from the other side, and you have already drawn together the two ends of the skin and the two ends of the muscle: and there will be four rows.
Then tighten with double thread around the needle several times from both sides at the same time, until the two lips of the wound are drawn together decently.
Then leave off the thickness of a thumb as well, and insert into them another needle; afterwards sew it with thread, just as you did with the first needle. You will therefore not cease doing this with it until you have completed the sewing of all of the wound.
And the needles shall be intermediate between thickness and fineness; for very fine needles penetrate the flesh quickly, and coarse ones are difficult to enter into the skin; therefore they should be intermediate in fineness and thickness.Et sic oportet facere de acibus et in omni genere suturze, ut debemus loqui de illo.
And it is not proper that the needle be introduced far into both ends of skin close by, so that the flesh may not be pierced quickly and the wound be opened before its consolidation, and that they may not be stretched out with the stitch as well, so that the wound might not be impeded from consolidating.
Then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not hurt the sick person in their sleep; and place little pieces of cloth from all sides which hold the ends of the needles; and leave them until you know that the wound is consolidated.
And this kind of stitching with needles is indeed more convenient for small wounds. Because one, or two, or about that many needles suffice in their stitching.Et bene est quod faciunt medici qui primum incident extremitates acuum, et postea subducunt eam per latus, et iterum introducerunt eam alio modo.
Yet the second stitching is common, in order that one aggregate with the stitching four ends: two of skin, and the two ends of the thread in place of one, with a needle on which is unwound thread equal in thinness and thickness.
Then when you have penetrated with the needle these four ends, bring back the needle from the part where you began it so that the unwound thread falls from the upper part of the wound: so that the stitching is, just as the stitching of cloth by which cloths are drawn together, and place between every stitch a quantity equal to the thickness of a little finger.
This stitching indeed men know.Et quod dico de hac sutura, dicit etiam de cunctis caeteris: ut sint omnes suturae equidistantibus intervallis, et ut non contragant cutem.
And with this stitch I sewed up the wound that had befallen a man in his belly, who had been wounded with a dagger, and there was more than a palm of disruption to the wound: and about two palms had come out of the intestines from the middle intestine, and there was disruption in the middle of the belly.
I therefore reduced that again after it had stood outside the wound for 24 hours.
The wound was consolidated therefore after about 15 days: and I healed it, and he was cured; and he lived afterwards for many years, restored to his own dispositions.
And the physicians had judged that he would not be cured.
And it was a miracle that I did not cure it with ointment. For I was in a place where there was no ointment found, nor anything out of the physicians' remedies.Et cum hac sutura ego sui uulnus quod acciderat uiro in uentre suo, qui fuerat uulneratus cum cultello, et erat disruptio uulneris maior palmo uno: I therefore put over the wound an old cloth twice a day, and I persevered in washing it with honey water until it was healed.Et cum hac sutura ego sui uulnus quod acciderat uiro in uentre suo, qui fuerat uulneratus cum cultello, et erat disruptio uulneris maior palmo uno:
But I will tell of two kinds of stitch proper according to the statement of speech.Et si in medio uentris fuerit ex utero, non est dubium quod sit necesse suturare omnes intestina: et non possumus in hoc loco facere aliam rem, sed debemus uisere facere super uulnus quaeque et reducere omnia ad medium, donec finem habeat.
And if in the middle of the belly it is from the womb, there is no doubt that one must stitch all the intestines; and we cannot in this place do another thing, but we must make a ligature over the wound in whatever part, and bring back everything to the middle until it ends. And it is, so as to begin with an acute stitch: and thrust in the needle from the outside towards the inside part.
When therefore the needle has penetrated into the skin, and is going into the flesh according to the length and breadth of the whole body; let the tip remain in the side into which you thrust the needle, and make it penetrate into the other extremity from the inside part towards the outside in the other end mirach.
When therefore you have made it penetrate, then make it penetrate according to this in the same end mirach from the outside part towards the inside: and let the tip remain which is in this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from the inside part towards the outside; and make it penetrate with your penetration as you make it penetrate in the tip of mirach, which is in its part, until it penetrates through all.
Then begin also from this same side and cut it itself with its extreme edge, which is on the other side of the face, and extract the arrow from the skin where it has penetrated.
Then return it to that skin, and cut its extreme edge, which is on the other side of the face, with this extreme edge: and extract it from the skin which is on its part, and do that alternately, one and then the other; and do that after the other, until you have extracted all of its exterior according to that example.
And the sum of this sewing is that you sew the lips of the skin as they are skins: so that you sew its edge alternately from one side of the skin on one side, and let it go alternately from the other side on the other side, until you finish.
The second species of proper sewing, which Galen said.Et prima specie faciatur in his modis: primum, si fisura aut lesiuno est minoris magnitudinis, qua non possunt intrare duae digitares una cum sua palma.
This speech of his is narrated in these ways: first, if the fissure or wound is of lesser magnitude, in which two fingers cannot enter with their palm together. This of his speech is narrated, so that they aggregate all parts to their natural compare by nature: and apply the edge of one to the other edge, and the edge of one to the other edge. And this is done according to what I narrate to you.Secundum vero, si est lesiuno qua minus magnitudo ad duos digitos una cum palma non sufficit: ita quod necesse sit intrare in eam digitum solum, et ut illuc pertractet digitum suum alium, donec intraiat in illum locum qua necesse est, usque quo complet suturam.
But if it is a wound of such magnitude that two fingers together with their palm do not suffice, so that it is necessary to enter only one finger into it, and for him to transfer his other finger there, until he enters into the place where it is necessary, as far as one completes the sewing. It is necessary to insert the needle in the edge of the cutting close to you from the outer part, and make it penetrate to the inner part in that alone: and let go of both edges of the cut. Then turn the needle, and make it penetrate from the outer part to the inner part into both edges of the cut, namely on both sides.Et fac illud alternatim usque quo complet suturam: et si placet tibi, cum hac extremitate suturas mirach ad extremitatem eius aliam, et facis extremitatem sifac ad extremitatem eius aliam.
Then roll up both of them and also make to penetrate both of them from the inside to the outside, in two extreme points in the other side which is opposite to the flank.
And this mode of sewing is better than common and easy sewing, and it is a sewing whose antecedent is a reminder.
This is therefore the speech of Galen as well.
And some have said: Is corrected sewing with two spikes.Quod non est verum sed ad suturam ventris in medio faciendam monstranda est res. Which is not true but the thing to be shown for sewing the belly in the middle is.What is, that you put into both of them one thread: and begin with the insertion of the needle, from which is with you, and make it penetrate to the other side, according to their sewing who are tanners equally.
And you know that when disruption is in the middle of the belly: then its sewing is more difficult than other places of the belly.Et quo libet facias punctum primum, si quid esset ad latus, et si quaereres quod esset ad mediam ventris partem: sed ut te esse, qui traies aculeus, secundum quod posueras antea.
The judgement of the medication of a wound is the judgement of other wounds.
When you approach a fresh wound still bleeding, before the air changes it: and draw in the bowels, and itself, and adapt itself: then put over the powder of carnations.
If the air has already changed the wound: then put over it some ointments which are present to you, until they make pus and fall off, and the flesh becomes firm and healed. Then cure it as is the cure of other wounds, until it is healed.
If however the medicines are not present to you, then put over it immediately, when it begins to emit pus, a poultice of old cotton; and change it twice a day as I taught you, until it is healed.
For you will not need another medication in several dispositions when the wounds are simple.Et si tu uideris in ualetudine carnis, et sanguinis quod emittit, et in puritate filis: et placet tibi statim ponere super ipsum cotum uetus, donec faciat pus et cadat fila, et consolideat: sed postea non facias cotum nisi per trium dies, sed ponas super ipsum unguenta quae docui te, et cotum facias cum huius mody carnationibus: et sic curabis illud donec sanetur.
If you are afraid that the wound will extend to the principal limbs, then you must soak soft wool in oil of moderate warmth or rose oil and place it around the areas between the groin and under the armpits.
If he feels pain or piercing or putrefaction in his intestines (for this often happens), then give him a clyster with astringent wine, black and lukewarm: especially if the putrefaction has already reached his intestine, and there is a passage through to the hollow of his anus.
And know that what is from the large intestine is easier to heal, and what is from the small intestine is harder to heal.
And the intestine that is called the small intestine does not heal at all from the wound that happens to it; and this is because of the multitude of its veins, and their size, and because of the subtlety of its body, and its proximity in nature to the nerves.
But if what comes out of the wound is pus, and you follow it freshly: return it according to your return, by which you return intestines equally.And you must return intestines equally because of the danger of their hollows, that is, so as not to press on them or on their hollows, but rather to return them gently; for they are hollow inside, like the windpipe and its branches. And this is a great danger.
But if he has passed gas, and it has already turned green or black, then you must tie him with a thread above the place that has turned black from it, so that no flow of blood occurs.And when you have tied it in this way, do not loosen it immediately, unless you are sure that you can return it to its place; but wait for one day and night, and if you cannot return it on the second day, then untie it, and let him pass gas through it until it returns to its natural color. And when he has returned to his natural color, he may no longer do so; but be careful not to tie it again, because by tying this place there is a danger of making an ulcer inside and causing a wound in the intestine. For there are veins and arteries in pus.If you see that the intestine has become swollen like a blister, then cut it lengthwise at its hollow; because when it has become swollen like a blister, there is no other way of returning it to its natural state.
Then cut what is beyond that ligament, and place two ends of thread hanging from the lower part of the wound outside it; in order to ease the tension on you when he attracts it, and pulls it towards the case of the pus, and emits the pus of the wound.And let him attract it towards himself, and emit the pus of the wound, until the pus is completely emitted. If the pus stops being emitted from it, then stop cutting it; but if he continues to emit pus, then cut it again according to what you have already done.
Rememoratio of a wound that occurred in the intestine.
When there is a disruption in the intestine, and it is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in some people; for I have seen one who was wounded in his abdomen with a lance-wound, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it was an old wound; and a Fistula was formed, and there issued from it discharge and flatulence.
I therefore made the cure, until I was not at all doubtful about his recovery; nor did I cease to apply ointments to it, until he was healed and the place consolidated.
After I saw that the place was now consolidated, I feared lest some misfortune should befall him in his abdomen; and no such misfortune befell him. And he remained in a better condition, eating and drinking, and copulating, and entering the bath, and exercising himself in his usual sports.
And now some experienced persons say that when there is a wound in the intestine, and it is small, then it must be bound up after this manner.Et quando quidam vident locum consolidatum et non ligatum: tunc oportet ut faciant ligaturam per se: quia si non fuerit ligatura per se facta, et cum uentro uoluit: tunc accidere potest illi mortem. And it is necessary to take ants of great heads.Et ponas in ligno, quod est humidus: et ponas super locum uulneris. Then join together the two lips of the wound, and put a single ant among them that has an open mouth upon both lips of the wound.Et faciat urinem contra uulnem, et teneat eam, donec consolitatur locus: nam per urinem facit lympham. And it will make urine against the wound, and it will hold it until the place is consolidated; for by its urine it makes lymph.When it tightens over her, and closes its mouth, cut off its head; for it will adhere, and not loosen itself.Et sic agas super alterum labium contra alterum: nam per urinam facit lympham, et cum tenet eam, consolitatur locus.
Then place another leech near the first one and don't stop doing this with a leech after another leech depending on the total amount of the wound.
Then heal itself and its wound. For those heads will remain attached to the intestine until it is eaten by the intestine and healed, so that the patient won't suffer any more harm.
And now it is possible to sew the intestine with a very fine thread; which is extracted from the animal' s intestine, attached to it when it is reintroduced into the body.
And you take one end of this thread out of the intestine, and cut off a lot of flesh. Then tie up at its end a very fine unbleached linen thread.Et postea remeare eum, et ad illum ligaturam applicare. And then heal it and apply to it the binding. And afterwards insert that thread into the needle, and sew up with it the intestine. Then heal itself in disruption.Et si non possit redux in integritatem:
And this mode of sewing with the forceps and intestine is not except in the way of trust and hope.
Know that a wound which is large and broad, especially if it is in one of the slender intestines, then there is no remedy except sottification, and there is absolutely no cure for it.
¶ Of the cure of Ulcers and Fistulas.
And this mode of sewing with the forceps and intestine is not except in the way of trust and hope.Know that any wound or ulcer when it becomes old and aged, and becomes an ulcer, and does not heal, and always discharges pus, and is not cut off: then it is universally called a Fistula, no matter what member it is in, and we call it Zuchemen.
And a Fistula indeed is according to truth, a filtered knot, hard, white: with which there is no pain, which has the concavity of a bird's feather: and because of that they call it some Rissata, that is, a feather.Et quia non potest curari nisi subtiliatio, et subtilitas facit lues, ideo nominatur uigintio in quolibet loco.
And it is in some of the hours moist, which emits pus. And perhaps the moisture is split in some of the hours. And sometimes this moisture is much, and it is little; and it is coarse, and it is fine.
And I have already mentioned this when I spoke about wounds, that any wound which does not heal and in which no flesh is born, is due only to one of nine causes.
Of these one is that either because of the scarcity of blood in the body; or on account of its malice; or because there is a piece of hard flesh between it and above the lip of it, which prevents the birth of flesh; or because there is much dirt and filth; or because the ulcer is rotten in itself, and the matter that is discharged from it is of bad quality; or because the medicine is unsuitable for its cure; or because the corruption that falls on the region is a kind of pestilence, or due to the nature of the region, as happens in Caesaraugusta where the digestion of diseases is made difficult, and their cure by natural apostemata is retarded; or because there is one bone, or a number of bones.
And I have already shown all these causes and their signs, and their cure with medicines in the discussion; and it is necessary here that I make you know the cure of fistula and the hernia, which is done by the way of an operation with the hand.Et quoniam fuit diuisio circa omnes partes corporis, et circa omnes morbos corporis, oportet ut diuida simus in hoc uersu quoque: nam non est unum genus fistulae, sed multas.
And since there has been a division about all the parts of the body and about all the diseases of the body, it is necessary that we divide also in this verse; for there is not one kind of fistula but many.You should therefore know that a fistula happens in all the limbs of the body. For some of them go to large veins or arteries, or nerves, or the sinews; or to the intestine, or the bladder, or one of the ribs; or to one of the vertebrae of the back, or to one of the joints that are composed of two bones: as in the hand and foot; and others go to a proximity of the principal member, and to those that are like them.
Whosoever therefore has these fistulas in this manner, it is of difficult cure from sicknesses, and does not receive treatment, and occupation with her is labor and ignorance.
But if it is from any fistula whose depth does not reach to these places which I said; and you hope, and trust in the cure of her, and desire to reach knowledge of her, then take a test of brass, or iron, if the fistula stretches according to rectitude, and probe her with herself.
But if there is a tortuosity in the fistula, then investigate it with a test of subtle lead.Quod si tentum peruanerit ad os Fistulae, et non ad fundum eius peruenit: scito quod sperare curam non debes, sed auferas ea quae obstat curationi illius. But if the test reaches to the mouth of the fistula, and does not reach to its depth: know that you should not hope for a cure, but you should remove those things which impede her cure.For lead with the gentleness of its body is bent, and cured around the tortuosity.Sed si tentum peruenit ad fundum Fistulae, et non potest eam contere ut possit in ea introducere: scito quod sperare curam non debes, sed auferas ea quae obstat curationi illius.
If it is a fistula having many openings, you will not be able to indicate it with a probe. So catheterize from the opening from among the openings of the fistula.
For when you introduce moisture through the catheter it will flow toward other openings and run out from them.
Then you must examine it as thoroughly as possible: so that you may know whether there is a bone or nerve there and the fistula's hollow is far away or near; or the fistula is one with many openings, lying on top of all that, with the utmost strength of your probe.
When therefore you have correctly identified the position of the fistula then proceed to treat it with confidence; and if it is a fistula that is close to the skin or in a healthy place, remote from a joint, or a nerve, artery, vein, or one of the places which I have mentioned to you, then cut off the fistula according to what has been said earlier in my narrative, and remove from it all that is in it of pus and rotten flesh, whatever grows at its opening out of the flesh or skin and similar things; and treat it until it is healed.
But if the fistula is of great depth and straight, then you must cut it as far down as possible.Quo fatto, stende super ea tentum cum forte tentatione, et considera quid faciat: si namque sentierit dolor a locis iuncturarum, aut nervorum, aut arteriarum, vel venarum, et tunc eam trahat ad te: scito quod in illo loco est Fistulae concauitas. Then stretch the probe over it with firm pressure and see what happens; if a pain is felt at the joints, or nerves, or arteries, or veins, and then it is drawn toward you, know that the fistula's hollow lies in that place.
Then apply lint wrapped around acute medicines; and push them up into the fistula' hollow as far as you can feel it with the iron; do this several times until the acute medicine corrodes all that remains in the fistula's hollow from腐敗.
Then treat the fistula with ointments which promote sound flesh, until it heals.Si autem Fistulae concauitas non est apud locum saluom, sed apud locum dubium: et sentierit dolor cum compressione super locum dubium, et non fuerit carnis corruptio in orificio eius, sed sanguinis multitudo: scito quod non potes curare illam per incisionem, sed oportet ut confregas eam cum tentatione tua, donec sanguis cesset, et tunc mundifica eam ex sanguine, et restaura cum unguento.
If it is not healed by that, then cauterize it as we have narrated.
If then the cause of the fistula is bone, and this is certified to you: then probe it, and cut it according to what I have narrated to you; if anything prevents you from this out of vein, or nerve, or main member, as we have said.
If then bone is found and there is something of corruption or blackness in it; then scrape away at it until all its corruption is removed.Si ergo detectum est tibi in os quiddam ex ulcere, seu fistula, seu ex ulceribus, et habet uenam, aut neruam: tunc non loquamur de cauterisatione eius loca Then treat it with that which causes it to be incarnated, until it is healed.
If it does not heal and still discharges pus as before; then know that you have not achieved the full eradication of its corruption.Si vero corruptio illius ex ulcere, vel fistula est in ossibus, et non potest eradicari, sed emittit pus, et non cessat: tunc scias, quod non peruenisti ad totam curam eius.
If the corruption in that ulcer or fistula is indeed in the bone and cannot be eradicated but still discharges pus, and does not stop; then know that you have not achieved the full cure of it.
Then restore it.Si vero caussa Fistulae est carne, et non habet corrumptionem: sique est in locis quae non sunt contraria vitae, donec curentur: sicut diximus: et non debet interficere aliam carnem cum ea, seu member cum eo: tunc cura illam per uigilia, donec curata sit. If the cause of the fistula is flesh and it does not have corruption; and if it is in places which are not contrary to life until they are cured as we said; and if it should not destroy other flesh or a member with it: then treat that through vigilance, until it is healed.If then it is healed, that is good; and if not, then know that the corruption is in a great depth of the body which you have not reached. It is therefore not for you to do anything with it except to leave it to nature.Si vero caussa Fistulae ex ossibus est: sicut diximus, et habet corrumptionem, sed non emittit pus: tunc scias quod tu non peruenisti ad totam curam eius: sed perueniisti ad remissionem, et ad auferendam dolorem eius.
If a small bone is broken and you can reach it, grasp it with delicate forceps that are suitable for the purpose.
If there are many bones, then pull them all with great force, and do not let any of them slip away from your grasp.
But if anything is resisting you due to moisture and there is no fear or mistake in cutting them, then cut through that moisture and meat, if it is there, and free the bones.Si uero aliquid inter eorum est quod non possis trahere neque solvere: tunc extrahe totum cum carne et humore suo, et lisa securi fac incisionem in ossibus iustam ad modum crucis, donec persolvas omnia ossa quae interea sunt.
But if you cannot pull or cut something between them, then extract the whole thing with its meat and moisture, and make a smooth incision in the bones according to the shape of a cross until you have freed all the bones that are trapped there.If you do not have the time to remove the bones immediately, then put something over the wound that will rot it: leave it alone until the flesh and moisture around those bones rots away.
And guard the wound so that it does not heal shut.Postea, cum debito tempore, uidebis quid faciendum sit. Afterwards, at the proper time, you will see what is to be done.And the incision that you made during the operation should be closed up. Place a piece of cotton wool over it, if you like, soaked in oil with ground sulfur; or cotton wool soaked in Egyptian ointment, or any other strong ointment.Poneque super sectiones cotum sublimum, et fac omnia ut debes, donec uulnus curuit: et postea trahe ossa quae interea sunt.
And when those moist humours rot and separate from the bones, one is comforted by their removal and their attraction.
But if it is a large bone, such as the thigh-bone or hip-bone and similar to these, and what has become corrupted from it is of great extent: then smooth over it with the final rasping until that blackness and corruption is removed. Then restore the wound.
If however what is corrupted in it is of great extent, and the corruption has already reached into the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to split it, and cut right through it all the way until one reaches where the corruption is: then treat it until it is consolidated.Si autem corruptio medullae ossis non peruenit ad omnia loca, sed in aliquo loco stet, et alibi intus ossis medulla integrita simper sit, tunc necessario est serrare ipsum, donec perveniat ad locum ubi stet corruptio: et cura ipsum usque qua illa corruptio uelutatur.
And I shall tell you about a case that happened to a man in his thigh as an example and aid for your operation.
There was a man of youthful age, about thirty years old, who suffered pain in his thigh caused by something that had moved inside him, that is, from the interior, until it reached the leg, and he had a large ulcer; and there was no extrinsic cause for this.
Time passed with him suffering from the error of the physicians until the ulcer became open and many matters came out with it. And his cure was postponed until the leg became fistulous and many openings were made in it; all of which discharged pus and body fluids.
Many physicians treated him for about two years, and no one skilled in medicine laid a hand on it until I was called and I saw his leg, and the matters that flowed out of those openings with great speed; also all of the man's body had become weak, and its color was yellow.
I therefore introduced a probe into one of the opening's openings, and it reached to the jaw.
Then I probed all of the openings; and I found that they were connected with each other throughout all parts of the leg.Quo facto uidebatur mihi, quod non posset remisi, sed debebat esse amputatum crus: et quod ista esset caussa morbi, qui peruenit ad interiora corporis.
I therefore probed and cut at one of these openings until I reached the bone, and I found it to be rotten and corroded and blackened and decayed and perforated so that it had affected the marrow.
I therefore sawed away at what was exposed, and prepared it from the rotten bone.
And I examined, that there was nothing in the bone except for this corruption which I cut away and sawed off. And I have now eradicated it.
Then, with a long interval of time, I applied the restoration of the wound with medicines that consolidate. And it did not consolidate.
Then I probed and cut at the bone a second time above the first cutting, and found continuous corruption with the bone; and I sawed away what appeared to me from this corruption as well.
Then I attempted the restoration of it. And it was not restored.
I therefore examined it again over the same area, and did not cease cutting at the bone in particular, and attempting its restoration; and it was not restored until I cut from the bone about a palm's width, and extracted that with its marrow.
Then I restored it with medicines, and it consolidated quickly and healed; and this repetition of the operation and its cutting was not necessary except because of the feebleness of the patient and his lack of tolerance and my fear for him concerning death, since a bad syncopation occurred in him at all hours from the excess of evacuation.
He therefore healed with perfect healing; and there grew up in the place of the bone a hard flesh, and good became his condition in his body, and his strength returned to him; and he was changed in his dispositions, and no harm at all made opposition to him in walking.
But if the bone which stands out in the place of the body is already broken, then you ought to saw it, according to this mode; and there is: that you take a ligament, and bind it at the end of the prominent bone; and command someone else to extend it upwards; and put another ligament of wool, thicker than the first, around the bone. Then tie it over the meat which is on top of the bone; and draw out its end in order to pull the meat down towards the bottom; and you uncover the meat above the spot that you want to stitch closed, so that the needle does not hurt the meat.
Place wood or a board under the bone below in a suitable way; because when you do this, it will not be prevented from cutting away the rotten meat.
And it is fitting that the stitching be a little above the rotten spot so that the rot does not appear in the hollow of the bone and that it be apparent to the sight and force its way to another stitch.
If the bone is rotten and not prominent, but rather one of its parts continues with another; and if the rot is in the middle of it or in one of its parts; then uncover the meat all around. Then place wood below.
Then stitch it up from the first part where there is rot all the way to the other side so that the stitching extends a little beyond the rot as we said.
If the rot is at the joint, cut into it, and stitch up the bone where it continues on the other side.
But if the rot is along a joint of two bones, then there is no remedy for it except to cut it away.Et si est corruptio, et non est continuatio in aliam iuncturam: sed habet aliam uia, quomodo potest serrare ut sit continens: et si non potest, tunc scinde eam et facere ut disiunxerit ab ossibus.
If there is a wound on the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, then the case is very difficult indeed. Indeed, you must enquire how the wound appears to you. And smooth and clean it in whatever way you can, and make it straight with whatever skill you possess: provided that it does not cause any impediment to a Vein or Nerve.
You should know that there are many tools for cutting and carving bones, depending on their position, preparation, thickness, thinness, size, smallness, hardness, rarity and density. Therefore you must prepare every kind of tool suitable for that operation.
And you should know that these operations will make clear to you the type of instrument you need when you have a lengthy period of time available. And the knowledge of these arts bears witness to the ways of sicknesses; then indeed you will discover for yourself that which suits the sufferer out of all instruments.
And I shall list for you at the end of this chapter the number of tools which you should place models over that you may cut and by which you may test others.
The form of another Saw.Forma Scalpel.
The form of yet another Scissor.The form of the razor for joints.Forma Rasorii carnium. This is a razor's head, formed like the head of a star-headed pin; and its points are formed like the points of the alis-chaftafeg, or double-pointed pin.
And it is not proper to use this instrument unless in cauterizing the heads of joints when they are dislocated, or a large and great bone.
Form of the larger razor.
Form of the broad razor.
Form of the hollow razor.
Form of the other thin razor.
Form of the other razor with a curved end.
Form of the small, thin tent razor.
This resembles a chisel, and its end is like a saw: it is used in many places for the reason of bones.
Form of the razor which is proper for shaving that which is perforated through bones.
Its end is triangular and its points are acute.
It is made out of iron. And in like manner let all those things which we have said about razors and knives and saws be made.
¶ Of the cutting of ends, and the notching of bones.Et primum oportet ut incidas super caput osse, quod conueniunt, donec perveneris ad chorda:
The ends decay, or from an extrinsic, or intrinsic cause.Et quod est extra, cito cadit, sed quod intra est, diu perdurat:
And that which is without quickly falls away, but that which is within endures for a long time: and when therefore you have been treated for that corruption by the application of medical remedies, and the remedy avails not, and you see the corruption attacking the limb, which does not push out anything, then it is necessary to cut through that limb until where the corruption extends, in order that the feeble person may be saved from death, or the malady which is greater than the defect of the member.
And the sign by which it happens is that the limb grows black, until it decays: for fire consumes it, or decay after blackness; until that decay is cut through to that which follows the limb, and creeps through the whole body.Et quod sit extremitas, quae denigrat illum, cognosces per quod non cadit cum illa putredo: et si incidas illud membrum usque ad extremitatem quae denigratur, postea curabitur illud; sed si non, cadit.
Therefore quickly make an incision and similarly if the cause of the corruption is from the sting of some poisonous animals, such as the sea scorpion, a viper, or adder, and similar creatures.
If the corruption or sting is at the end of a finger, cut off the finger and do not leave any space for the corruption to spread up into the rest of the hand.
And similarly if it happens on the arm, cut off the arm from its root at the shoulder and do not leave any space for the corruption to spread up into the body.
And if it has invaded him, then cut off his arm at the elbow joint.
But if the corruption passes through and you see it around the elbow, then there is death in the patient.Et si pertransibit in brachium usque ad axillam, non est spes vitae infirmi. And if it passes through the arm all the way to the armpit there is no hope of life for the patient.
And similarly do for the foot when the corruption invades a toe, then cut it off at one of its joints; and if it reaches the ankle, cut off the whole foot.Si autem pertransibit in crurem usque ad genua, et tibi uideo in ea corrupti ueneficia, incide crurem totum. If it reaches up to the knee, then cut the shank at the joint of the knee.
But if the corruption has already reached above the knee, then there is no cure for it except to free it and leave the sick man to die.
And the manner of cutting off a limb, or of binding it up, is that you tie the ligature below where you want to cut, and also above the part. And let an assistant hold one ligature beneath, and another assistant hold a ligature above higher up. With a broad scalpel then separate the flesh which lies between the two ligatures until you have laid bare all the flesh.Quod si perueniet ad caput ossis, et uidebitur quasi spuriore colore, tunc scies quod est corruptum in ossibus: If it reaches up to the head of the bone, and you see a discolored color, then you may know that there is corruption in the bones.Then cut it or bind it up.
And you must place a linen cloth from all sides and not touch the healthy place with the saw; and let there be added injury to the sick man, and a warm pustule.
If however there is internal bleeding while you are operating, then cauterize the place quickly; or place upon it some blood-clotting powders.Et si corruptio perueniet ad ossem in quolibet loco corporis humani, et non apparuerit, tunc scies, quod illic est mortis: et non potest curari. And if the corruption reaches into the bone in any part of the human body and it does not appear, then you may know that there is death there; and it cannot be cured.Then return to your treatment until it is complete.
Then bind up the wounded limb with a suitable ligature and treat it until it heals.
And I tell you what happened to the man's leg; this is just what I am telling you.Exiit enim sanguis de pedibus sui, et uenerunt eum medicinæ apud mundi uiri: non potuerunt autem curare illum.
For blood flowed from his foot and he went to be healed by the medicine-men of the world; but they were not able to heal him.This was because a blackness had occurred in his foot, resembling a burn; and this corruption began at first with his toe until it spread to his whole foot.
The man therefore cut off the limb himself after he saw that the corruption was spreading through the member with its burning pain; and he cut it off at the joint and was healed.
And after a long time had passed for him, the same corruption happened to him in the index finger of his hand.
He came therefore to me, and I tried to recover the superfluity with him that I put on the hand from medicines after purification of his body; and the superfluity was not restored, and it began to go into another finger until corruption began in the hand.
He therefore called me to cut off his hand; and I would not do it, hoping from me the restoration of that superfluity; and I also feared for him in the cutting of his hand, death. For the power of the man was over the case.
After he therefore despaired of me, he returned to his land; and he came to me about it, because he was eager, and cut off his whole hand: and he was healed.
And I did not bring this narrative, except that it might be an aid over that which falls from the kind of this illness; and in order that there might be a sign by which to act, and according to what is done.
¶ Of the care of the eyes, and the quality of cleansing with medicines.
When an ulcer happens in some fleshy members, and the space of the ulcer is prolonged until it makes a collection of pus; then it breaks, or is perforated, and that which is within it comes out, and there remains a hollow place as if it were a cup: and the skin which is over it, is as a napkin worn through, and it does not reach to the end in its corruption, nor press into the eye, or upon any nerve, or ligament; it deserves to be called a Sinus: and it is not called a Fistula. But if the space of it is prolonged, until the corruption presses into some of these members, then it is called a Fistula, or a Ulceration.
And the care of it is to cut off that skin entirely as it is revolting; and especially when it is worn through, and made like a napkin; and you may be confident because it does not adhere to the place on account of its corruption.Et si apud incisionem eius, de quolibet genere sanguis egreditur uelut sanguis de carnibus novis, non debes timere super illum locum mortem: sed curas illum, donec corrumperatur sicut corrumperunt alii sinues: et postea debes curare eum sicut curaris alterum quolibet sinus.
If you expect that the skin will adhere and there will be no corruption from that final consequence: and if there is thickness of flesh in the skin, then treat it with the enema: and it is, as you consider the sinus.
Then if it is large, and the pus that is emitted from it is of a foul odor: then enema it with the Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, and oil, and ziniar, parts receiving equal, are aggregated in a vessel: and cook over fire, until the medicine turns red: and come into the thickness of honey.
Then take from it what you need: and dissolve it with water and honey, and enema with it the sinus: and squeeze the orifice of it, and leave the medicine in it for the amount of two hours.Et si post haec non possit emere pus, et non possit adhaerescere cutis: deinde clisteriza cum medicamine quod suprascribimus, et stringe orificium eius ut antea.
Then extract it with a probe; do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the bad smell removed.
And when you cannot get this medicine; take the ash of burnt wood, or ash from holm-oak wood, and throw it into the water. Then strain it and inject it until you are sure that the sinus has been cleansed.
If a weak person cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or water of ashes; then inject it with water and honey in which some ground zeniary has been mixed. Or inject it with honey and wine mixed together; for the property of honey is to cleanse and wash away, and wine clings to the sinus especially when there is an excess of the astringency and dryness in it.
When you have done this several times and are sure that the corruption has been removed from the sinus; then inject it with that which makes flesh to grow inside it.
And this you prepare from the daphnicon plaster; dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine; or inject it with other medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken at length in the treatise on ointments.Et quod dicimus sinum, non est sine causa: nam et intra aliam partem corporis, ubiquaque peritium est, vocatur sinus.
If the orifice of the sinus is narrow and does not accommodate the cannula of the enema, then widen it slightly with an instrument of iron; or put into it a piece of linen wrapped in Egyptian ointment, or in basilicon ointment, until it is enlarged.
And likewise if the orifice is also large, then gather its lips with a suture; and let there issue from it a quantity into which the enema can enter without addition.
And likewise if the orifice from which the pus flows is elevated to the upper part, then dry it up in the lower place that is within it so that the pus may flow out of it downward; for when the pus is pressed into the depth of the sinus, it hinders flesh from being generated there.
If it is not possible for you to dry up the sinus around its lower part according to what you see; then try to prepare the member by a preparation whereby the pus may flow out of it with ease according to how it is prepared for you.Et cum flueret pus, tunc tene eum, donec saturaretur: et postea fomenta eum. Try so that no pus is retained in it at all; and take the medicines to harden which are applied over the wound, suiting them to what you see. And spread them on a linen cloth. And let the cloth be of such quantity that it covers all the sinus. Then pierce with the forceps a little beyond the opening of the sinus directly. Then spread some of the soft ointment on another cloth according to the size of the opening and place it over the sinus away from its opening so that the pus will drain out through it; do not remove this large cloth for several days at a time.
But the one that is over the sinus opening is the one that you move every hour so that what gathers in it of pus may come out; and in order to know whether what runs from it is much or little, digested or not digested.Igitur post quaecunque dies, quando videbis quod esset ex eo munda curritio, et non uiride pus: scito illum Sinus esse expeditum, uti debet.
And when you have done this consider again the place of the sinus itself, whether the master of it feels pain there or not, and whether there is or is not a pustule there.
And when your treatment has been thus far extended, and you see the matter that is coming out through the opening of the sinus, then know that the sinus is now adherent or approaching adhesion: then therefore loose it in the morning, or on the third day; and when you have loosed the wound, then change the dressing, and renew the ointment.
But if a fine thread is coming out of the sinus after a long space of time, then do not despair about its adhesion; for its healing is approaching, since there are men whose flesh grows slowly in their wounds, and there are others who grow it quickly.
But if indigested pus is coming out of the sinus after many days, then know that the sinus is not adherent.Et si in diebus autitium tibi uenit ex Sinu, et sentis dolorem quando tangitur, tunc scias quod sinus non est adhaerens: nam dolor indicat non adhaerentiam, sed quod sinus uitium habet et sanguinem ex illo egreditur.
And if a deafness comes upon you from the sinus, and you feel pain when it is touched, then know that the sinus is not adherent; for pain indicates not adhesion but that there is an opening in the sinus through which blood flows out of it. And if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed, and its condition prolonged, then add to the drying remedies medicines which medical men make moist in their substance and dry in their action; just as dyaphinegon unguent is when a superfluity of camphor is added to it.Sed si ex Sinu egreditur pus indigestus, et sentit dolorem qui habet eum, scias quod sinus est adhaerens: nam dolor indicat adhaerentiam.
But if indigested pus is coming out of the sinus, and he who has it feels pain, know that the sinus is adherent; for pain indicates adhesion. And from the last day on which it was being treated, take dyaphinegon unguent, and dissolve it with rose oil, and rub it over the old wine in an amount equal to its own substance.
Then make it into a poultice and use it.Et post dies multos, per quos tibi uenit ex Sinu pus indigestum, fac ut renouetur medicatio: nam in diebus primis, quando incepta est curatio eius, et in his qui proximi sunt, non debes mutare medicamentum nisi in tertio die.
And now he makes a similar action, when you do not have present the dyafinicon ointment, honey, when you cook it until it thickens and use it. Or take myrrh, aloe, and frankincense; pound all together, and powder it over honey while it is on the fire. Then spread over it a cloth, and press it in the press: spread it with honey that you have cooked until it thickens, powder with the spices, put on top of it the cloth, and press it.
And sometimes one should use in this the long aristolochia, and roots of celestial lily, and it is a lily; and flour of grass, and cornflower. Use these simples alone or together, pound them, and sift them; powder over the honey that I have described, and use it.
If the sinus is prolonged and not healed by this treatment: then know that there is corruption inside it; or he has already made an impression on bones, or in other hard parts of the body, or ligaments: then heal it with the treatment of fistulas, according to what was mentioned earlier.
Of the cure for a panaritis and nail, and the additional scraping, and cutting of the finger:
A panaritis is an abscess which arises under the nail of the thumb or a foot; and perhaps it arises in other fingers.De panaritio in manu.
Of the panaritis in the hand.When therefore its matter is prolonged and neglected without being healed; and it is abscessed with a hot abscess: or it rots and gives off pus, until it corrodes the nail root; and perhaps it rots all of it, and perhaps corruption extends to bone, until there is a foul odor; and the end of the finger becomes broad, and its color becomes dark.De panaritio in pede.
Of the panaritis in the foot.When therefore you heal it with what we said before about the division and treatment does not help: then one must cut all of the excess that remains from the nail with a knife.Et si post hoc, non peruvit, et est corripiens aliter, quam diximus scias quod in profundo eius est corruptio: et faciunt mortem in ossibus, et ligamentis, et nervis, et in reliqua carne. Then cauterize the wound after that. For the cautery of young wounds is indeed valuable.
But if the bone is sound and the nail also whole, and the growing nail presses the flesh inward and begins to pierce it and hurts it, then one must put a fine point under the angle of the nail which is piercing the flesh, and push it upward; and cut away that flesh easily, and put on what remains of the flesh some of the burning medicines, corrosive substances, until all of it is removed. Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
If, however, the corruption has already affected the bone, then you must cut away that bone and remove it, for it will never be healed as long as there remains a corrupt bone in it.Deinde cauteriza uulnus post illud.
Then cut away the nail, and, when you have done this, cauterize it.If you see that the corruption and decay are spreading to the finger, then cut it off at one of its joints according to what has been said above concerning this matter.Si autem uides eum pernitiosum esse et corruptum, ut non possit in aliquam partem crescere, sed sit pernitiosus et corruptus usque ad extremum: incide illum digitum ad extremum in loco ubi est corruptio, scilicet in artificio: nam si corrumperit eius pars, non sanabit. Then treat it until it is healed.If you see that it is utterly decayed and corrupt so that it cannot grow into any part but is utterly decayed and corrupt right up to its end: cut off that finger at the end where there is corruption, namely in the joint; for if a part of it be decayed, it will not be healed.
But if there is injury to the nail or a blow, and this causes violent pain, then one must bloodlet the suffering person at once.Si accidat autem ualde, et non possit agi nisi cum magno dolore: tunc oportet ut facias de medicamentis placentibus et refrigerantibus et sedantibus. But if it be very bad, and cannot be done but with great pain, then you must make the patient pleasant and cooling medicines, and those that lull to sleep; then cut the nail with a sharp blade across from above downward.Si enim trahatis eam carnem ad extremum, multo minus doleret: et si facietis illuc cauterium, multum debet mitiores esse dolores.
For if you draw off that flesh to the very end, it will hurt much less; and if you cauterize there, the pains will be much milder.And beware lest the cut go through to the flesh under the nail, for you will then make the sufferer's pain very violent indeed, and it will cause an addition of flesh in that spot.
Then treat the site with something that relieves pain.
However, the finger which is added to certain people's hands is perhaps all fleshy; and perhaps there are bones in some of them, and perhaps it has a nail: and some of them are born at the root of the joint, or their origin is in some of the joints of the finger. Therefore he who is born in some of the joints of the finger does not move; and he who is born near the joint of the finger perhaps moves.
Therefore the section of him who is fleshy from them is easy. What you do, cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
However the treatment is difficult for him whose origin is at the root of the joint. Therefore refrain from cutting it.
However, if he is born on the finger at the last of the joints, then you must cut first by a round incision up to the bone. Then saw the bone with one of those serras which fit together with it. Then treat it until it is healed.
However, the consolidation which occurs to fingers with each other, often happens either from the origin of man, that is, it is born with him, or from the consolidation of a wound, or burning by fire, and the like.
Therefore you must cut that consolidation, until the fingers return to their natural form. Then place between them a piece of linen, or linen infused with rose oil: so that they do not consolidate quickly, and separate them from each other: or place between them a thin sheet of lead, until the place is consolidated as it should be.
And in a similar way if consolidation occurs to some fingers with the palm, then cut that consolidation, according to how it is prepared and suits the form of the member.Deinde cura locum cum oleo rosato et cum succo de radice Celandinae, usque quo redit ad integrum.
Then treat the site with rose oil and with juice from the root of celandine, until it is restored to health.
Chapter 92. The varicose veins are enveloped, and swollen with black blood resulting from an excess of melancholy, which afflicts many parts of the body: their most common occurrence is in the legs, especially those of walkers and workers, and carriers.
Hence it is necessary to administer a vigorous massage of the body from time to time, to rid it of the black bile.
Then the patient's varicose veins should be lanced.
The treatment for them is twofold: with fire, and with a knife.Utramusque curationes faciunt ex utroque modo. One of their remedies is to draw out black blood. And another method is to open a vein and draw out the whole vein.
The incision into it is made thus. First of all rub the leg with much warm water, until the blood runs freely and the foul blood dissolves. Then press on the patient's leg from above the hip to below the knee with the palm of your hand.Antiquum enim est praeceptum, ut non debet per stringendum excoriari crucis: sed si non potest fieri nisi per stringendum excoriare, cum uita, donec sanguis fluat, qui excoriationem curat. Then cut the vein in one place or two or three, making a large incision.It is an old rule that the vein should not be cut so as to cause a bruise: but if it does not flow freely enough without bruising, then cut it with the palm of your hand until blood flows which will heal the bruise.
Then draw out or milk the blood in your hand from below the leg up to above it: and if possible the patient should stand for this. Then cut the nail down to the bone below, until blood flows as much as you judge sufficient and the patient can endure.
Then ligate the vein and tell him to abstain from foods which generate black bile; repeat the blood-letting and the cupping as often as the veins are full and it hurts the patient.
The milking of this is done thus: Shave the leg of the patient if there are many hairs on it.Deinde stringe crucem tuo ante pedem cum uita tua usque ad caput infiri. Then press the leg with your palm before his foot up to his head until blood flows: or rub it on the leg with warm water until the veins are swollen and blood flows freely; or have him exercise strongly if he does not have a bath ready, until the limb is heated.Deinde eleuatio fit in primis cum phlebotomice, ut supra dictum est: et postea secatur unguem.
Then the milking is done first with a cupping-horn as said above; then cut the nail.Then cut the skin straight across the vein, or at the bottom of it by the ankle, or by the heel.
Then open the skin with hooks and scrape off the vein on every side until it appears to sight; and you will know that when it has turned from a ruby red to a dark colour.Si non potest excoriari, nisi per stringendum: cum uita ut supra dictum est. When therefore it goes out of the skin you will see that it is white as if it were a cord.
Then insert under it a probe until, when it is lifted and comes out of the skin; suspend it with a blind hook, gently.
Then dry the other cut near that cut with three fingers. Then scrape the skin from the upper part of the vein until it appears. Then lift it with probes as you did before and suspend it with another hook as you did at first.
Then dry another cut, or several cuts if you need to. Then lift and cut it in the last cut near the heel.
Then pull it out to the cut which is above it.
And do this until you pull it out of the upper cut, or higher cuts altogether, until when it goes out entirely; then cut it.
If however it does not obey you in being pulled out and lifted; then insert a strong needle with thread and tie it and pull it out; or insert under it a probe; and roll your hand to every part until it goes out. And beware lest it be cut. For if it is cut, it becomes very difficult to lift it and it goes into the invalid with great harm.
When therefore you have pulled it out entirely; then place over the wound wool saturated with wine and rose-oil, or oil; and dress it, until it is healed.
If the vein is contracted and has a tortuosity which has no swelling to its parts, and it is not as we have said according to rectitude; then you ought to find upon it at every part of its tortuosity, and its places of contraction.
Then suspend it with hooks until you have lifted it entirely; and beware at your cut over it that you do not cut the vein or wound it; for it will be difficult to lift over you, or pull out from you. Therefore, be careful.
The form of the incident by which the grape is healed.
The form of the blind vine-dresser.
The cure of it is not as in other vines; neither does it have an acute end, lest it wound the grape-vine; and its edge is blunt: for if it were acute, it would pierce through the grape-vine with its acuity: nay, there is an over-great grossness in it, as we have said.
On the drawing of blood from the leg-vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in hot countries, as in Algeria and Arabia, and in arid, hot lands, few in tenderness, that is to say, in which grass nor tree does not grow.
And perhaps it is generated in parts of the body other than the legs.Et per hunc caput manifestum est quod non omnia Vnea in corpore generantur in terris frigidis, sed in calidis et aridis: et quod non generatur in cruribus in locis frigidis: nam si generaretur in cruribus in locis frigidis, esset cum haec Vna, quae generatur in cruribus in terris calidis, una generatio, utpote quod crura sint una carne, utpote quod generatio huius Vnæ est in cruribus et generatio illius Vnæ est in cruribus.
And through this chapter it is made clear that not all veins in the body are generated in cold countries, but in hot and arid ones; and that it is not generated in the legs in cold places: for if it were generated in the legs in cold places, there would be a single generation with this vein which is generated in the legs in hot countries, since the legs are of one flesh, whereas its generation is in the legs and the generation of that other vein is also in the legs.And indeed its generation comes from the putrefaction which occurs under the skin, as happens inside bodies, such as snakes and worms and ascaris worms, and worms generated between the skin and the flesh.Et generatio quidem huius Vnæ et illius, de qua loquebamur, est una, sed in locis differt: nam haec generatur sub cutem in cruribus, et illa super carnem circa uena.
And the generation of this vein and that one, of which we spoke, is one, but it differs in place: for this is generated under the skin in the legs, and that one over the flesh around the vein.And the sign of the coming of this vein's vent is that an acute inflammation happens in the leg.Et quando venit in euntem illam Vnam, quae est circa uena, est cum ea dolor vehemens, et contricta fit in locis circumdantibus uena. Then the site is bandaged. Then the vein starts to come out of the site of the bandage, as if it were the root of a plant or an animal.
When therefore its end appears from it, then you ought to wind round upon it a fragment of lead whose weight is from a drachm keil up to drachmas two and tie the knot: and leave the lead hanging from the thigh.
Whenever therefore something goes out from it to the outside, wind that up in lead, and tie it. If it is prolonged much, then cut off its part, and wind up the remnant.Et sic facias per omnia loca quae erunt in corpore usque ad finem curationis. And do not cut it at the root until it has come out completely. Because if you cut it, it contracts and goes into the flesh, and makes an ulcer to fester and decay in that place, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore it must be treated gently and drawn out little by little until it comes out of its very end, and there is nothing left of it inside the body; and from this indeed a vein comes out in some men which is five or ten palms long. And now I have heard that one man had it come out twenty palms.
But if it is cut while you are making your examination, then insert the probe into its hole and pierce it with the probe along a long hole which is through the body, until all that is inside it is discharged of its matter; and treat the decay of the place with remedies for several days. Then cure the ulcer itself by curing ulcers.
And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the ankle-joint, or on the foot itself; and there occur to it many openings, and a branch goes out of every opening.Et sunt qui habent in ea quoddam ramum, et prope eius ramus egreditur ultra pedem usque ad genua: id quoque praefertur intra pedem: nam si extra pedem egrediatur, non est bene, quoniam facit mortuos locos.
Therefore, as we have said in the division, and with that which is put before it.
There is a disease of vermin engendered under the skin, and it is called the malady of the bowie.
This malady is called by some people the malady of the bowie because it often happens to cattle, and it is a small worm that is engendered between the skin and the flesh.
And it passes through the whole body, going up and down; and it makes its presence felt by its movements from limb to limb, until it breaks a place in the skin, and comes out.Et postea moriuntur, et cadunt in terra: sed multotiens praelium apud eorum carnem concitatissimum fit ante disrumpendam locum.
And afterwards they die, and fall to the ground; but often before they break out at a place in the skin, a very violent battle is fought in their flesh. And its generation is from the putrefaction of certain humours.Et si postea cadunt apud locum quos non disrumpere possunt, moriuntur. As happens with worms and snakes, that is, roundworms and threadworms in the belly.
And one fears its maliciousness. Because when it crawls into a body and is raised up to the head and arrives at the eye, then perhaps it opens it up and comes out, and destroys the eye; and this has happened many times.
Therefore when you wish to cure it and extract it, then that is not done unless during its movement, and his appearance to the sense.
It is necessary, therefore, to bind firmly with a strong ligature what is above it, and what is below it with strong constriction.Et postea quod est in ipsius ventri parte, id extrahere debes: et non debet esse ad modum lumbricis extrahendae, sed ut ascarides. Then dry it and take it out.
If it is embedded in the flesh, and you do not find it: then place cauterization over the spot with fire until it dies.
And what is most feared is its corruption, which corrupts the eye, as we have said.
But if you see it already having penetrated near the eye at the top of the head, then tighten under it the eyebrow with a good ligature. Then dry over it and take it out.
And the sick person should be cleansed of his bad putrid humors with dissolving medicines.
And he must guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
¶ On the incision over the disease of Nakir.
This disease is called Nakir in our land: and it is a pain that occurs in some limbs, then changes from limb to limb.
And indeed I have seen it myself, according to what I am telling you.Quam ob rem accidit haec aegritudo? How did this disease come about?I was called to a sick woman in some pains.Et post quaedam tempora inveni eam peruenisse in capite prope oculum ad terram, et non poterat recumbere nisi ad terram super faciem: And after some time I found that she had reached the top of her head near the eye to the ground, and she could not lie down except on her face to the ground: And she had stretched out her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm's tendon.Quam ob rem?
Why?And after we stayed for about an hour, I saw a swelling going up with heat, like a worm, ascending to her shoulder faster than it could be; so that it was like living silver, when it runs from place to place.Et postquaedam tempora invenit eam peruenisse ad caput prope oculus, et non poterat recumbere nisi ad terram super faciem:
And after some time I found that she had reached the top of her head near the eye, and she could not lie down except on her face to the ground: The pain therefore withdrew from that place and settled in her shoulder.Et peruenit ad caput prope oculus, et non poterat recumbere nisi ad terram super faciem:
Then he sat for one hour and crawled over the rest of his body until he reached the other arm.
He then told me that he was twitching all over his body as I had seen.
I was astonished at the speed of his movement from one limb to another. Indeed, I had never seen this disease with my own eyes in this manner before. Nevertheless, I have seen many people who experience pain that moves from one limb to another, but not as I saw it in the woman.
And I do not believe that is the case unless it is because the woman was one of those whose bodies are dry from detected blood vessels; therefore, this windiness appears to me as a result of this sensation being changed.
And it is necessary that they do not appear according to this reasoning in those who are dainty and have moist bodies with hidden blood vessels.
When then you see the cure and the patient feels the pain: then if it is apparent to you by sight, as we said, then quickly press above it and below it, and cut above it, until the windiness bound up exits; and brand the place.
But if you do not see it with your own eyes: then cure him with a shaking of the body, and with that which drives out windiness, and bind it with stinking pills, and pills of serapine, and similar things.
¶ On the Extraction of Arrows.Et si in corpore aliqua sagitta manet: et non possis ueluti extrahere, sed uti debes cauterio circa caput sagittas.
Arrows are distinguished according to their kind and also according to the parts of the body into which they fall.
There is a difference among them; for some have large points and some small; some are hollow and some blunt. And there are some which have three angles. And there are some which have a tongue-shaped point. And there are some which have stars.
But those which fall into the limbs of the body are distinguished according to two forms. For either the limbs are hollow, such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, bowels, bladder, and similar; or they are solid, such as: Now when a wound appears in one of these limbs and you see the signs of death which I am going to describe for you, then you must extract that arrow from them, for death will follow if it is not removed, unless you act promptly. And when these bad signs are not apparent and the arrow is not deeply embedded in the limb, then extract it and treat the wound.
For when an arrow strikes the brain and pierces the bone and emerges from the hole at the top of the skull, there are signs that something is wrong in the brain: violent vomiting, blindness, dizziness, redness in the eyes, swollen face, blue lips, spasms, muddled thinking, and vomiting of bile. Blood may also flow from the nose or ears. Speech may be lost and the voice destroyed. A white fluid like pus will flow from the wound. It will also discharge a fluid similar to blood.And if the brain is wounded in its upper part, and the signs that I have mentioned appear, then it is certain that death will follow unless you act promptly.
If you see these signs, refrain from treatment and extract the arrow if it has not emerged on its own.Et si in parte media membrorum cadit sagitta, sunt de eius signis: uertigo, et rubedo oculorum, et scotomia, et spasmus, et exitus sanguinis per nasum.
The signs of an arrow that has hit the heart are these: it is close to the left nipple; and when you feel it it feels as if it were fixed in a hard object, not in an empty one. And perhaps the arrow is moved with a movement similar to that of the pulse; and black blood flows from the wound. This is followed by coldness in the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting. Know then that death is at hand without a doubt.
And the sign of an arrow when it wounds the lung, is the issue of frothy blood from the wound; and the vehemence which follows chokes the throat, and the colour of the patient changes. And he breathes out a great deep breath, and seeks the attraction of cold air.Et post modicum moritur.
If the arrow falls on the membrane which is in the breast, then it is near the little ribs; and a great panting takes place with violent pain, with sighing; and all the limbs of the arms are moved.Et postea moritur.
And if an arrow has fallen into the belly, then perhaps something undigested will come out of the wound from food.
And if an arrow has fallen into the belly, and it is stuck in there: something like faeces or bile will come out of the wound, or intestine which has already been disrupted. There is therefore no hope for a cure for him, nor any hope for the removal of the arrow.
If an arrow has fallen into the bladder and urine comes out of it, and there is a worse pain for the sick man then you should know that it is mortal.
The other parts, however, such as the face, and neck, and throat, and shoulder-blade, and helper, and back vertebrae, and breastbone, and hip, and leg, and their like of the limbs are healed according to several dispositions: when the arrow has not found an artery or nerve; and it is not a poisonous arrow.
And I tell you that I have seen with my own eyes that these arrows exist, so that you may understand this concerning your cure.
Now what happened was that an arrow fell on a man in the tear gland of his eye, at the root of his nose. So I extracted it from him on the other side, under the fat of his ear; and he was healed, and no harm befell him in his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had fallen on him in the fat of his eye under the lower eyelid; and the arrow was already concealed, and I did not obtain anything from it except its tip, with which it adhered to the wood: and it was a large arrow from the arrows of Turkish bows, with a blunt iron, in which there are no ears.
So the Jew was healed, and no harm befell his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian's throat.
And it was an Arabic arrow, and is that one which has ears. So I made an incision over it between two tendons; and it was already submerged in his throat. I extracted it with her, and so the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who had fallen into his belly, and we thought that he would die from it.
And so after thirty days had passed and nothing changed about his condition from this treatment, I took to the arrow, and I probed it and extracted it, and he was healed and no evil accident happened to him.
And I saw a man to whom an arrow had fallen on his back and the wound was consolidated there. And so after seven years, the arrow came out at the root of his hip.Et quodam modo uidi uirum cui cecidit sagitta in latus eius, et non habebat ibi uitium nisi solum ad saginem.
And I saw a woman to whom an arrow had fallen into her belly and the wound was consolidated there, and the arrow remained inside her, and nothing changed about her condition, and the woman did not find any harm in any of her natural functions.Et uidi aliam mulierem cui cecidit sagitta in latus eius, et non habebat ibi uitium nisi ad carnem solam.
And I saw another woman to whom an arrow had fallen on her side and there was no exit for it except through the skin alone. And I saw another man to whom an arrow had fallen on his face; and the wound consolidated, and it remained without finding him much pain, and similar to these many.Et uidi alios multos qui habuerunt sagitta in corpore suo, et non potuerunt extrahere eam: et perierunt ex dolore eorum, quia non habuerunt medicum experientem qui potuisset extrahere eam.
And I extracted an arrow from a prince of the king's men, which had fallen on his nose and turned slightly towards the right; and the whole arrow was concealed.Et uidi alios multos qui habuerunt sagitta in corpore suo, et non potuerunt extrahere eam: et perierunt ex dolore eorum, quia non habuerunt medicum experientem qui potuisset extrahere eam.
I was therefore called to his treatment after the arrow fell until three days had passed.Et uidi sagittae remansisse in corpore suo multos dies post casum eius, et non possuit extrahere eam per omnes homines qui habuerunt experientiam medicinam. I therefore found the wound of the arrow tight and deep.
I therefore probed it with a fine probe, but did not feel anything; and indeed he himself perceived a pricking and pain under his right ear. I expected that this pricking was from the tip of the arrow.
I therefore applied a plaster to the place where there was an attractive and digestive power, trusting that the wound would heal up and I should see the sign of the arrow, so as to cut over it; and this did not happen: for there occurred no accident in the place showing that the arrow had been there.
I therefore persevered for many days with the plaster upon him; and no accident occurred, but the wound healed up meanwhile; and he remained weak from the extraction of it through a space of days, until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose. And he told me this story.
And he told me this story. I therefore put on the wound sharp and corrosive medicine for many days, until it was opened; and probed it with a probe, and felt the tip of the arrow which adhered to the wood.
Then I continued to apply the acute medicine until the wound was opened through it; and after four months had passed away with me.
Then when the wound was enlarged and possible for me to insert a forceps into it, and move it, and did not yield to be extracted: then I did not cease probing it and devising about it with the ways of art, until one day I began upon it with properly made forceps, according as their shape came at the end of the handle, until I extracted it. Then I restored the wound.Et sic curauit illum diuersis diebus.
And so he was healed in various days And indeed the physicians judge that cartilage of the nose is not restored. I therefore restored it; and the wound was healed, and he was cured with entire health and no harm at all.
And I will tell you the quality of the extraction of certain arrows; put that rule and its meaning on top of what I did not say.
Because the parts of this art and their distinctions are not embraced with the narration: nor does that book embrace it, and a wise artist compares a little with a lot: and with what is present, on what is absent; and he finds a new operation, and a new instrument at the descent of foreign things in this art when they happen.
I therefore say that arrows do not come out of the limbs to which they are fixed, unless according to two methods. Or by attraction from the place where it entered.Quod si intraverit cum capite in locum ubi non possit procedere nisi extraheratur capite: vel cum punta in locum ubi non possit procedere nisi extraheratur punta. Or the contrary of the other part.Si itaque intraverit capite, extrahatur capite: et si intraverit punta, extrahatur punta.
And that which comes out where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy place; and it is drawn and comes out. Vel est sagitta procedens per os, vel per narem, vel per oculum, vel per auriculam: et procedit ad extra, sed non potest procedere nisi capite extrahatur.
What if it does not obey by being pulled out from the hour that it fell: then you have to leave it for several days until the flesh inside its socket rots and the attraction of it and its movement cease.
And similarly if it is stuck in the bone and does not obey you to come out, then also leave it for several days and keep pulling and moving it every day until it comes out.
If it does not obey you to come out after a few days, then you must drill holes into the socket of the arrow in the bone from every part with a thin drill until the arrows spread open.Et post dies quidam, cum tibi obedit ad exitum, et non possit resistere sagitta, ad haec perfora circumitum sagittae, donec egreditur: sed non omnem sagittam in medio osse perferas, nisi necesse sit, ne forte dissecas ossa. And after a certain number of days, when it obeys you to come out and cannot resist the arrow, then drill into the socket of the arrow until it comes out; but do not drill through every arrow in the middle of the bone unless it is necessary, lest you split the bones.Then pull it and extract it.
But if the arrow is now hidden in some part of the body, and is concealed and hidden from sense; then seek it with a probe. Nam si sagitta peruenit ad sifach, tunc mors non prolongatur ei. If you feel it, then draw it out with such instruments as are fit for its extraction. Nam si sagitta peruenit ad sifach, tunc mors non prolongatur ei.
If you cannot get at it on account of the constriction of the wound, and on account of the length of the arrow in its depth; and there is no bone, nor nerve, nor vein there; then apply remedies upon it, until the wound be enlarged, and it be possible to extract the arrow.
If there are ears by which it is held fast, then free the flesh fixed upon them on every side, with every remedy that you can; and apply remedies, if the flesh will not yield to a mere relaxation of the ears, and a contortion of them, until it gives way. Nam si sagitta peruenit ad sifach, tunc mors non prolongatur ei.
And when you are applying the extraction of the arrow, in whatever place it may be, then make use of the contortion of your hand with forceps upon all sides, until you make it come out; and with the most subtle subtlety, lest the arrow should break, and its extraction become difficult for you.
If you cannot get it out at once, then leave it for some days, until those parts about it putrefy. Nam si sagitta peruenit ad sifach, tunc mors non prolongatur ei. Nam si peruenit ad os, et uenit in eum, qui moritur: tunc mortis cause est pernicies ossis, et mortifera eius sagitta. Then stitch it up again, for if the flow of blood causes you any problems then apply what we have said about curing in its own chapter; and guard your strength from cutting a vein or nerve or tendon.
And apply the trick in every way you can to draw out the arrow; and let it be with ease or slowness or swiftness or force, just as I have told you.
And when you draw out the arrow, it is necessary that its tip be feeble according to the shape which it had at the moment of the arrow's impact. For it is more likely. But if you are not able to do this, then apply what you can according to the shapes.
Now the arrow which exits from the opposite side or is proceeding towards that end, or is causing some protuberance at the tip of the arrow as it presses outward through the skin, and you see it protruding - cut above this, and let the incision be according to what the forceps will hold.
Then draw out the arrow; for its tip is made easier for exit.
But if it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand according to its roundness until the arrow presses and widens for itself; then draw it out.Et quod restat ex ea, extrahe per aliam incisionem.
And if there is anything remaining in it, extract it by another incision. And if not, let it be for a few days; then repeat the operation until it comes out.
But if the arrow's wood is in it, then push it along with this.
But if the wood has broken off and you wish to apply pressure, then insert a hollow instrument so that its hollow end may enter into the tail of the arrow; then push it along with this.Quod quidem non facias nisi quando vis Sagittae egrediatur: nam si retinetur in ea, non trahes eam per concauitatem, sed dimittas.
If the arrowhead is concave, then push it with an instrument inserted into it. The arrow, indeed, is loosened by means of that instrument.
If the arrow is poisoned, then you must cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, if it is possible for you to do so. Then treat that with whatever is appropriate for such a thing.
If the arrow is falling into the breast, or into the belly, or into the gullet, or into the side; and it is near to what you are touching with the tent, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut, and beware of cutting a vein, or nerve, and extract it.
Then dress the wound, if you see fit, and treat it until it is healed.
And this is the shape of forceps, by which arrows are extracted.
Let their ends be like a bird's beak, made of iron: when they grasp the arrow shaft, they will not let go.
And from these there are many forms, large and small, and medium, according to the quantity of the magnitude of the arrow, and smallness of it, and amplitude of the wound, and tightness of it.
Form of instrument for pushing in a concave wound.
And form of instrument for pushing in a deaf wound.
This is the end of a deaf person as far as a radius, so that its entrance into the concave arrow may be loosened and pushed with it.
Of phlebotomy, or opening veins.¶ When you open a vein, do not place your finger on it, so as to prevent the blood from issuing out; but when it has been opened, press both sides of it, until the flow has ceased; then apply a styptic, and cover it with a bandage.
Of veins to be opened, there are thirty, the practice of which is usual in the body.Quod si quaestus uenarum est necessarius, et non possunt facere apud se solutiis: ad uenam prima prope cor.
There are sixteen vessels in the head: two pulsating veins which lie behind the ears, called the Two Herbs; two arteries visible in the two temples; and two veins lying in the tear ducts of both eyes, called the Spectators; a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead; and a vein located at the end of the nose. And two Goats, which are in the neck. And two veins that are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins that are in the lower lip. And these are the veins which are called Algecherich. And two veins under the tongue.
Now as for those veins that are bled in the arms, there are five veins in each arm: three above and two below the bend of the elbow, one of which is called the Vein of the Cubit. And all these are visible. There are also two veins on top of the shoulder and two under the armpit.
One is the Cephalica vein, which is on the side of the head; this the common people call the Vein of the Head. It has a branch which extends towards the neck and another which goes down into the chest. Its starting point is at the angle of the jaw below the ear, from where it descends along the side of the neck in front of the ear. And the Dark one.The Cephalica vein has two branches: one towards the neck and the other towards the chest. The Fusca vein has two branches which go to the shoulder and armpit. These three veins have no connection with each other except through the Cephalica vein. The Fusca vein is the largest of all the veins and extends from the angle of the jaw along the side of the neck in front of the ear down into the chest. It has a branch towards the shoulder and another towards the armpit, both of which are called the Veins of the Shoulder. And there is a Middle vein composed of a branch of the Basilic vein and a branch of the Cephalica vein; this the common people call the Vein of the Body. It has branches to all parts of the body, i.e., to the shoulder, armpit, chest, back, arms, hands, abdomen, groin, genitals, legs and feet.It receives blood from all these parts and returns it to the heart. And the Basilic vein is situated on the medial side of the arm; it is also called the Tickler. It has two branches, one towards the shoulder and the other towards the armpit. It receives blood from all parts of the body and returns it to the heart except for the head, neck, chest and back which are served by the Cephalica vein and its branches.The Basilic vein receives blood from the elbow, forearm, hand, wrist, fingers and palm. And this vein is called by the common people the Vein of the Womb. It has a branch towards the abdomen and another towards the groin; it receives blood from these parts and returns it to the heart.The Basilic vein receives blood from the groin, thigh, knee, calf, ankle, foot and toes; it returns this blood to the heart through two branches which go towards the armpit. And the vein of the arm is placed on top of the cubit; and it is that one through which bloodletting is performed, and it is that one which appears above the palm with a clear manifestation.
And the Salvatrice: And it is a vein which is between the ring finger and the little finger; and it has two branches.
And in the leg and in the foot there are three veins. One of them is which is below the bend of the thumb from the side of the cubit. And the second is the Saphena; and its location is at the heel from the domestic side.Et tertia uena est quae traxit pedem ad laterem syluestrem. And the third vein is which draws the foot to the side of the cubit. And the vein of the back; and its location is at the heel from the side of the cubit.
And in the other leg there are three veins similar to those.Et prima uena est quae est sub genua ex latere syluestri.
And the first vein is which is below the knee from the side of the cubit.§ On bloodletting from two veins after the ears.Et secunda est quae est sub genua ex latere domestico.
And the second is which is below the knee from the domestic side. However, bloodletting from two veins which are after the ears is suitable for old catarrhs and migraine and sahafati and old bad sores of the head.Et tertia uena est quae est sub pedem ex latere syluestri.
And the third vein is which is below the foot from the side of the cubit. And the quality of bloodletting it is according to what I relate.Quapropter postea quod dixi de uenis post Aures, loquendo de uenis sub genua, et pedes, et crure, quae dicuntur sub tibiae. Therefore after that which I have said about veins after the ears, speaking about veins below the knee and foot and leg, which are called below the tibia. And it is, so that the head of the sick person is shaved; and his occiput is rubbed in the place of two veins with a rough cloth with good friction.Et postea faciuntur fricationes cum unguento balsamico super locum uenarum usque ad terram, et super caput eius, quod est super uenam: et non debet esse super caput eius panni, ne tangatur caput eius. Then massage is done with balsamic ointment over the place of the veins down to the earth, and over his head which is over the vein; and there should not be a cloth over his head so that it does not touch his head. Then the sick person tightens his neck with a girdle until two veins appear.Et faciat urina et fiet salus infirmi. And their locations are behind the ears in two sunken places of the head. Therefore seek them with your finger, and when you feel their pulse underneath your finger, mark those spots with a cautery.
Then take the phlebotomy knife, and it is that one which is called the Incision Knife. Then insert it under the vein in the incision until the phlebotomy needle reaches the jaw. Then lift your hand with the vein and skin up to the upper part, and cut the vein with the skin in an inclined incision. And let the length of the incision be two joined finger widths, or about that; and cause to come out of the blood as much as you see fit.
Then tie it with ligatures, and leave it until it is healed.
And now it precedes in the beginning of the book the incision of them, and their cauterization.
However, the bleeding of two Arteries which are in the two temples, is for ancient migraine: and for a continuous headache, and for constant obduracy, and for the flow of acute overflowings to the eyes.
And the quality of bleeding them is according to what I tell you.Take a bloodletting knife which is made thus: its edge should be a little curved, and its point turned inward, like the letter sigma; its length two finger widths, or about that; and its cutting edge as sharp as possible. Let the sick person hold his neck much stretched out, until two veins appear in a manifest appearance of sensation; and their pulse be demonstrated under your finger.Then take the bloodletting knife, and insert it beneath one of the veins, slanting inwardly and upward toward the other vein, so that its point may lie between them; and let its edge touch the skin only slightly, not cutting deeply into it. Then mark the spots with a cautery.And when you have made the incision, let the person hold his head erect for two or three days; but on the fourth day, let him bend it down and move it about freely.
Then lift the skin above the vein upward with your index finger, and insert the phlebotomy needle beneath it, inclining upward; and lift the vein upward.And if you see any blood coming out beneath the needle from that place, stop it with your finger; but if none comes out, lift the vein higher up and try again until some does come out. And cut it, as you did with the other two veins: and make the blood flow according to your need.
Then release the patient's constriction, and put your finger on the vein for an hour. Afterwards, put a bandage and some cotton wool on it, and tighten it from above with a strong constriction: and leave it until the patient is healed.
And now a reminder of these things has gone before, and their incision and extraction at the beginning of the book.
Indeed, the cause of phlebotomy of the frontal vein is after phlebotomy of the Cephalic, for ancient diseases of the face: and for a migraine, and redness: and foul ulcers.Et si in incisia uenae frontis sanguis fluat liberius, et non contineatur: incide eam uanam aliam: et fac ut sanguis fluere desistat.
And if in the incision of the frontal vein the blood flows freely, and is not staunched: cut it again another vein: and make the blood cease to flow.And the quality of its phlebotomy is, according to what I tell you. Let the patient stretch his neck with his chin, until the vein appears.Et si non possit apparere: stet cum capite reclinato ad uenam: et munda locum super eam: et incide eam cum scalpelio. And if he cannot appear: let him stand with his head bent towards the vein: and clean the place above it: and cut it with a scalpel.Then take the instrument which is named Fossorium.Et pone super uenam, et trahe eam usque ad concavum fossoriae, donec apparere puluis intra eam.
Place the sharp point that is on the head of the trocar over the vein and strike it with a hammer or other instrument in this way; then let the blood flow as much as you want. Then open the patient's wound and close it until it heals.
And sometimes with a wide bloodletting instrument. However, it must not be a sharp-pointed bloodletting instrument like the others, but rather one with a broad point. And let them bloodlet her according to her fainting; for the mouth is near, and perhaps the bloodletting instrument will break when it is fine.
The vein of the two tear ducts of the two eyes is for an eye affected by scabies and redness; and a lump in the eye, and diseases of the face.
And the quality of their bloodletting is to make the patient's neck tight with the tool. Then you shall bloodlet them; and you shall stand over his head.
And let the bloodletting be according to a slight slant, with a small bloodletting instrument, made a little broader because there is no flesh in that place.Et si sanguis fluxerit multum, percutiant eam cum pectine paruo: et dimittant eam, donec sanetur. If indeed the bloodletting instrument is fine-pointed, it might break. And if the blood flows much, let them strike her with a small hammer; and let them leave her until she heals.
Then let the blood flow as much as you need.And let him stand over her head. And place a poultice on them, and tie them up for one night, and open them.
The bloodletting of the nose veins brings relief from acute fever, and severe headache, and diseases of the face, especially when they are old.Et si sanguis uenarum Nasi non currit, percutiant eam pectine usque ad sanguinem: et soluat eam donec sanetur: nam sanguis multum in naso est bonum contra febrem acutam.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is such that it tightens the weak neck. Then hold his nose with your left hand, and take a fine, long phlebotomy, and fix it in the middle of its lip, between that which divides the nose according to its straightness. Because the vein does not appear to sight there, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
And you must slightly press your hand with the phlebotomy: and cause blood to run out according to your need. Then ligature it for one night. For it is restored quickly.
But the use of Guidegi's phlebotomy is to restrict panting and to arrest leprosy and melancholy diseases and impetigo and malignant ulcers and festering sores, that is, herpes.
And the quality of them is such that it tightens the weak neck beneath both ears with a ligature: and let the operator stand over the head of the patient, and the patient be sitting on a seat.Et si non possit sedere per infirmitatem suam, stetque prostratus super lepadum uel cum panno serico et super lino sub capite suo, et ubi uenit ad collem qui est in medio collum.
And if he cannot sit because of his infirmity, let him lie prostrate on a mat or with silk and linen cloth under his head, and when he comes to the hill which is in the middle of his neck, then phlebotomize the vein a little with a large phlebotomy.Et tene eum per nasum et per oculos, et faciat eum sanguis fluere secundum necessitatem suam, et super lino sub capite stet ut non debeat verti: quia si uertatur sanguis uenit ad collem sub collo et est mortalis. And hold him by the nose and the eyes, and let blood flow according to his need, and let him stand on the linen under his head so that he may not bend over: for if he bends over the blood comes to the hill under the neck and is lethal.Then withdraw a tempered quantity of blood or according to what you see is required for it.Et si est in eius collo uena uisibile, lige eam per collum sub medio et super omnia per caput, et stet artifex super lepadum et infirmus super sedem suam: et tene eum ut non vertat caput. Then do likewise with another vein.
Then loosen the ligament and tighten both veins in the middle ligature so that the weak one is not singed. And let it be until morning.Et si quando resectas aliam uenam, incisasque eam superuenerem: fac etiam sicut prius. And if when you cut one vein and slit it lengthwise, do likewise with the other vein. For the wound heals.
Of phlebotomy of veins [by] Albucasis.Deinceps: ut sanes lymphas, fac in hac uia. Thereupon, so that you may heal the lymphs, proceed as follows.But Albucasis is an aid for phlebotomy of veins, because it draws out blood from the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and splits of the lips and bad sores also in the nose and around it.Et si quando resectas aliam uenam, incisasque eam superuenerem: fac etiam sicut prius.
And its quality is that you make the sick man sit before you and tighten his neck with a ligature.Et tene uenam superuenerem in tua manu, et trahe eam ad te usque quasi ad medianam arteriam: deinde reseces eam cum lacinula. Then hold the vein lengthwise in your hand and pull it towards you up to about the middle artery; then cut it with a ligature.Thereafter open his lip and look at two veins, one of which is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left, and their indication by means of the darkness of both.Et si quaestus fuit uenam in medio labii: reseces eam per medium, et facis sicut prius. And that is true: because around their circumferences there are minute black veins. Therefore cut both with an inward cutting.
If however doubt is upon you, and you do not know which is which: then make your cut on the larger one, and the more obvious one.
And likewise do with the two veins which are in the upper lip: and indeed most often custom runs with that: and cut the two veins which are in the lower lip.Et intra inter nasum, fac incisionem bene ad modum unius digitus, intra labra, ubi solitam esse ranam.
¶ Of phlebotomy Under the tongue after phlebotomy of the head.Post phlebotomiam Cephalicum, fac deinde phlebotomiam venarum sub linguae: ut animus remittatur, et sanguis in corpore distendo possit. However the phlebotomy of the two veins which are under the tongue, is that the phlebotomy of the head is for the inflammation which is in the throat, and the ailment of the uvula, and ailments of the mouth.Et uerum est quod si non sit post phlebotomiam Cephalicum sanguis ad mensem, sed ad duos menses, aut ad tres: et si uenae sub linguae non distendantur, et sanguis in corpore non possit effluere per eam uiam, et per aliam uiam qua solitus est, nisi post phlebotomiam Cephalicum.
And it is true that if there is not after the phlebotomy of the head blood to a month, but to two months, or to three: and if the veins under the tongue do not distend, and blood in the body cannot flow out through that way, and through another way where he is used, unless after the phlebotomy of the head. And the quality of phlebotomizing them is that it sits weak between your hands before the sun: and examine her tongue, and look under the tongue from one side of it a vein, and from its other side a vein: and the color of both to blackness.Et si in ea parte quae est ad latum uenam, et ad longum, non sit ad nigredinem, sed ad albinum: et si in ea parte quae est ad angustiam uenam, et ad longum, non sit ad albinum, sed ad nigritudinem, non est bonum signum, sed malum.
Therefore, when you bleed them with the scalpel, keep your hand from touching the wound. For beneath it are arteries and perhaps there will be a flow of blood out of those arteries.
The three veins which are bled at the elbow, are those whose bleeding has become customary for all people.
And their bleeding is done according to two methods. Namque una venam percutit ad modum puncturae et facit in ea incisiomem, ut sanguis fluat; Or he pierces the vein with a large myrtle-wood venesection instrument and makes an incision in it so that blood can flow out; or he pricks it with the wide end of a phlebotomy instrument, or widens it with a knife on the underside, or he cuts it with a scalpel, which is called Alnesil. And this is its form. Nam primum facit in cubito puncturam ad modum venesectionis cum phlebotomo latissimo et profundissimis:
And then he makes another puncture against it at the elbow with a very wide venesection instrument, which is held in the hand; and from these there are wide and thin species according to the width of the veins and their constriction. The form of the myrtle-wood phlebotomy instrument is wide, as you see. Et facit tertiam puncturam contra eam ad modum venesectionis cum phlebotomo latissimo et profundissimis: And he makes a third puncture against it with a very wide and deepest venesection instrument; and it is fit for opening hollow, full, proceeding, apparent, thick veins, and those which contain thick blood.
And this phlebotomy instrument is narrower at the end. Nam si uteratur phlebotomo latissimo ad modum venesectionis, et percutiat uenam concauam, plenum, procedens apparens: facit puncturam contra eam cum phlebotomo minoris latitudinis:
For if he uses a very wide venesection instrument and pierces a hollow, full, proceeding vein; then he makes a puncture against it with a narrower phlebotomy instrument: and it is fit for bleeding subtle veins which contain yellow blood.Et si uenam inueniuntur, ut supra diximus, ut sit cum sanguine citrino subtili et percutiat eam ad modum venesectionis cum phlebotomo latissimo: facit puncturam contra eam cum phlebotomo latissimo:
But of these three veins, one is sufficient for phlebotomy. Because it draws blood from the diseases which are under the throat and neck, from that which follows the breast, and belly; and it is convenient for the phlebotomist to draw this with a phlebotomy, so that he may take heed and be over fear because there is an artery under it. If therefore he mistakes, and adds to the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will strike that artery, and there will occur a flow of blood.Et quia prope est sinus, qui uersat nasum, et oculum: et si in illo punctu addit, ut supra dictum est, sanguis profluit per os et nares; sed uelociter curatur. Therefore, let it not be bled with a blood-letting instrument; but dry it up with alum.
If this does not appear with a manifest appearance of the palace, then one must alienate it and replace it with another, or look for some branch of it; or in its place use a thread of the arm. For it is manifest, and dry it up with the blood-letting instrument of Anesil, as we have said.
But if you wish to blood-let from it, then before the binding of the arm, touch the spot until you know the pulse point. Then mark the spot with cautery, afterwards the arm, and dry up the vein by a concave incision with the blood-letting instrument of Anesil, as we have said. And beware lest the blow fall through the space from the place of the artery.Si autem pulsus non apparuerit manifestus in locis, et non est apparens ad tangentes, sicut diximus:
And when you see, as you are tying a ligature, inflammation at the spot which you have marked with caustic, then that inflammation is inflammation of an artery: therefore let it be.
If you see blood rising in a vein, as does the urine of a child, and the blood is thin, red: then know that it is from arterial blood. Then therefore quickly put your finger over that spot for a long time, then take away your finger. If then the blood is cut off (for it is often cut off), then tie the arm and leave it; and let the sick man beware of its motion, and let him be above his fear.
And let him not move it for a few days, until it is healed.
But if the blood does not stop and you are defeated, and there is no medicine present with you at that moment, then cut the artery, if it appears to you.Et non moueas locum in quo fuit caustica, donec inflatio desit. And do not move the spot where the cautery was used until the inflammation goes away. For its ends are cramped and the blood is cut off.Et non facias hanc operacionem nisi cum medicina praesens: nam periculum est in ea, et multotiens mortem accipere.
Or take a peel of fig tree and find it; take half of it and bind it onto the vein with a ligature and bandages until another day.
Then if the blood is stanched, that is good. And if not: then treat it again with that which preceded it in memory from the place of the dust which caused the flow of blood; and the cutting off of its blood is not difficult in many dispositions, because of the smallness of the wound, and the possibility of the ligature from the arm.
The vein of the Dark Vein however is a phlebotomy instrument, which draws blood from the upper part of the head and lower part of the body; therefore because it is composed out of the Basilic Vein, and the Cephalic Vein, as we have said.
And it behooves the phlebotomist to be upon his guard from phlebotomy of it, because under it is a nerve. If then he adds to the pricking of the phlebotomy, and finds the nerve, it happens in it paralysis, and the cure of it is made difficult, and perhaps it is not cured altogether.Et si addit postea in punctura eius, et non est neruus sub ea: fit in ea fluxus sanguinis per magna spatia corporis: propterea quod trahit sanguinem ex brachio, et absciso sanguinis eius non possunt esse ad mensem, nisi ad duos menses.
And if he adds afterwards to the pricking of it, and the nerve is not under it: a flow of blood happens in it throughout great spaces of the body; because it draws blood from the arm, and after the cutting off of its blood they cannot be for a month, unless for two months. And this nerve frequently appears to sensation. But if it is concealed in certain men, and is subtle, and does not appear: then you ought to place your phlebotomy where you phlebotomize it, with the Alnasil, and cutting off of nerves with your strength.Et si apparet sensui, et non possit ferri ad mensem, nisi ad duos menses, tunc oportet ut ponas sectionem tuam in parte brachii, ubi est nervus sub ea, qua sectionem facis, cum puluillis et ligamento:
If the vein is between two nerves then find the vein lengthwise.Et si absciditur sanguis eius ut debet sub eo, qui traxit eum: et uultus eius est ut celeriter curaritur, qua uena traxit eum, cum puluillis et ligamento, donec diem alterum.
Of the good Head-bandage. The phlebotomy of the cephalic veinlet is useful because it draws blood from the head and brings relief to ailments of the eyes.
And it is right in this veinlet, if you wish, that you should draw blood by puncturing with a phlebotomy needle of olive or of myrtle; for it is safer than all other veins because there is no great artery or nerve beneath it.
However, you should draw blood with the needle only from the head of the lizard and look for a tender spot; and it will not hurt if, on first striking, you do not find such a spot, but return to it several times with the phlebotomy.
However, perhaps there will be an inflammation in some people when blood is not drawn on the first striking, but this does them no harm whatever.
On the usefulness of phlebotomy and the precautions to be observed in its practice. The quality then and the accidents of phlebotomy are such that you ought to think about their correction.Non est enim uoluntarius per se uel non: sed ex conditione, ut quae sit ex sua, uariatur: sicut et oculus uisum, si in sua conditione sit, et non ex sua: nam pro suo uiso non ualet.
Phlebotomy is not to be administered save in the interest of health, and its continuance and precaution against the approach of diseases.First then of this you ought to know, that phlebotomy is not administered save in the interest of health, and its continuance and precaution against the approach of diseases.
And let phlebotomy be performed on one of three veins which are in the elbow, namely, the cephalic, and the dark, and the basilic.Et si adveniat qualitas de qua oportet ut phlebotomias, et non possit per phlebotomiam fieri per se uel non, sed per medicamenta, aut etiam per eius administrationem, sicut et oculum ualere, et non potest per oculum ualere per se uel non, sed per oculo-salua, ita tibi debet esse de phlebotomia. And in order that bloodletting be done at the beginning of Spring after fasting, in Summer, Autumn and Winter after a meal when signs of fullness appear.
And let bloodletting be done on the first or third day, after three hours have passed [since sunrise].
But bloodletting which is administered in diseases has no set time; but whenever convenience and necessity demand it, at night or day, and at every hour and at all times.
And children should not be bled until they are fourteen years old.Si autem aliquis praecipere uoluerit sanguinem faciendum in die festiua, non debet faci re eam ante quam sunt transitae tres horae post solis ortum: sed potest faci re post tres illa horas. Nor should a pregnant woman be bled except from the fourth month until the seventh.Et non oportet sanguinem faci re etiam per uulnera, donec fiant de ieiunio post octo dies: sed potest faci re post octo illa dies. Nor should old men be bloodlet, who have already passed sixty years.
When someone wants to be bloodlet for whatever reason, it is appropriate that he cleanse his intestines before the bloodletting with a gentle enema, if there is much waste retained in them; so that the veins are not drawn by putrid superabundances of intestines injuring the principal members at the time of bloodletting.
Nor should a patient be bloodlet when overcome by nausea, that is, by saturation; nor while belching, nor going out of drunkenness, until that is removed from them. Nor the weak with dropsy.
And bloodletting must be avoided again after a colic passion, and vomiting, and a flux of the belly, and multiplication of coitus, and labor and exercise, and vigils, and fasting, and all that dissolves strength from bodily thing or animal.Et non phlebotomentur senes, qui iam pertransierunt sexaginta annos.
Then consider the subtlety of the humors before that, if the blood is thick with foods and drinks, and medicines; if possible for him that.Et sic faciendum est ante omnia ueterum sanguem, et novum sanguinem, et superfluitatem.
Then let him enter a bath, if something does not prohibit it; or exercise himself by some exercise, that the blood may be subtilized.Et mox post balneum ueniat ad phlebotomam.
And put the bleeding in his chest around the third of the day, as we have said; and try to evacuate his chest that day from all bad accidents of animals: such as tightness, and anger, and fear; and from all bodily accidents, such as labor, and pain, and superfluities, and their like.
And let him have present those things whose use custom has made necessary for men from aromaticity, and odorant, and tripe, and the like, by as much possibility as he can.
Then let the phlebotomist sit upon a stool, which is higher than the phlebotomy-stool: afterwards he shall draw out his arm, and the phlebotomist shall rub it with his hand twice, or thrice. Then let him tie the vein with a ligature, and wind it twice.
And let the constriction be temperate, for when the constriction is unequal, or by superfluity in the constriction, then it prevents the flow of blood; or in relaxation, then also it prevents the flow of blood.Quo facto postea sic uti debet phlebotomator: postea cum ligatura superligata sit, tunc debet trahere ligaturam usque ad os phlebotomandi, et percutere eum qui phlebotomatur in fronte aut in mento.
Then afterwards the phlebotomist must use it thus: then when the ligature is over-tied, he ought to draw the ligature up to the mouth of the phlebotomy, and tap him who is being bled on the forehead or on the chin.Then after constriction, it behoves the phlebotomed to rub his hands together simultaneously until they are inflated, and become manifest to the sense.
Then the phlebotomist shall wipe the phlebotomy with a little old oil, properly.Postea stetitque sicuti antea usque ad tertiam diei: et si necessitas post haec exigat, faciat iterum sicut diximus.
Then he should place his left-hand index finger on the vein under the spot where he wants to perform the phlebotomy gently so that the vein does not escape and the incision is not damaged. Because the veins are as unsteady as a fleeing chord during phlebotomy and among them is one that is full of windiness; and when you place the phlebotomy on it, it contracts under the phlebotomy and deceives the phlebotomist, and he does not open the vein; and if he opens it, it is tight. Therefore it is necessary for the phlebotomist to be firm and careful about all these things.
Then he should deposit the phlebotomy. If therefore the vein is opened from one blow, then it is good. And if not, then he should repeat it with another blow a little under that spot or above it with quickness; if the spot is not swollen.
If it is swollen, or grows feeble, then leave him for a day or two days; and do not tighten the ligature.Quia si facit, postea uenam non inveniet. Because if he does, later he will not find the vein. Perhaps indeed the swelling will be hot.Et non faciat in ea uenula cum festinatione: sed faciat ligaturem super eam, et dimitta eum die, aut duobus diebus: et mox iteret ad illum. Do not enter a bath.
Then let him have bloodletting, if he loves it.
If the opening is small, or if the blood flows gently: and you fear that a quantity will not come out of the blood as you wish: then repeat the bloodletting in the very orifice according to the properness, and add something little in the operation.
And do that with hastiness before he goes to sleep, for a closed up place is common among many men according to the little operation.
If therefore you see that he is already closed up, then do not repeat at all upon him, for it does not excuse anything with you. And put something of the faeces of oil upon him, because he lightens the flow of blood. And is better in this place than the oil itself and than other oils.
And likewise use the faeces of oil in all your bloodletting where you bloodlet veins according to the prohibition of the flow of blood; and they do it tyrian purple and sagenia, when one is put from these out of a place.
For blood is made subtle and dissolved when it is thick.
But if a great closing up happens in the place of bloodletting, for it often happens, especially to him who is not bloodlet except that mode, or the opening of the vein is small, then hasten and put over the place sponge infused in water and salt, made warm a little: and squeeze it an hour: for it is dissolved.
And one ought to do that after the going out of blood from the vein itself, with its complement, or from another vein.
But if something remains in the place after days of blackness, or greenness, that does not hurt; and if you wish, put over it something of aloe, or of myrrh dissolved: or something out of the juice of mint-leaf, that is, calaminth or similar to that.
And indeed many times closing up and eminences happen in bloodletting of basilic vein.Et si uides locum uenas paruo, et non currit sanguis nisi subtile: sed uidebis aliquid, ut iteret apostematum, ponite super locum ex succo de apium graveolens: et si per dies tres iterabit apostemata, itera postea phlebotomiam ibidem.
Therefore, put your hand over it; if then you find softness under your pressure on it, then that protuberance is diseased. So take care to place over it something of those things we have mentioned above. For perhaps blood will flow from the artery.
But make an ointment for her with that which has astringency to harden the place. Then take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
And it behooves that you extract from every person blood according to the quantity of his strength. And what appears in the color is shining over the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it go out until it becomes red; and likewise, if you see it is thick, then let it go until it thins down; and similarly, if it is sharp, let that be taken away until its sharpness is removed.
And it is necessary for that person who is full, strong, and needs the extraction of blood at one time, to enlarge the incision of the vein, and it must be wide; and in that person who is weak, let its opposite be.
And it is necessary that he extract it through incisions, and let the opening be tight; and better than this is when it is administered in the vein's phlebotomy as a transversal incision not a puncture.
And this mode of phlebotomy is safe from the flow of blood and from the cutting of nerves; and it is preferable and safer than phlebotomy by width and length.
And for whom is accustomed to go fainting upon phlebotomy, it behooves that he eat before phlebotomy some bread soaked in pomegranate juice of the muzzi fruit; or with secaniabin if heated: and extract from his blood in three places or four.And let him who performs this, not be in fear, for there is no harm to him.
And if he has a cool complexion, then let him take before phlebotomy bread soaked in myrrh syrup or in syrup flavoured with spices or in aromatized syrup fragrant.
If this happens during phlebotomy and the cause is excessive loss of blood then he should drink water flavoured with meat and thin perfumed syrup, and use aromatic herbs with camphor and cover his chest with it; and he should use the other remedies I mentioned for fainting due to blood-letting.
But whoever wishes to restore his arm and get rid of the blood which has accumulated due to a second phlebotomy: it is necessary for him, because his power of evacuation is weak, to eliminate the blood little by little over several days according to the power of his constitution.
But whoever wishes to restore his arm and get rid of the blood which has accumulated due to a second phlebotomy, and his body is strong: then he should do this after seven or nine hours from the first phlebotomy.
But whoever wishes to attract blood from one part of his body to another: it is necessary for him to do this on the second or third day.
But in the body of whoever there is much blood already heated and becoming sharp, and causing fever to occur: it is necessary that this blood should exit his body at once, and a large quantity be extracted; and the opening be enlarged until fainting occurs: after you have observed all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on his pulse in the path of the flow of blood so that death does not occur at the site of the fainting. For often it happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant, and falls into negligence.And be aware that in such a case you should not apply a tourniquet to his arm at all. Rather, you should cut away the hair from his arm, and then cut his skin with a sharp scalpel along a length of three fingers at the site where the blood has accumulated, and then press on it with your finger until you see that the pulse is strong, and then you may apply a tourniquet to him.
And it is not necessary when you wish to restore his arm and get rid of the blood which has accumulated due to a second phlebotomy, if the opening of the vein is already closed and the exit of blood difficult, that you press on it with vehemence and that it be quickly extended by stretching.But rather, you should apply pressure gently until the pulse becomes weak; then you may cut away the hair from his arm again, and then cut his skin along a length of three fingers, and then press on it gently until he is safe from danger; then you may apply a tourniquet to him. And that is a very bad wound, rather leave it as it is, until it is bled a second time.
Or remove with the point of the phlebotomy instrument that which has congealed from blood at the opening of the vein and put some dissolved salt-water on it. And put something from the ointment farrokh or sagzeneia on it and put it under a light compression until the blood comes out.
But if the vein is already closed then leave it as it is and do not touch it until the swelling goes down.
If necessity compels you to let blood a second time and there is no excuse then either phlebotomize that spot above it or else in the other arm in another vein. Nam si sanguis non est egrediens per uenas alias, quae ueniunt ad illum locum, sed per uenas quae ueniunt ad os, tunc oportet eum scissum facere, et ponere super illum aliquid salis dissoluti in aqua.
The funis of the arm is bled in the place called the Fusca and the Basilica when they are not found and are concealed because it is composed of them.
And the quality of its bleeding is that the sick person should put his hand in hot water until it turns red and the vein appears clearly.
Then a bandage is tied over it with little compression in the middle. Then bleed according to the transverse not widthwise nor lengthwise and let there be a wide opening and let your bleeding be where you bleed over the junction of the hand a little.
If the flow of blood is blocked then again put your hand in hot water and let the blood run into the water until you get what you need.
But if it's during the days of summer then you are excused from putting your hand in hot water. And indeed most of all the flow of blood is put in hot water in winter time.Quod si non est tibi vas, aut vas non potest ad te perferre sanguinem, tunc facies ligaturam cum ligamento, et itera super eam phlebotomiam usque ad finem quae bene curat.
And the bleeding of this vein is healthier than all veins because there is no pulsating vein or nerve under it.
The bleeding of the right hand's Saluatella however is beneficial for liver diseases.
And the quality of its bleeding is that you tie a bandage on the Mahason of your hand or with your hand after you put it in hot water until the vein swells and is manifested with a strong feeling.Et phlebotomias super uenam usque ad finem, quae bene curat. Then bleed it across transverse not widthwise nor lengthwise and let there be a wide opening and let your bleeding be where you bleed over the junction of the hand a little.And then bleed it according to the transverse not widthwise nor lengthwise and let there be a wide opening and let your bleeding be where you bleed over the junction of the hand a little. And if you cut it totally then it won't harm him at all.Si autem uides uenam sub ea multum curuare, et non potest tolerare phlebotomiam, tunc facies super eam ligaturam, et phlebotomias eam post dies plures, donec curat.
And keep your hand away from the bloodletting instrument. Under that are the nerves of the fingers stripped of flesh.
Then return your hand to warm water and let the blood flow in it. For if you do not return it to warm water, the blood will coagulate in the vein's opening and be prevented from flowing.
When therefore you have extracted from the blood the quantity of what is needed, then place oil and salt on top of the vein, so that it will not clot quickly.
And in a similar manner, you should do with every tightly bound limb.
The cause of its bloodletting from the left hand is because it pertains to spleen diseases; and likewise do the bloodletting on it as you did with the second one equally.
The cause of the bloodletting from the saphenous vein however is for diseases which are in the lower part of the body, such as diseases of mothers, and retention of menstruation, and maladies of kidneys, and old ulcers of buttocks and legs, and similar diseases.
And its quality of bloodletting is for the weak foot to be put in warm water and for friction to be done on it until the veins are prominent, and a ligature to be placed above the ankle with a leather strap. And the location of the vein indeed is by the heel, appearing towards the big toe; and many branches spread out from it on the face of the foot.
Therefore, bloodlet from it at its larger branch or by the heel at its junction; because that is better and safer.
If you bloodlet on the face of the foot however, then beware of the nerves which are under it above the face of the foot.
And put your bloodletting instrument as if you want to pierce it; and let the bloodletting person be a Nasil.
If however the flow of blood is prevented, then return the foot to warm water and let the blood flow in it until it is evacuated.
If the phlebotomist has missed his aim at the first attempt, let him go on with phlebotomy to the higher vein; for that part is safe and you need have no fear of harm when you draw blood from the nerve as we said before.
And likewise with the saphenous vein of the other leg also.
The sciatic vein, as we said, lies by the heel on the lateral side.
And the indication for phlebotomy of it is pain in the ancle when it is due to hot blood.
And the mode of phlebotomy for it is that he should go into a warm bath and walk about; and he should tightly bind the leg from the ancle on the side of the pain up to above the heel with four fingers' breadth, using a long, fine bandage; for it will not show itself except in this way.
When therefore it shows itself, then phlebotomize it in whatever way is possible for you; and it is better to cut it with a razor, or to slit it open. For its site is safer, and it is deeply hidden in many men.Et sic apparet, ut diximus: et non ex eo malicia ualde timenda est, nam si incidas eam, bene; sed si feles eam festinet, periculum non habes ex eo, nisi cum sanguine calido: nam cum sanguine frigido periculum non est.
For its site is safer, and it is deeply hidden in many men.Et sic apparet, ut diximus: et non ex eo malicia ualde timenda est, nam si incidas eam, bene; sed si feles eam festinet, periculum non habes ex eo, nisi cum sanguine calido: nam cum sanguine frigido periculum non est. If you do not find it and it does not appear to the senses at all: then open a vein in one of its branches, and this is that which appears on the back of the foot, and turned towards the ear; and beware of nerves, and let some blood flow in the quantity that you desire.
Then loosen the ligature, and place a piece of skin over the site of the phlebotomy, and tie it up. For it heals very quickly.
¶ On Ventilation, and the quality of its use.
Bleeding occurs from horns, and air, and from vitriol.Ventosae fiunt etiam ex capite, ut superius ditus est, et ex facie, et ex oribus, et ex oculis.
And bleeding occurs indeed according to two ways.One is that a person bleeds from the head, as has been stated above, and from the face, and from the ears, and from the eyes.The other is that it is done artificially in two ways: either by opening a vein, or by applying a ventosa. With scarification and drawing blood: and the other is ventilation without scarification.That is to say, placing over the part to be bled a glass vessel in which air is contained, and then placing over it another similar vessel containing fire; so that the fire, being heated by the fire, becomes rarefied, and thus it draws the blood from the part to which it is applied, and thus there occurs ventilation without scarification.
And this ventilation, which is without scarification, occurs in two ways.That is, either by placing a hot thing over the part to be bled; or by applying a ventosa, as has been said above: and these two ways differ only in this, that in one a ventosa is applied, and in the other a hot thing is placed over the part. For either it is with fire; that is to say, placing over the part a vessel containing fire: or else by applying a ventosa.Nam qui ventosit, uentosas uarias habeat. Or it is without fire.
And there are fourteen places in the body where bloodletting and scarification are performed. Of these, one is the Wind-hole of Alnocrati, and it is the last of the head; and Alkehel, which is in the middle of the neck; and the Wind-holes of Alhagdahim, which are two lamina of the collar bones, on either side of the neck; and the Wind-holes of the mind, which is below the jaw, in the lower part of the mouth; and the Wind-holes of the two spatulae; and the Wind-holes of Alachosos, which is upon the end of the tail; and the Wind-holes of the two armpits; and the Wind-holes of the two thighs.
And the Wind-hole indeed does not draw blood from the minute veins scattered in the flesh; and on account of that it does not lose its strength, as is the case with phlebotomy.Et quod Ventosatio non extrahat sanguinem tibi ex uenis minutis sparsis in carne, et propter illud non cadit uirtus eius sicut est casus eius ex phlebotomia. Nor is it necessary that the Wind-hole be administered, either with fire or without fire, in any diseases which are caused by fullness, until the whole body has been evacuated.Et non oportet ut administretur Ventosatio, siue cum igne, aut absque igne, ad aliquas aegritudines quae fiunt ex repletione, donec totum corpus evacuetur.
And if necessity calls for the Wind-hole on account of a disease, or because of habit, we administer it at every hour during the beginning of the month, at its end, and in the middle of it, and at any time during which it was.Et quod si necessitas prouocat ad Ventosationem ex aegritudine, aut propter consuetudinem, administramus eam ad omnem horam, in principio mensis, et fine ipsius, et medio ipsius, et quocumque tempore fuerit.
And it is because from men there is he who when blood multiplies in him until he needs its extraction by means of the Wind-hole, finds heaviness and pain in his head.Et quod est, quia ex hominibus est qui quando multiplicatur in eo sanguis, donec indiget extractione eius per Ventosationem, inuenit in capite suo grauedinem et sodahan.
And from them there is he who finds fullness and redness in his face, head, and neck.Et quod est, quia ex hominibus est qui inuenit repletionem et rubedinem in facie sua, capite suo, et collo suo.Et illum oportet administrare Ventosationem ad omnem horam donec evacuetur totus corpus per ventrem seu per aliam partem corporis. And from among them is he who finds itching in his face and forehead, and darkness and heaviness in his eyes.
And from among them is he who shaves the place of his wound. And from among them is him whose laughter is multiplied. And from among them is he who finds the taste of blood in his mouth; or the tongue is swollen and spits out blood. And from among them is him whose sleep is multiplied. And from among them is he who sees in his dream blood and redness, and the dead, and wounds, and suchlike things.
When therefore we see something of these, and especially if it is in the middle of the third month: then we command to make the wound-dressing, after two or three hours have passed since noon.
Now the bandage of the nape is: because it brings about weight on the head, and what flows down to the eyes. But indeed it is necessary that it be after the evacuation of the whole body.Et quando Ventosationem facit, faciat sibi uentosiones in pedibus, et per omnes articulas quae superuiuent: ne reseruetur ventus subditus intra corporis interiorem: et intra caput et extra.
This is in fact a ventosa, a place for bloodletting on the head.
And it must not be used by anyone of a cold constitution or suffering from a cold. For it does him great harm.
And for that reason the aged and those whose heads suffer from cold diseases must not use it either.
But whoever is constantly under it becomes insensible to it.Quo facto, et sanguis, qui in capite est, generatur et super eum obliiuitur.
And because of that you must instruct the person using the ventosa to temporarily remove his hand from it and lower it a little, fearing the generation of oblivion. Nam sanguis per ventosas in capite generatus, si non est remissus pariter, sese tenet in locis ventosatis, et ob hanc causam generatur obliuio super eum.
Bleeding at the Alkahel is a substitute for bleeding from the Vein of the Arm and the Vein of the Basilica; it brings relief from shortness of breath and constriction of the chest, and also from coughing and fullness.
And it is necessary to apply the cupping-glass to the Alkahel for a short time only, because if it is applied too low down it will cause weakness of heart and belly.
Cupping, however, on the nape of the neck brings relief from pains in the head, and dimness of sight, and migraine, and piercing of the eye, and toothache; and it is a substitute for bleeding from the Vein of the Basilica.
And you should direct the cupper not to press his hand on the scarification, lest he pierce an artery and bring about a flow of blood.
Cupping under the chin brings relief from sores in the mouth and腐in the gums and similar disorders of the mouth; it is a substitute for the phlebotomy known as the 'vein of the two lips'.
Cupping with spatulae brings relief from cholecystitis and from heat and bile.
Cupping, however, of the internal parts of the two kidneys brings the same results as bleeding from the Three Veins, the Basilica, and the Fuscus and the Cephalicus; for it draws blood from all the small veins in the flesh, and those small veins draw from other larger ones until the attraction reaches the three Veins.
And you should direct the cupper not to go very deep in his scarification; for beneath lies flesh and under that nerves and arteries.
Cupping, however, applied above the hip-joint brings relief from Piles and sores of the lower abdomen.Et oportet, ut praecipias Ventosatori, ne multum procedat in scarificatione: quoniam si incidit arteriam, accidit fluxus sanguinis, et mortis periculum.
And it is necessary that you order the Bellows to blow with a strong breath and let there be a great bellows made of air, for the site requires strong suction and perhaps delicate bellows are broken; and he must be scarified with a large incision.
And the bellows also decrease the legs with manifest decrease, for they attract blood from the whole body and bring about old pains in the kidneys, and wombs, and veins; they provoke menstruation and bring about bothor, and ademenul, and stand in place of phlebotomy of two saphenous and alhorcoben.
However, they weaken the body a lot, and make syncopes occur in many people.
And the bellows of the alhorcoben is near to the bellows of two legs.
The quality of the position of bellows is to place the bellows first empty and suck with moderate suction; and do not prolong the position of the bellows, but place them quickly and move them quickly so that the humors come to the site with equal advent: and do not cease to repeat it and continue, until you see the place already red and swollen, and blood redness appear. Then scarify and repeat with moderate suction. Then consider the arrangement of the body parts.
For he who is of tender flesh and few pores, you should scarify him once, not more, so that the site does not become ulcerated.Et qui est carnis robuste et poris pluris, oportet iterare scarificationem triplicatim: ut sufficiat una scarificatio humores adduxisse et exuatio, et secunda scarificatio concidit, tertia facit uenire sanguinem.
And command the cupping glass man to enlarge the scarification and to deepen it a little; and to moderate the suction with gentleness, and swiftness, and smooth movement.
If there is thickness in the blood, then one must scarify him twice. Indeed, the first opening is for subtilization of the blood and its liquidity; indeed, the second for exquisite extraction of the thick blood.
If indeed the blood is very foul, then let there be a third scarification so that he may come to his senses.
And lastly, when we wish to draw blood little by little or a little bit, one scarification is enough for us. If we want the extraction of much blood, then we scarify with many scarifications.Et quilibet faciunt ut bene possunt: et non dubitant iterare, si necessitas impellat, usque ad quintam vel sextam scarificationem.
And if we measure that the blood is thick: then it is necessary that it be scarified with a deep scarification: and the equal limit in scarification is the depth of the skin.
What it is that must be applied from oils at the position of wind-holes, and what the windsucke must beware of.
IN that indeed whose skin is thick, hard, brown, and whose pores are strict, it behoves that the places of Windsuck be anointed with open, soothing, dissolving oils: if in the time of summer, as is oil of almond, or oil of violets, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of pumpkin seed.
And if it is in the time of winter, then oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or camomile oil, or savory: and suchlike.Et si mensuramus quod sanguis sit subtilis, tunc oportet ut scarificetur cum scarificatione superficiali, et terminum aequalem in scarificatione faciat superficies cutis.
If however the superfluity is thick, cold: then let the oil be of mace, or oil of sweet basil or white oil, or aniseed oil: and suchlike.And if we measure that the blood is subtle, then it behooves that it be scarified with a superficial scarification, and let the equal limit in scarification make the surface of the skin.
If however the windsucke is of large pores, tender flesh: then it behooves that it be prohibited from oil, and let these wash the places of their Windsucks after windsucking with rose water, or with cold water, or with water of solace, or with water of pumpkin, or with water of purslane: and suchlike.Et si superfluitas sanguinis est subtilis et calida: tunc oportet ut administretur cum oleis apertiuis, lenitiuis, et resolutiuis, sicut antea dictum est.
But he whose blood is of much moisture, let him wash his wind-holes with vinegar, or with water of myrtle, and sumach: and suchlike.And if the superfluity of blood is subtle and warm: then it behooves that it be applied with open, soothing, and dissolving oils, as before was said.
But whose superfluities are thick, let them wash their wind-holes with old wine, or with water of sesame, or infusion of aniseed, or camomile: and suchlike.Et si cutis est sicca, et pori eius sunt patefacti: tunc oportet ut scarificetur cum scarificatione superficiali: et administrentur loca uentosarum cum oleis apertiuis, et resolutiuis.
And it is necessary to guard against excessive sweating in the bath, or in the area of the bath; indeed, it is necessary that it be administered after leaving the bath by an hour, or for two hours.
And no one must sleep after sweating.
What is it that one must do in order to control flatulence, or bleeding before sweating?
And after that, you must consider first of all: then if the person who has been bled, or who has flatulence is choleric, and his blood prevails over its sharp and inflammed nature; then he should take cooling things, such as a pomegranate with milk: and also endive with vinegar and lettuce, and capers, and dill: and similar things.
And put aside his food of poultry, and mutton sekebiget, and foods seasoned with agresta: and similar things.¶ Si autem Ventosatus, aut Phlebotomatus sit melancholicus, et uincat super sanguinem eius frigiditas: et uigour; et uelut pavor: et tunc oportet, ut accipiat cibaria calida, sicut pullos, et carnes ouium, et oues: et eiam larderos, et capones: et eis similia.
And if, however, the person who has flatulence, or who has been bled is melancholic, and his blood prevails over its coldness and lethargy; and it feels like fear: then he should take hot foods, such as poultry, and mutton, and sheep: and also larders, and capons: and similar things.And one whose complexion is cold, must take in drink syrup of honey, or of almonds, or alsecaniabin made from seeds: and take moderate wine, which is between old and new: and be instructed to use a little food. And put aside his food of poultry, and canebir: and passerine birds, that is, small birds: and squabs of pigeons issiadebet.¶ Si autem Ventosatus, aut Phlebotomatus sit sanguineus, et uincat super eum uigour sanguinis: et eius complexio sit calida: et praesens in eo uigour, et uoluptas: et si Ventosandus, aut Phlebotomatus sit hilaris, et eius complexio sit calida: et praesens in eo uigour, et uoluptas.
And if, however, the person who has flatulence, or who has been bled is sanguineous, and his blood prevails over its vigour: and his complexion is hot: and there is present in him vigour, and pleasure: and if the person who has flatulence, or who has been bled is cheerful, and his complexion is hot: and there is present in him vigour, and pleasure.And it is necessary that drink on the day of sweating and phlebotomy be more than food: and it is necessary that in some men there be given in drink in the hours alfaroch of tyriaca, or medicine of musk, that is, muscata, or alesselithe before sweating: and before phlebotomy, or after: so that the principal members may be comforted, and the blood subtilized. And it is not proper that they should take it in hot drink.
Of cupping without scarification But cuppings which are without scarification, are those who put on the liver, and spleen, and gout, and on the belly, navel, and places of the kidneys, and anus: because these members do not bear scarification on them.
And it is not asked through them, except or attack blood from a member to the member: as we put cupping on the breasts in the disease of nosebleed.Et si ventosa fuit posita utramque noctem et tertiam die, et non potest esse tolerata ultra tertiam diem, sed debet esse remossa, per quod est signum bonae positionis Ventosae: sed si post tertiam diem non potest esse tolerata intra eandem positionem, debet esse remossa et posita in alio loco: et sic faciunt de cunctis Ventosis. And we use them to solve from the member of the cold and raw in a member: as we put cupping on the belly, and navel.Et si fit, ut ventosa non possit esse posita intra locum eundem ubi est uentritus: sed debet esse remissa et posita in alio loco ubi non sit dolor et frigus et uentus: quia non potest esse tolerata intra locum eundem ubi fit uentus in membro. It chills the limb and warms it, and removes the pain on that account because it dissolves the coldness.
It is also laid upon the kidneys when they are affected with stone. For perhaps by its attractive power it opens up the obstruction or removes the stone from its place.
And likewise when applied to the liver and spleen, if there is coldness in them.
And these ventoses are used without incision when they are applied. And sometimes with fire.Et si ventosa non possit administrari propter multam uentositatem, tunc fiet compressio.
And sometimes a full warm water is administered for diseases of the lungs; and that is to fill the Water-bag, and let it be large, with hot water only, or water in which herbs have been boiled that are suitable.
Form of the Administration of the Water-bag with Fire
Let the width of its opening be two finger-breadths, according to what we have formed; and let the quantity of it in the depth be half a palm; and let there be on its side, in a place which is about the middle of it, a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into it, needle: let it be made of brass, or copper, thick-edged, smooth, equal, polished: so that it may not hurt the member at its position above it; and let there be in the middle of it a cross-bar of brass, or iron, where the candle with fire is placed.
And now this large Water-bag is made, larger than that which we described, and somewhat smaller according to the diseases and age of him who uses it.
For the Water-bags of boys are different from those of thin men, and larger than the Water-bags of men and corpulent bodies.Et si faciatur ex aere, sit in medio eius in loco medii, qui dicitur naviculare, et sit super eum uirga transuersa: et fiunt in illo locum foramen parvum, et alibi non fiat: quod est, ut cadat in illum locum spissatio aquae, et illic manet.
The quality of this wind instrument, which is placed with fire on the limb, is to light a piece of linen with fire or a small candle made of wax, and place it in the middle of the transverse pipe which is in the middle of the wind instrument, so that the fire burns around the lower part of the wind instrument, so that the body of the patient does not burn.
Then it is placed on the limb; and the finger is placed over the hole which I mentioned, until we hold the wind instrument. While we demand, take away the finger, and the vapor will go out through that hole, and the wind instrument will be immediately released.
Then light the linen with fire according to its way, and repeat it if you need it.
But in the wind instrument which is administered in the disease of pleurisy with water, there is no transverse pipe or hole; and it is not administered unless it is filled with water and placed on the limb only.
And this is its form.
And this wind instrument is better in proportion to how great it is so that it may hold more water.
Of the suspension of bloodletting.
Leeches are not used on many parts of the body because there is no room for their application due to the small size of these parts, such as the lip and the gums and similar areas. Or on a part of the body that has been stripped of flesh, such as a finger, nose or similar.
And how to use them: take leeches from sweet waters clean of rottenness.
Then let them be left for a day and night in sweet water until they are hungry and nothing remains in their bellies.Et postea applicentur super locum laceratum per spatium circa punctum dolorosum, donec sanguis exeo. Then the body should be drained with cupping glasses and with bandages first. Then wash the patient's limb until it turns red.Et postea applicatur super eum sanguisuga in spatium circa punctura dolorosam. They are then placed on top of it.
When they are filled and have burst, and there is a good bleeding, then the wound has been properly cleaned; but if not, cleanse the wound with vinegar. Then wash it with plenty of water, and rub it, and squeeze it.
If the flow of blood continues after the removal of the Sangui-sugars, and there is perspiration: then dip a linen cloth into cold water, and place it on top until the perspiration stops.
If the blood flows profusely, then powder on top of it powdered alum, or gall-nuts, and similar things from astringents, until the blood stops.
Or place on top of the wound half a bean-pod, and leave them until they adhere to the wound; for the blood will then stop.
And it is necessary when an iteration of the Sangui-sugars is needed, when possible, to change them.
But if the Sangui-sugars are prevented from attaching by coagulated blood, then cleanse the wound with fresh blood.Et postea ponantur super locum fabae excorticatae, et similiter iterentur, donec adhaerent. Or freeze the wound with a cold object until some blood comes out. Then they are placed, for as soon as they feel something of the blood, they will stick immediately.
When you wish them to fall off, then sprinkle on some powdered aloe or salt or ashes; and they will drop at once.
This chapter is also often necessary in the art of medicine; it is a restoration after a fracture or an injury to the bones.
Know, O sons, that foolish physicians and the multitude boast about this chapter, and they have not looked at an ancient book, nor read a letter from it.Quo cum audieritis medicum uolgare loquens de dislocatione et tortu ossibus, aut alio qua libet vobis omnium ad hanc Artem, scitote quod si bene curat, bonum medicus est; sed multum melius habemus nos, qui scimus restauraciones, torturas et dislocationes per viam medicamentorum, nec non et torturum per viam mechanicum.
And because of this reason this method from among the sciences in our land is deprived of its privileges. I have never gained any benefit from it whatsoever, nor have I attained from it that which I have attained except through the length of reading the ancient books and studying over their understanding, until I extracted the knowledge of it from them.
Then I adhered to experiment and study throughout my life.
And I have now described for you in this Chapter all that my knowledge contains: and concerning what has passed over, inasmuch as I have abridged it for you, after having freed it from the occupation of elongation, and having abridged it by an abridgement at the end, and shown it by a declension at the end; and I have formed therein many forms out of the forms of the instruments which are administered in it, when it is from the addition of the declension, as I did in two preceding Chapters.
CHAPTER II.
It is meet that we should say in the prologue of this Chapter, summaries of speech, and Chapters, to whose understanding the artificer is compelled to a station on their truth: namely that you, and those who are prompt, may know, or learn this noble art from you.
I say, therefore, that when there happens to anyone a fracture, or dislocation, or torsion, or accident: then you ought at once to proceed first of all to bleed him, and loosen him, or both together: if anything does not forbid, as weakness of strength; or is he to whom this happened something out of these a child, or old decrepit man; or is the time of violent heat, or violent cold exceedingly.
Then let him be content with his food of cold vegetables, and flesh of kids and he-goats; and forbid wine, and gross flesh, and to be filled from foods, and all food which fills the veins with blood.Et si postea resedat ille a uobis qui ad uos venit pro remedio huius accidentis sui: et pertranseat domum suam, et post dies rediat ad uos ut remedia faciatis super illo: neque sit satura saporibus omnino, sed uery simplici: neque in domo eius fiant risus, et laetitiae, et uocibus, nec cantus, nec organa, nec audacitas, nec stultitia. Until when he is sure of the heat of the poultice, and does not fear the effusion of the matter to the limb: then let the invalid return to his first regimen with which he was accustomed.
When therefore a broken bone begins to be restored, then it is necessary that the invalid should eat nourishing food in great quantity, coarse, heavy, containing much moisture; as food made from cooked wheat with water, rice, heads and feet, and bellies of sheep, eggs, and fresh fish: and strong wine, and things similar to these. For by this regimen the coagulation of the fracture is made more speedily, and better.
And know that broken bones, when they are in men who are in the first old age, and decrepit, it is not possible that they should be continued and consolidated according to their nature always, on account of the withering of their members: and they are consolidated and continued which from them are in the end of softness, as are the bones of infants.
However nature connects over the broken bone from every part something like a glue, in which is heaviness, that it may adhere to and hold itself, until they are glued together and bound together, until it comes to the end of strength and firmness, as it was in the beginning, so that it does not hinder it from its operations; and on this account it is necessary that you should give to the invalid food which has heaviness, and moisture, and heaviness, as we have said.
And know that the species of fractures are diverse, according to the diversity of the members; for the fracture of the leg is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the breast-bone is different from that of the back-bone; and likewise all the other members are all different from one another; and I come with a reminder of every species of fracture exposed in its Chapter, distinguished from another. And the species of fractures of bones also differ in themselves.Et diuersificentur etiam fracturae membrorum superflui, secundum diuersitatem eorum, sicut fractura pedis, et fractura manuis, et fractura ossis nasi.
For a fracture of this type is bow-shaped, except for that which occurs in its stars. And sometimes the fracture is along the length of the bone; and its fractures are split, that is, stars, and additions proceeding as with a reed when a pen is applied to write. And not proceeding: and the fracture is with a wound and disruption in the head; and the fracture is a small crack.
And every species has its own disposition or instrument in its restoration according to that which will come the memory of it, distinguished in its places.
And from that by which a fracture of the bone is known, is its tortuosity, and its eminence; and its appearance to the sense, and its sound when you compress it with your hand.
When therefore there is not in the place an apparent tortuosity, nor a sound at your touch when you touch the bone with agitation, nor does the infirm find great pain; then there is no fracture there, but rather it is possible that it is a tortuosity, or a small crack: therefore it is not proper to move it altogether with the hand and compression, rather place over it from the medicines of which comes the memory after that movement which suits the place. Then it is bound with a subtle ligature.
And you ought to know that the place when it is arched and split into two, except for that which happens in its stars, however all its part is removed from its companion; then you ought to begin from your hour to its rectification, equalizing it before an aposteme of heat happens to it.
But if an aposteme of heat happens to it, then leave it for several days, until the aposteme quiets.Et postea cum remouerit apoestema, incipias ad rectificationem eius, ut antea dixi: et si non possis rectificare totum os, sed in parte aliqua restet tortuositas, tunc oportet tibi, ut rectifiques partem illam quae potes, et remittas ceteras partes. Then he should heal it in whatever way he can with gentleness and skill.
And you should know that the restoration of this, and its healing, is easier than bone, whereon calluses form.
Then tie it up, as it will come to your mind.
But if there are calluses on the bone, then extension of this broken member is necessary from two parts, if it is a hand or foot: or with your hand, if the part is small: or with two strings, or with a string and a hand.
And let your position be as you place the limb on an equal spot, according to its natural shape, until when the parts of the broken member are extended: then try, with all skill and in whatever way you can, to return these joints to their places: and beware according to your strength that no pain or injury comes upon the infirm by your operation; and try according to your strength to bring together one of two bones with its mate, according to better forms.
And it is necessary at that hour for you to touch and feel it with your hand.Et si non possis facere illum aduenire per manum tuam, cum audieris quod uenit tempus qua in ea parte debet esse cura, et non potest ibi manere nisi cum magno dolore: tunc applica eum super locum aequalem et secundum naturam eius et fac illum ibi remansurum. And if you see something different there, correct it and make that even by the quantity of your strength.Et si non potest ibi manere nisi cum magno dolore: fac eum aduenire, donec in ea parte sit cura qua debet, et remansit illic donec quando ueniat tempus, qua debet esse cura.
And beware of violent stretching and strong compression as many unskilful people do. For very often through their operation there comes about a hot ulcer or a contraction of the limb; as we have already seen many times from their operations.
Then after equalization and proper operation and binding of that limb and rest and tranquility warn the sick man about himself. And let him guard against moving it during the hours of his vigils and sleep in accordance with his turn and agitation and at the time of his voiding and all his movements with his last strength.Et faciat eum quodammodo adiuuare et sustinere in quouis uigilia, et nocte et die. And let him assist and sustain it in some way during any vigil and night and day. And so that he will beware not to be in a position of the member with which there comes pain. That is because when he feels in the disposition of the member's pain or injury, then it behooves him to change it to another disposition from that with which he does not feel the pain.Et quando sentit dolorem, oportet permutes positionem sui.
And beware with him so that it is an equal and straight position so that no crookedness of the member occurs when it is restored.Et post aliquot dies quum membrum ueniat ad quietem et tranquillitatem: mone super ipsum ut non trahat se per vigilia sua, et somnum suum, nec pro motibus suis.
The quality of the binding of a broken limb is according to what I tell you.
You should know that broken limbs differ in number, size and shape.
Therefore, when they are small like an arm, a finger, or a toe, or similar, then there should be a wrapping of soft, thin cloth. However, when they are large like a thigh or a leg, then there should be a wide and firm wrapping on them.Et qualitas stricturae membri fracti est, secundum quod narro.
And the quality of the binding of a broken limb is as I tell you. For a wide band connects a large limb and pulls it tight from every side with an equal binding so that no spot intrudes into it.Quo facto, cum membrum fractum est, et stricturatur per focis loca, pro quibus dixi ut debet inuolvi, tunc debet sub hoc addiri aliam inuolutam, quae sit lata et dura.
Then after your return from the evacuation, place an appropriate poultice on it in a gentle manner over the site of the fracture. Then wrap a band over the site of the fracture with three or four wrappings, according to what the limb deserves; and pull your hand a little tightly with the band.
Then move him to the upper part from the site of the fracture, and pull less than your previous pull on the broken site.Et uide, ne facias per te, ut sit inuolutio illa dura et latior supra locum fracturae quam sub eo. Then lengthen the wrapping from the site of the fracture a little, and gradually loosen the binding until you get a large amount from the healthy site.Et scito quod si facias per te ut inuolutio illa sit dura et lata, neque uoltum facit, neque ad partem superiorem trahitur.
Then take another bandage and wind it again over the broken place with turns of the bandages. Then proceed with the bandaging to the lower part from the fracture. And your work be in binding and loosing the bandage according as we said above in the first bandage.
Then put between the bandages some soft wool or cloth to even out the crookedness of the fracture, if there is any crookedness; and if not, put nothing in it.
Then wind another bandage over it. Then tie over these bandages well-made splints placed directly, if there is no swelling or hot wound.
If, however, there is inflammation or a hot wound, then put over it what rests above the wound, and remove the inflammation; and leave it thus for some days. Then tighten the splints over it.
And let the splints be made from the middle of a reed which is broad and smooth and well-formed; or let them be made out of wood, such as that with which sieves are made, namely pine, or out of gnarled oak, or out of palm branches or dogwood; and let all the length of the splints be according to this shape and form.
However, the splint which is put on top of the break should be a little broader and thicker than the others; and the length of the splints should be according to what is permitted by the size and smallness of the limb.
Then tighten over the splints with another bandage in the same manner as the first one. Then tie over it with threads carefully, according to what we said about binding; and there should be more binding over the place of the fracture; and as much as is removed from the break, so much less should be the binding.
And it is necessary that the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and let them be made out of soft flax.
For if the threads are thick, as I have seen from the operations of foolish surgeons who put their threads on from twisted flax threads, there is a great mistake; for then the binding is too much with them outside the proper amount.
And thin threads again are not convenient because you will not follow up on them with a stitch as they are too fine.
Nor should the distance between the slits be less than a finger's width.
If the weak spot is injured by the edges of the slits after they have been stitched up, then place under them a soft sponge or dyed wool, until it has healed.
However, when there is a fracture with a wound and disruption of the skin occurs, I will speak about that again in chapter two according to its nature.
You should know that not every fractured limb needs to be stitched up on the first day.Quia enim multum est super quo agatur ad uos de hac materia: sed mihi sufficit, quod dixi vobis de his, qui debent stringi primum diem et qui non debent. What is, because when the limb is large, you should not put stars on it, unless after five days, or seven, or more, according to your security from the outcome of a hot pustule.
And this is the mode of plasters, with which the ancients restored, which are put on over fracture and dislocation.
¶ The way of the common plaster of abreviate, restoring fracture, suitable for many complexions, especially women and children: because there is on it nothing that overcomes heat or cold.
And it is, that you take from the powder of the mill, and there is a farina medulla which hangs on the walls of the mill near the motion of the millstone: and you prepare it as it is, except that you sift it with white ou; and put its confection not thick, nor subtle. Then use it.
¶ The way of another plaster, restoring fracture, and dislocation, and torsion.Take oil of roses a pint, and make it boil in a brass pot, and cast therein wax and turpentine, a half a pint, and a quarter of a pint of the oil of bay; and when they are melted together, take it off the fire, and pour into it powdered alkanet until it thickens. Take almess, and laudanum, and acacia, and enula, and mugwort; and suck all alike ʒ X myrrh, and aloe both like ʒ V and alethil ʒ XX are ground together, and sifted, and mixed with water alethil: or with white ou, if the complexion of the patient is hot.Et si complexio est frigida, et uulgaris, utere aqua oui albi. And if the complexion is cold and common, use white ou water.Then use this plaster. For it is of good composition, quickly restores broken bones, and confers on many people.Et si quaeritis bonum emplastrum restaurantem fracturas, quod non sit costosis, haec facite:
And if you seek a good plaster restoring fractures, which is not expensive, do this:Take a pint of oil of roses, and make it boil in a brass pot; and cast therein wax, and turpentine, a half a pint, and a quarter of a pint of the oil of bay; and when they are melted together, take it off the fire. Take mugwort, and wormwood, and white horehound of each one part; myrrh, and aloe, both of each five parts; acacia six parts, Armenian bole twenty parts. Let all these be pounded fine, and sifted, and made into a poultice with water, or egg-white: and let it be applied.
Take gall-nuts, and mastic, of each one drachm; rose leaves four drachms; rose flowers, and vitex berries, of each two drachms; white vitriol half a drachm; rose oil, and vinegar, of each three drachms; mix them all together. This plaster heals joints that are out of joint, and bones separated from their places; and it eases the pain, and the wound in the bone, and the fracture. Let wool be soaked in vinegar, and hot oil, and applied to the spot.
In this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, but it is good for the sedative of a hot ulcer: and it drives away pains properly.Sumatur ergo galbanum, et masticus, libella una: rosa folia quaternio: rosa floribus, ac vitex bacca, singula quintio: alumen dimidio: oleo, et aceto, libellae duae: omniaque conficiantur in unum.
Take galbanum, and mastic, one drachm each; rose leaves four drachms; rose flowers, and vitex berries, of each two drachms; white vitriol half a drachm; oil, and vinegar, three drachms each; let all be mixed together into one.¶ A recipe for a plaster that heals a broken bone.Sumatur ergo resina, et myrrha, scypharum decem: aloes, et galbanum, libellae duo: acacia quater librae: bole armeniaco libella una: terantur, et conficiuntur cum aqua, vel albugine ouie: et ponitur super ossa fractura. Take the leaves of the fig tree, and the leaves of the wild poppy; bruise them all, and make a plaster of both.¶ Take resin, and myrrh, ten scoopfuls; aloe, and galbanum, two drachms each; acacia four ounces; Armenian bole one drachm; pound them all fine, and mix them with water, or egg-white; and apply it to the broken bone.Take the leaves of the fig tree, and the leaves of the wild poppy;
A recipe for a plaster, to be used in the healing of a broken bone: and when you wish resolution of the residue of an ulcer.Sumatur ergo resina libella una: myrrha scypharun quater: aloes, et galbanum, singula duodecim: acacia libella una: bole armeniaco semlibra: terantur omnia contritione multa, et cribalentur: et conficiuntur cum aqua, vel albugine ouie: et ponitur super fracturam. Take equal parts of the root of alecost, and camomile, and flowers of the olive tree, and flour of fennel; grind them all up, and make it into a poultice with wine if there is no hot limb.
If however it be hot, then make it up with the water of wet coriander-seed, or with water and use it.
A recipe for another stronger poultice for the resolution of a tough abscess when there is restoration to health of a limb: Take equal parts of the root of alecost, and linseed, and mace, and melilot, and marsh-mallow, and flowers of the olive tree, and camomile; grind them all up, and make it into a poultice with water of willow, or with sweet water, or with wine. Apply this according to the heat of the limb, and its abatement of heat.
Now Hippocrates did not say in his book that this should be laid upon a broken limb while it is being restored, unless it were made of chalk and oil; nothing else; and he described it as being halfway between coarseness and thinness.
But Galen has deemed it proper that things should be laid upon a broken limb while it is being restored which contain drying heat such as myrrh, and aloe-wood, and frankincense, and similar to these the things we have described.
A recipe for a poultice which promotes healing of a wound and relief from pain: Take mugwort, and peas, and human hair cut short, or feathers of a bird, and alecost, and salt in equal parts; they are to be ground up, strained and made into a poultice; let it be used as a poultice.Omnia illius nature iuxta quod ponatur, sicut doloris natura et affectus est: nam si dolores apud restorationem membrorum sint frigidi, et sicci utpote in affectibus, tunc res calidas conficiantur, et exiccatrices, et subtiles, ut mox supra scripsimus.
Now all of this as to what should be applied is according to the nature of the pain and suffering; for if the pains are cold and dry as regards their affections then hot things are made into poultices, and drying, and subtile, as we said above. Now the quantity must be according to how long a bandage should remain, then it will be loosed, as you consider then, if no sickness occurs, nor itching, nor the broken bone is moved from its place; then do not loosen it for many days. If he feels a severe itching or pain, or inflammation in that spot, then quickly remove the plaster and wash the area with lukewarm water until the itching subsides and the pain is relieved.
If he feels a severe itching or pain, or inflammation in that spot, then quickly remove the plaster and wash the area with lukewarm water until the itching subsides and the pain is relieved. Then let the limb rest for one hour. Then place on the wound a piece of lamb's wool soaked in vinegar and oil or rose oil, and bind it to the spot for one night until you are sure that there is no heat, that the inflammation of the limb has subsided, and its pain removed.Deinde, si posset, fac ambulationem in termino horarum duarum: et, si non posset ambulare, fac ut sit sedens in termino horarum duarum.
Then, if he is able to, have him walk for two hours; and if he cannot walk, let him remain sitting for two hours. Then repeat the process with a light bandage and a small amount of plaster; and do not bind it tightly at first, but gently, until he recovers.
If you see that the wound, and redness, and pain, and inflammation have all disappeared completely, then you will need plaster and a bandage again; then repeat the process as you did at first equally.Ex his itigantibus faciunt bibeas: et bibant potum lenituum simplicium, ut calidum hydropipere cum melle et oleo, aut cum balsamo, et vinagre: et potum lenitium simplicium, ut hydropipere cum oleo et aceto, et melle: et faciunt potu de succo novellarum uiridescentiucollorum: et potu de succo uiridis pomi et melle et oleo.
From these healing drinks they make a beverage: and they drink the simple beverages such as warm pepper with honey and oil, or with balsam, and vinegar; and simple beverages like pepper with oil and vinegar, and honey; and they make a drink from the juice of young leaves, and the juice of green apples with honey and oil. If none of the things we have mentioned happen to the limb, then do not remove the plaster, unless after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when it is completely removed after twenty days, as it appears to you from the healing of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture has healed and the flesh over it is closed: then also add more to the bandage than your first bandage; and also add in the increase of the invalid's food, according to what we said before.
If you see that the site of the fracture is drying out and getting thinner than it should be, then know that nutrition is being prohibited from reaching it. Therefore, moisten the site of the fracture with warm water at every wound care session, and let it stay like that for all three days, and loosen the bandage a little bit.
Through this operation therefore nutrition flows to the limb, and is healed quickly.
However, what the unskilled restorers of a broken limb do from a different type of wound, when it is not restored first of all as it should be, and is restored according to tortuosity, is an error out of their operation, and a great fear: and if it were straightened, the ancients would have said it in their books, and operated with it.
And I have not seen anywhere of them a trace in that at all, and it is better that this should not happen.Quod si fit, res est ad tortuositatem membrorum: et uenit per eam omne male, et per mortem.
If this happens, the result is to the tortuosity of limbs: and comes through it all evil, and by death.¶ Of making accident in head.Si autem uides fracturam capiti faciendam, et non uultus peruenire ad illum nutrimentum, sed uenit ad illum siccum:
Thus it should be done as it is, if they will, that it does not reach it, but be somehow near to it nourished and turned into warmth, and afterwards reach it, that it might be restored according to nature, just as they do about a fracture of limbs.The species of fractures are diverse, and their shapes many: and their causes are distinct.Nam quae sunt in capite ex uentriculi causa facta, et quae pro diuersis causis.
For those that are in the head made from the cause of the stomach, and those for diverse causes.Now there is a fracture which is made by striking with a sword: and the blow takes away the whole bone right up to the pith, which is under the bone, just as an axe does in wood; and on account of this that species of fracture is called Axial.Et illa quae fit per contusionem cum lapide, uel cum murum, uel cum quodlibet durum et conuertit caput in puluere ut sit quasi ex sanguine, sicut faciunt equi et boves, nominatur Concaudata.
Or a sword has struck something of the bone, and it has struck its face, and the incision does not penetrate to its end; and this kind of fracture is called Kalaan, that is, an absolute split.
And it is a wound of two fractures, or great, or small.
And from the fracture is that which is a crushing, or attrition; and its cause is beating with a stone, or falling on a stone, or similar things.
And this fracture is also either penetrating, which already approaches the membrane, which is under the bone: or it is in the face of the bone; and it is a wound of these two fractures also, either small, or great.
And from the fracture is that which is hidden in the bone in the subtlety of a hair: and it is a small crack, and because of that this kind of fracture is called Capillary.Et est etiam fractura, quae non penetrat faciem ossis, sed est intra osse, et nominatur Haematoma.
And of these is a fracture which happens from a fall or the blow of a stone and those like them that make the lamina of bone enter inwards, and it happens in the place of a hollow: as happens to bronze cauldrons when they receive a blow and part of them enters inwards.
And indeed most often that happens in the heads of moist bones, as are the heads of children.
And all these species of fractures are separated from one another, and I shall come with the remembrance of it all in its place.
And we know all these species of fractures by examination upon them and investigation with tests and removal of the corrupted flesh which are above them.
Indeed, however, the species of a fracture in the hair is known by this, that it is revealed above the bone and wiped away and oiled over itself with wax; for the fracture appears black.
Yet in the cure of a fracture, consider first the accidents of the patient: then if you see from the accidents that it indicates in plain sight above fear, as vomiting cholera, and extension, and loss of intellect, and loss of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and exit of the eyes, and redness of them, and similar to these accidents in many dispositions, beyond a doubt he does not heal: and if you see accidents not terrifying you and you hope for salvation: then begin his cure.
Which is, if the wounded man comes to you at first with the wound: and it is that in the days of winter, then you must strive for removal of the bone before the fourteenth day according to every disposition.Et si uenit ad te post diem quartumdecimum, et non potest durare ultra diem quintum decimum secundum omnem dispositionem: et si per accidens non possit durare ultra diem sextum decimum, non debet durare ultra diem septimum decimum.
And if it comes to you after the fourteenth day and cannot endure beyond the fifteenth day according to every disposition: and if by chance it cannot endure beyond the sixteenth day, it should not endure beyond the seventeenth day. And if it is in the days of summer, then you must hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day before that which is under the bone spoils from the membrane, and those accidents happen which we have related.
If the fracture of the bone has now reached the brain-covering membrane, and there is a minute piece of bone and menarikation, then one should cut away the splintered part, as I tell you.
And you will have to shave the head of the wounded man; and remove from above the bone as far as possible for you in every way; and according to the shape of the wound, and what is light over the sick man.
If during the exposure of the bone a flow of blood or a hot pustule occurs to you, then oppose it with what is appropriate for it. And you will have to fill the place with bandages infused with wine and rose oil; and make the wound rest until the pustule sits, and you are safe from the flow of blood. Then begin the cure of the bone, and its removal.Quod si uulnus non sit in capite, sed in alio loco: tamen fac illum quiescere: et curare secundum quod dixi tibi.
If the wound is not in the head but in another place: nevertheless let it rest and be cured according to what I told you. And that happens according to one of two ways.
One way is to cut the bone with a sharp-edged knife; and this is its form.Et debes scire, si ossis frakturam habens ad partem tangat cerebrum: quod non debes incidere hunc locum cum Incisorio: sed debes detrectare hunc locum cum Chirochirurgia, et trahere os ad partem oppositam.
And you must know, if the fractured bone touches the brain; that you must not cut this place with a knife, but you must detatch this place with a hand-surgery, and pull the bone to the opposite part. Then administer a knife another one behind the knife wider by little: and this is its form.
Then also administer an incisor yet another one wider as well as according to it.Et fac ut sit inter ista duo Incisoria, quod sit locum ad tractionem ossis: et fac ut sit super os in medio inter duos Incisores, et in medio traxeris os ad partem oppositam.
And the second method is to have at hand a number of different knives; some of these should be broader than others, and some narrower; they should have their extremities very sharp, and they should be made of Indian iron or steel; and you must use them with ease when striking on the knife so as not to shock the head and injure it.
But if the bone is hard and tough, you must pierce it all around before using knives, with those borers called non-penetrating borers; for they are thus named because they do not penetrate through the bone to the part beyond, on account of their round point which is under its sharp head like an edge, and a small circle prevents the point from being submerged and penetrating through the thickness of the bone.
And you must have many of these borers, each one adapted to the thickness of the bone, until you have one which fits any skull; and its sharp point should be long or short according to the thickness of that skull.Et cum acciderit tibi, ut perfieris, et aperias in omni parte illum Cranium: tunc oportet, ut adjuras, et confirmes Incisoria ad extremitates illas Terebrarum quae sunt intra ossa: et non debes perferre Terebras intra ossa, nisi quando tu perferes Incisoria.
And when you have pierced and opened the skull all around, then you must swear and confirm the knives to the points of those borers which are within the bones; and you must not carry the borers into the bones unless you are carrying in the knives.And this is the form of three kinds of borers or trepans.
The quality of piercing around the broken bone is this; you must place the borer on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated.Et si facies sic, quando tu perferis Terebras intra ossa: tunc non concutiet caput, et non laedet illud. Then remove the trepan and place it in a different location, and put into each of the holes, or around it, as much tissue as the thickness of a radius.
Then cut with a chisel what is between each hole from the bone; and make it thinner than you can above that from the end of the lightness, as we said, until you scrape off the bone, or by your hand, or with some other instrument of those which you prepared for it: such as tweezers, and thin pincers.
And it is necessary that you take every precaution, so that the trepan or chisel does not touch anything of the brain.
When therefore you go around the bone drilling and separating it from the brain, if it is continuous with it, and you extract it, it is necessary that you scrape and smooth the end of it which remains in the bone with another similar instrument. However, it should be thin and thinner still with other chisels.Et postea, cum excerpueris radem, radas locum illum in ossibus: et per omnia loca quae extraxisti, sicut diximus superius.
If something remains of the small bones and splinters, then remove it with ease using the appropriate instrument that you have to hand. Then dress the wound after this has been done using the bandages and ointments we mentioned earlier.
Another method of operating is easy and in no way to be feared; which Galen has mentioned and highly praised, and this is his discourse. It is necessary for you in the first place to begin by removing the bone from the place where the fracture is more violent and more apparent, until when you have removed that part, and placed beneath it the end of this lenticular knife, of which this is the shape.
And the flat side of the knife does not cut anything; and the sharp side of it, flowing in length on both sides of it, as you see, so that the flat side is resting against the jawbone, with its sharp face cutting into the bone.
Then strike upon the knife from above with a small hammer, until you have cut through the whole bone with ease, as it revolves; and be secure from the strip of leather, that no accident need be feared at all.
And if the mediciner were not a fool among men, and more ignorant of this, or were not sleeping, then if anything remained attached to the bone from the strip in certain places, he would cut it away from there with the end of his lenticular knife with ease. For it is removed from him without harm or fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the strip, and that which is cut from the bone is its face, and there remain in it asperities and splinters; then you must scrape away that asperity, and pluck out those splinters with fine rasors from among which you have prepared a number of diverse quantities, so that it might be possible for you to apply from them in every convenient place and straighter ones, according to that to which the operation leads you, and the broken bone and its shape. And it is appropriate that you administer this in your own wisdom, because those razors are broader than the first ones. Then use one that is finer after that one.
And it is appropriate that you administer this in your own wisdom, because those razors are broader than the first ones. Then use one that is finer after that one. And do not cease doing this according to continuity until you reach the administration of the thinnest and most subtle of all of them.
But with regard to every other slight crack or hairline fracture, you must administer treatment according to what leads to its correction.
And it is something that is not hidden from anyone with any interest in this art and who has stood on what we have written and shown about large fractures.
But if the membrane is exposed when you are digging out the bone, then you must take a linen cloth according to the amount of the wound and soak it in rose oil and place it over the wound's opening. Then take another doubled or trebled cloth and soak it in wine and rose oil and place it over the first cloth, and do this as easily as you can so that no air gets in.
Then administer a broad bandage over it, and do not tighten it except by the amount that holds only the wound, and leave it with this care for one day or two days until you are safe from a hot blister. Then loosen it and after that administer medicines with which there is an excess of dryness, such as lily roots, and herb flour, and talc, and aristolochia, and their like, and it is as if you were to make a powder from these medicines, which is powdered over the wound just as they are dry.
And universally administer in it any medicine of the property that washes away and does not bite. And beware according to your strength that the wound is clear in your cure, neither is there any dirtiness of ointment nor dirtiness.Et praesentane, et futuro, quaecunque sint ad infusiones faciendas super uulnus, fac illas cum oleo rosa.
And beware according to your strength that the wound is clear in your cure, neither is there any dirtiness of ointment nor dirtiness.Et praesentane, et futuro, quaecunque sint ad infusiones faciendas super uulnus, fac illas cum oleo rosa. Nor let the husband be separated from his wife altogether; for when the husband is separated from his wife, he corrupts her and makes her putrid, and great wickedness ensues upon this separation: and now it has happened to the brain, when it is cleansed of the blackness that appears on its surface.
Therefore consider then, if such accidents as we have said happen to the sick, know that it is by no means doubtful.
And if the blackness does not happen except by the medicine that is placed upon it and there is a virtue in this medicine to make that blackness: then you should take one part honey, three parts rose oil, and linseed with these two things. Then place it on the head; afterwards cure it with curative remedies that are appropriate until it is cured.
¶ Of the restoration of the Nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose does not break except its two upper parts at the same time or one of them; because it has two bones: for the lower part is cartilaginous and does not break, and nothing happens to it but attrition, and torture, and crookedness.Et si quod frangatur superius eius, et non curatur, facit nasum tortuosum.
If either of the two parts is broken, then you must insert your little finger into the nostril and keep that fracture equal with your index finger and thumb outside until the nose returns to its natural shape. This must be done skillfully and easily. And beware lest by your operation you cause pain to the patient.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then you must equalize the tip of the radius where there is a slight thickness.
If, however, the fracture is in both parts, then do likewise; and proceed quickly with restoration on the first day of the fracture, if possible.Si non potest reduci ad primam figuram per unam operationem: tamen oportet ut iterum et iterumque operes, donec redeat ad naturam suam: quia multum uenit ex positione fracturae: nam si est in parte superiori Nasi, et non est reducibile, neque per te, nec per alium: tamen fac, ut non accidat dolor infirmo. And if not [healed by then], then on the seventh day or tenth day in a state of rest of the hot pustule.
Then insert at the end of the nose a piece of linen as large as the fracture: or insert two pieces if there are two fractures: and let the thickness of the piece be such that it fills the nasal cavity.
And some ancient surgeons said that the linen pieces should be soaked in butter and changed every day. However this doesn't seem right to me: rather the linen piece should be infused with egg white beaten with flour. Then leave off the linen until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.Et si est fractura in Nasi magna, infundatur licinium in albugine oui: et superponatur in extremitate nasi sal.
And if the fracture is large, then a piece of linen soaked in egg white should be inserted, and salt applied to the end of the nose. And sometimes when the linen piece is inserted into the nose, a goose feather should also be placed over it after being wrapped in a soft cloth; this holds the nasal fracture more firmly in place and ensures that the patient is not hindered from breathing.
And this is not necessary. Nam et si non, tamen post diem septimum aut decimum apud quietem apostematis calidi, superponatur in extremitate nasi sal. If you wish, do it; and if you wish, don't do it. Nam et si non tamen post diem septimum aut decimum apud quietem apostematis calidi, superponatur in extremitate nasi sal.
If the nose becomes sore again while you are treating the pustule, apply a plaster to the nose with ceratum or with wool soaked in rose oil, or a little diachylon.
But if the pustule does not appear, then the nose should be plastered with sesame flour and powdered thyme mixed with egg white.Et si est fractura magna, fac illum ut intromittat in extremitate nasi penna anseris inumidam cum oleo rosato, et superponatur sal: et sic factum sit, donec firmetur cartilago. Then put on top of it a soft pad, and don't tie the nose at all.
If however the bones of the nose are only slightly fractured or crushed, then you must split them and extract them with appropriate instruments. Then heal the cut and treat it with what causes it to grow together and harden, using suitable plasters or ointments.
If a wound happens between the nose, then you must heal it with linen and apply a tube of lead until it is cured.
¶ On the restoration of the lower jaw when it is dislocated.De restauratione Mandibulae superioris, quando disrumpitur.
When the lower jaw is dislocated and there is no wound associated with its fracture; examine then whether the fracture is only outward and has not split into two, and it is cured inward: then its knowledge is easy.De restauratione Mandibulae superioris, quando disrumpitur.
You should therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, put your left index finger in the mouth of the patient: likewise, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the index of your right hand; and push with it the knob of the fracture inward from above with your other hand from the center of the bone, and with it equal.Cum hoc facto, liges nasum cum linteo pro uigilis diebus, et postea soluatis ligaturis, ponas super eam stuppam lenem: faciesque omnia ut supra diximus, et sanabitur.
If the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you must administer extension from both parts according to their straightness until their equality is possible.
But if a shock or disruption has already occurred to the teeth, then tie them with gold thread or silver thread or silk thread from which you expect that they will remain. Then place over the fractured mandible a bandage of soft material. Then place on top of it a doubled cloth and place on top of the cloth a large bandage made with due skill or an equal piece of leather, in the length of the mandible.Quod si postea acciderit quod non possit tolerare astellam: tunc remove astellam: et stringe mandibulam cum filo aurato aut argentato, aut cum seta ut antea.
Then tie it up from above, according to how the tying of it is prepared for you, and according to how the application of it is appropriate, until it is destroyed; and direct the sick person to use tranquility and quiet; and give him mild food to drink.
But if you think that something is already changed in its figure in some way: then hasten and loose it on the third day. Then correct what has been changed in it by this means, and anoint it with ointment made of flour of the mill, with the white of an egg, or with the flour of sesame-seed, after having taken off the scabs: and put over the ointment a piece of soft wool.
While therefore the said plaster remains on it, and the arrangement of the bone does not change, leave it, so as not to loose it, until it is healed: or tighten the fracture. For often this fracture is tightened in three weeks.Quod si non potest obtineri ut stringatur fractura, et tamen permanet appendia illius ex ossibus, quod mihi videtur, debes manum subligarem facere ad pedem, et pedem ad manum, quae subligatura per omnes dies placet.
If however it cannot be obtained that the fracture should be tightened and yet the appendage from the bones remains, which to me seems likely, you ought to make a sling for the hand with the foot, and for the foot with the hand, which this ligature will please through all days.If in the meantime a hot wound occurs, then apply what we said before many times for its sedative effect, until that wound is removed.
And if there is a wound with the fracture, consider.Quod si uulnus est profanum et novum, tunc scio quod debet primum sanare fracturam. If the wound is new and not putrid, then I know that you must first heal the fracture.But if a piece is already separated from the bone, or from the jaw: then be subtle in this, so that you may take away those pieces of the jaw with that which is convenient for you in removing them by instruments.Et si est uulnus placidum et profanum, quod diximus facere cum eo debes.
If however the orifice of the wound is narrow, then enlarge it with a fleam according to the amount that your need requires.
Then when you have removed these sutures, and nothing remains of them, then open the orifice of the wound, if it is large: and if not, place over it from the poultices which are suitable for it, and let them heal, until it is healed.
¶ Of the restoration of a broken collar-bone.
Most frequently the collar-bone is broken from the anterior part from the shoulder-blade, and the fracture of it is according to one of three ways.
Or it is broken, and separated into two pieces, besides which accidents occur in those sutures; and it is easier to restore it.Aut vero frangitur cum illa separatur, et illae duas partes super se inclinantur, ut sit angulus valgus, et intra eum interpositus est musculus, qui ad eam parte, qua illuc inclinatur, trahit eum: et non est facile restaurare eum.
Or that which happens in the jawbone of a dog; and it is more difficult to restore.
Or that which is a fracture with a wound.
And the operation in it when the fracture is without a wound, is to have two ministers present, so that one of them holds the split furcula, and the other extends the neck towards the affected part.
Then adjust the fracture with your fingers, until it is shaped as it should be; and there be no bumps or hollows in it.Et si in ea uelationes sint, facias ius quod traxerit ad modum crucis, et ponas super fracturam, et super ius quod est super fracturam, mox posito iure super eam, facies ius quod traxerit ad modum crucis: et ita usque quae res uelationes in ea fiant.
If you require more extension, then it is necessary to place under the patient's armpit a ball of cloth or wool, and let its size be according to your need: then extend and lift up the fork, and squeeze the ball with your hand until you get an equal fracture, as required.
If you cannot pull the end of the fork outward because it has gone too deep, then the patient must lie back on his neck; and you must place under his armpit a pillow half as big in size, and the assistant must press the arm downward until the bone of the fork which is inside is lifted up; then straighten the fracture and make it equal with your fingers.
But if you feel a splinter coming out of the fork, and it moves; then you must find that place and pull out the splinter with ease.Quod si indiges ad trahendam extremitatem Furculae ad exteriora: propterea quia peruenit in os sub cutem: et non potest eleuii, nec extendi: tunc oportet, ut facias super illum ligaturam, et reseces carnem: et extrahas Furculam cum facility.
But if it is retained in the bone, then cut into its incision with one of the knives which you have prepared for it after you have placed under the fork the instrument which holds the הס And this is its shape:
It is like a funnel without a hollow.Facit etiam utrumque extremum ad modum valvis ut sit in medio latus unum, et alterum est apertus ut recipiat Furculam.
And let each end be made like a valve, one side narrow and the other open to receive the fork; and let its width be according to the size of the bone and its thickness.Et sit longitudo eius secundum quantitatem necessitatis ut trahatur Furcula ad exteriora. And its length should also be according to what is possible for you with regard to the operation.
And it has two ends as you see, and one end is wide and the other narrow.
But if the break of the wound that you split when you extracted the shard of bone is wide, and the wound was cauterized with hot iron, then sew up the two lips of the wound.
And if the break is slight, or you fear cautery with hot iron, then fill the wound with wads and poultices according to the quantity of the cut of the wound.Et facies per omnes dies usque ad septimam diebantur sciditurus stetit, et post septem dies facies resolutio uulneris secundum ordinem quod dixi tibi.
And you shall do this for all the days until the seventh day when the split stood, and after seven days make the resolution of the wound according to the order that I told you.If hot cautery happens, then soak a cloth in rose oil, and vinegar, and wine, and place it on top of it.
But the stiffening of the bone when there is no wound, and no cut, is to place over the bone a plaster made from flour-mill flour with egg white.Et si accidat scindatur cum uulnere: tunc ponas super eum emplastrum factum ex farina molendini, et albugine oui, et creta, et cera. And place a soft pad over it. Then place a ball under his nipple, if you need them. Then take a bloodletting instrument, that is, the wheel which the saracens hold, that it may be very long: and its width should be that of one palm, or about that much. Then place a double poultice over the pad and ointment. Then take a thin metal plate whose width is that of three fingers, and in length likewise. Then wrap it in cloth. Then wrap that cloth with the metal plate in the place of the armpit which falls over the fracture and joint. Then place the armpit over the fracture as it is wound, and wrap it over his neck, and under his healthy nipple, and under his sick nipple; and draw it over every part, and as you see that the bandage holds the fracture well: and it is this, which does not hide over you, and all of it, so that the metal plate is not removed from over the broken bone. And for this reason, you must look at the sick person every day. Whenever therefore the ligament softens and you see the metal plate being moved, then straighten it and tighten the ligament.Et deinde facias sicut antea.
Then place the sick person's bed on his back, and put under his nipple near his bed a little poultice at night, so that it may warm him by the side of his chest.Et deinde facias sicut antea. So then the collarbone fracture is cured through the warming of the shoulder.And you do likewise.Let the clavicle fracture be warmed by the warming of the shoulder.Et deinde facias sicut antea.
Or tie his arm to his neck; and do not loosen the bandage unless an accident happens because of itching or from a blister for up to twelve days.Et deinde facias sicut antea.
Then renew the poultice if you see that his face turns towards it.And then do likewise.And then renew the ointment, if you see that his face turns towards it.Et deinde facias sicut antea. And add a ligature and leave it until it heals and coagulates.
A broken collarbone, indeed, is bound up and treated as much as possible within eighteen days; in some men it sometimes happens sooner.
Of the restoration of a broken spatular bone.
It is seldom that the spatular bone breaks, and when it does break it is in a wide place; and it is not broken except at its edges.Et quod si fractura fieat in medio, adde in strictura et conforte, secundum naturam ossis et magnitudinem fracturae, donec restauretur.
But if a break occurs in the middle of it, add a ligature and support according to the nature of the bone and the size of the fracture, until it is healed. Whenever, therefore, a place in it breaks, and breaks in the middle of it, and it is not known except by touch: then, according to what the form of the fracture is, try its preparation. And reduce it to its natural form in every way of skill that is possible for you.Et si non possis reducere ad naturam, fac illum ad plurum, et ad majus, ne frangatur os: si enim frangerit, malum est.Et quod si in medio eius fieat fractura, utpote que in locis latis fiunt, adde super stricturam ligaturem de tela cerata, et fac ligaturam de tela cerata, et fac illam esse ubi fisura esset.
And if you cannot reduce it to nature, make it greater than it was and larger, so that the bone is not broken; for if it breaks, it is harmful. And if a fracture occurs in its middle, as they usually do in wide places, add over the ligature a bandage of waxed cloth, and make a bandage of waxed cloth and place it where the fissure was. Then put over that spot powder from the mill with alum, and put on soft poultice, and put on top of that a little powder from double cloth.Et fac illum esse super locum donec restauretur: et si postea fisura esset, adde desuper ligaturam de tela cerata. Then place over it a flat plate of thin wood, according to the quantity of the spatula as a whole or larger by a little.
If, however, there is a concave depression under the plate in any part of the spatula, then smooth it out gently with a piece of soft wood until the plate lies level.
Then bind it firmly in place with a long strip of leather thong, with a decently tight knot and with the strength of the spatula, until it does not move out of its place.
And examine the binding every day. Whenever therefore the binding becomes slack, tighten it up, and bring the spatula to an equal level if it is raised out of its place; and let the sick man lie on his sound side.
And the spatula itself is restored in twenty days, or in twenty-five days.Et post quaecunq; tempora debet remoueri ad locum suum.
After this time is past, then loosen the binding: and you will be safe. For it is composed of bones whose separation and union are not to be feared.
But if a piece of bone has broken off, and is pushing against the skin underneath: then cut over it, and take away the bone.Et omnia fac ad modum qui antea dictus est. And do as we said about a broken furcula from the hot abscess if anything happens from it.
§ On the restoration of a broken breastbone.
The breastbone is sometimes broken in the middle and this rarely happens.Et si fuit fractura cum sedazione apostematis calidi facta, postea fac quod diximus de fractura furculae cum sedazione apostematis calidi. The ends are indeed most often broken and crushed from accidents of it.Et si fuit fractura in medio, fac quod diximus de fractura furculae cum sedazione apostematis calidi.Si autem fuit fractura sub cuti et non cum sedazione apostematis calidi facta, et comminuitur: postea fac quod diximus de fractura furculae cum sedazione apostematis calidi.
When its middle is broken, that which inclines toward the lower part, and it happens to him great pain, and difficulty in breathing, and coughing: and perhaps he vomits blood, and a concavity is declared in the broken bone, and is not hidden from sense, its restoration is, as the infirm are laid supine on their backs: and put between the spatulas a poultice.Et fac super fracturam puluinar calidum et plies: quod si non habuerit sedacione apostematis calidi, fac tamen puluinare calidum super fracturam.
Then press his shoulders and gather his ribs from both parts or sides with your hands; and stretch him in equitation of it, according to every way that it is possible and convient, until the shape of the bone returns, according to what is fitting.Et fac quod diximus super fracturam furculae cum sedacione apostematis calidi si accidit ex eo aliquid: et non debes pergere ossem, donec redierit in consuetudinem suam.
Then put over it a plaster and a bandage, and place over that a star from a slender board out of willow or ash, and from those similar things in lightness, after you wrap it in cloth.Et fac quod diximus super fracturam furculae cum sedacione apostematis calidi si accidit ex eo aliquid: et non debes pergere ossem, donec redierit in consuetudinem suam.Si autem fuit fractura in medio, et non comminuitur ossem: fac quod diximus super fracturam furculae cum sedacione apostematis calidi si accidit ex eo aliquid. Then use a ligature to tie it over the broken bone so that it cannot move. Then apply the ligature around the shaft of the bone several times according to its roundness and tighten it with a decent knot.
Then examine the ligature at every hour and whenever it softens, tighten it. And if its need prompts it to be removed because of itching, or corrosion which occurs in the place, or pain, or blistering: then quickly remove it, and erase the plaster, and rectify what has happened with the method of its cure.
Then reduce the plaster, if you see the face to it; and attach a bandage to it until it heals.
On the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
You should know that a rib fracture does not occur except in the thick places which follow the back, and from their ends from the front part.Quod si accidit fractura Costarum, in locis grossioribus, quae ad dorsum pertinent, scilicet inter escutem et lunam: ubi costae non habent cursum rectum, sed curvantur, et quasi in circulo procedunt ad latera et ad ventrem. And if a rib fracture occurs in the thicker places which pertain to the back, namely between the breastbone and the rib: where the ribs do not have a straight course, but bend and almost proceed in a circle to the sides and to the belly. And it does not occur to them attrition except because they are cartilaginous.Et si franguntur illa quae ad extremitates pertinent: etiam non accidit eis attritio, nisi propterea quod sunt cartilaginosae: sed dolor et pus multum in illa generatur. And if those which pertain to the ends are broken: also it does not occur to them attrition, except because they are cartilaginous: but pain and pus a great deal in these is generated. And its knowledge is not hidden from the sense at an inquiry with fingers.Et quod accidit dolore, et pus multum in illa generatur: scilicet cum exulceratione: et si mortis periculum non est, ad eam applicare debemus emplica mentis, sed non debemus ligare ligatura: et post hoc faciemus applica mentem cum emplastro.
And what happens, pain and pus a lot is generated in them: namely with ulceration; and if there is no danger of death, we must apply mind bandages to it, but we should not tie it with a ligature: and after this we will make an application of mind with plaster. And its restoration is done so that, as far as possible with fingers according to the mode, until the form is equal, according to what it ought to be.Et postea debemus ad eam applicare emplastrum cum oleum et calce: et facere debemus, donec sanetur, ut non remoueatur ligatura: et postea debemus uadere placentem, et uisere plaquem: sed post sanationem non debemus uadere placentem: et facere debemus uestem ad eam. Then apply poultices and bind up the broken bone with a splint if necessary.
And if the fracture of the ribs is inclining towards the interior [organs], then it causes a violent and painful breathlessness in the invalid, and puncturing, like that which occurs to him who has a lung disease; because the bone punctures the membrane, and also he suffers difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and vomiting up of blood. And this is difficult to cure.
And the ancients have devised many remedies for it; and among them are those who say, that you should give food to the invalid which will generate inflammation and heat, so that the gut might be inflamed, and might be extended, and that the fracture might be driven outwards.
We indeed abhor this, so that it does not become an occasion to make a hot ulcer, if it has not happened. If however it has already happened, then it adds to it.
And some of them said: a blister should be put above the spot, and then it should be sucked strongly, and this is more like to succeed. Nevertheless there will be danger that the heat will attract superfluities into the body, because of the debility.Etiam dictum est, ut si fractura Costarum sit peruersa et decliuis ad interiora, sint in ea de uario.
And some of them said: it is necessary that the place be covered with wool which has already been submerged in hot oil; and put cotton balls between the ribs until they are full, so that the ligature is equal when you wrap it according to the roundness.
Then the patient is treated with a treatment of pleurisy from food and medicine.
If the patient suffers from a constriction of a cold thing which he cannot tolerate, and the throat pricks with the piercing pain of a veil, and we fear for him: then it is necessary to cut open the spot, and expose the broken rib. Then we should put over it a binding instrument that has been mentioned previously: and cut open the throat with ease, and cut through it.
Then we should bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch; and treat it with a plaster until it heals.
If, however, a hot abscess develops in the meantime, then quickly pour cotton balls into rose oil, and place them over the spot; and treat the patient with that which is suitable for an abscess.
Meanwhile also let him lie on his side opposite to where he is sleeping, until he recovers.
§ Of the restoration of a broken vertebrae in the back and neck.
Of the cure of a vertebrae in the back and neck with bone, and also with ligament.Vertebrae indeed of the neck sometimes suffer fractures, and rarely friction; and similarly to the vertebrae of the back as well.Et quod ad osseos pertinet, si non est magna fractura, et ossa non sunt disiunta: sed resupinus est homo, et traxit humum: ponamus super eam stichos suturas, et curemus cum emplastris, donec uelantur ossa, et ligamenti curentur. And if it happens to someone, and you wish to know whether he will recover or not: then be assured.Si enim facies eius est ad uertigines, et oculi ad vertigem: et sic in somno: et omnia ossa dolunt eum per totum, ut morbus lumborum: ponamus super eam stichos suturas, et curemus cum emplastris. For if you see that his face is towards the wound, and his eyes towards vertigo; and so in sleep: and all bones hurt him throughout, like a pain of lumbar: then put over it stitches sutures, and treat it with a plaster. Indeed, if you see that his hand is already soft, and dead, and cannot move them, nor extend them, nor pull them together: and when you pull them together with your fingers, and stab them with a needle, he does not feel it, and feels no pain in them: then know that he will not recover, and in many dispositions it is fatal.Quod si uides faciem eius ad uertigines, et oculi eius ad vertigem: et sic in somno est, et omnia ossa dolunt per totum sicut morbus lumborum: et cum resupinus sit, et traiat humum, ponamus super locum stichos suturas, et curemus cum emplastris.
If he moves them and feels a tightness with his fingers and a piercing, then you should know that the neck of the bone is intact and that the patient will recover with treatment.
If he experiences the same thing in his spine and back, and you want to know whether or not he will recover, then look at his feet; if you see that they are swollen, and the same thing happens to them as happened to his hands, then when he lies on his back, gas escapes from him involuntarily; and when he lies on his stomach, he passes stool involuntarily; and when he lies on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you should know that he is sure to die. So do not waste your efforts in treating him.
If, however, none of this happens to him, the condition is less serious.
And the treatment for what has happened to him is that you prepare a hot poultice of sedative herbs; place this on the spine where it is affected, either with olive oil alone or with eggs cooked in wine.
Apply this to the affected area several times a day until the swelling is reduced; then apply one of the comforting and drying plaster, and tie it tightly in place with a bandage; finally instruct the patient to rest quietly and to keep still.Hic est finem capitis quinti. Here ends chapter five.He must not sleep on the side where he feels the pain until it is healed.Quod si mouet eas, et sentit in eis constrictionem cum digitis et puncturam: tunc scias, quia nucha ossis salua est, et quod infirmus sanabitur cum curatione.
If it occurs during the grinding of a bone that has been broken, or something has already separated from it, then you must cut through the skin and remove what is there.Et postea ponas super locum unum ex emplastris confortantibus et stringe super ipsum cum ligamento. Then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch. Then treat it with some ointment until it heals.
If however the last bone of the tail is broken off and it is the end of the tail: then you must put the forefinger of your left hand into the anus and with your other hand hold the broken bone as best you can and bring them together.
Then put it back in place and withdraw it and treat the wound with the treatment described earlier until it heals.
¶ On restoring a dislocated shoulder joint.
Chapter 11.De restoratione anchae.
It is rare for the bones of the shoulder to be broken.Cum autem frangitur, sicut in caeteris, primum oportet auferre causam fracturae: postea curare uulnera cum unguentις et fasciis: et finem facere, ut suprascriptum est. If they are broken, then their fracture is not complete unless there is comminution at their extremities; and they split along their length, and turn inward; and there is feeble pain at the spot, and a pricking; and the leg that is broken becomes numb.
And its restoration indeed is, that you should stretch out your hand over it, until you stand over the fracture as its figure is.
If the fracture is only at its extremities, then equal that fracture according to how it is prepared for you by the equation, until it is made like to its natural figure.Et quod ad ligaturas eorum pertinet, primum ligaturum est crus super fracturam qualiter est figura eius, et ligaturus est sicut ligaturo pedis super cruciatim pedis: et facias eum intra vaginam cruris, donec stet super locum fracturae.
But if the fracture is along its length, or is already turned inward: then let the invalid lie on his back, until his restoration is prepared for you.Et facias te esse in loco quae est super cruciatim pedis, et ligaturum est sicut ligaturo pedis: et fac illum intra vaginam cruris, donec stet super locum fracturae. When you have therefore equalized it, place a plaster upon it; then place over it a wooden splint, or a splint of skin: and with a bandage over all, tighten it as much as you can, without being afraid of causing any alteration in the fracture, or of removing the splint.
And fill the hollow of those with it, until you make it even by means of the bandage; and direct the patient to sleep on his back or on his sound side.
But if he be subject to a hot ulcer, then cease from extension and restoration of it, until the hot ulcer is healed; and place over that which sits upon him, according as it was before, and then return to his restoration; and tighten it as it behooves.
If, however, a chipping or comminution occur in the bone, extract it.Et si os superius ad inferius trahatur: et non possit per stringendam restorationem facere, deinde trahe eum usque ad extremum, donec disciat se: et si non potest disciere se, tunde carnem ubi sedet satagia, ne per disciendae lacerationem disciat.
And if the upper bone be drawn down upon the lower, and he cannot effect a restoration by means of bandaging, then draw him up to the utmost, until he is restored; and if he cannot restore himself, cut through the flesh where the ulcer sits, lest in the act of laceration in order to restore himself he should lacerate.
The instrument which is between the elbow and head of the spatula is an assistant to this.Et si uenerit fractura ad osse masticatorii: et non possis per stringendam facere restaurationem, deinde trahe eum usque ad extremum, donec disciat se, et redi ad restorationem.
And if a fracture come to the masticating bone, and you cannot effect a restoration by means of bandaging; then draw him up to the utmost until he is restored, and return to his restoration.If therefore it be broken, then its restoration is according to one of two methods.Sunt namque duo modii de restauratione fracturae maxillae: primus est per stringendam: alter autem per tractionem.
One of them is this: Take a flat piece of wood of medium thickness, in this shape that follows.
And in the two ends there shall be bound two ligatures.
Then it is suspended from an elevated place, and the sick person sits on the seat.Quod si per unum diem non sufficere videatur, iterandum est in secundo die et tertio, donec conficiantur. Then he must throw his broken arm over the wood until it reaches to his armpit, where there is attached a curve of wood.In hac positione debet manere per quattuor et viginti horas.
Then let something heavy be hung from above to lengthen the arm out to its lower part.Cumque sit in hac positione per quattuor et viginti horas, minister debet applicare super fracto unguentum mirabile et plies facere ad flexum et extensum, donec conficiatur. Then the doctor will bring the fracture back to its right position with his hands at the same time.Cumque redierit ad modum, minister debet facere plies per quattuor et viginti horas, et applicare super fracturam unguentum mirabile.
And the other way is this: that he be laid back on his neck; and his hand is suspended from his neck by means of a ligature.Et debet ministrare super fracturam unguentum mirabile per quattuor et viginti horas, donec curaritur. Then command two servants, one of whom holds that above the fracture with his hands; and the other below, and each stretches to his side.Et minister debet applicare super fracturam unguentum mirabile per quattuor et viginti horas donec conficiatur.
And if you wish to have a stronger extension, then tighten under the fracture with one ligature; and another above it, and each of the two servants should stretch it to his side.Et debet ministrare super fracturam unguentum mirabile per quattuor et viginti horas donec conficiatur.
If then the fracture is close to the shoulder joint, one ligature must be placed under the armpit and another under the fracture turned towards the elbow.Et debent ministri applicare super fracturam unguentum mirabile per quattuor et viginti horas donec conficiatur.
And similarly if the fracture is close to the elbow joint, then a ligature must be placed over that place and over the elbow itself.Et debent ministri applicare super fracturam unguentum mirabile per quattuor et viginti horas donec conficiatur.
Then set the broken bone in place with ease and without effort until it is set as it should be, and a good application is put on it; then bind it up, if no hot blister occurs.
If however a hot blister occurs, then leave off the bandage until the seventh day. And place over it a piece of felt which has been dipped in vinegar and rose-oil until the blister settles down; then bind it up, and the way to bind it is to put the plaster over the fracture.
Then place a dressing made of new cloth over the plaster.Et postea fac stringam de lino, et super eam almucezam, et super almuciam vestem. Then, he will place his arm over the assistant's arm and put his open hand on his shoulder.
And put a bandage and tighten over the assistant's arm, so that the arm stands in place of the stars: if it does not prevent you from doing something, nor alter anything on you from the broken bone.
If you are afraid that something will be altered on you from the broken bone, then use splints: and there is a way to put over the fracture itself a splint which is wider and stronger than the other splints. And place between each splint the breadth of a finger: and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with the addition of three fingers from every part.
Then tighten over the splints the bandage which I said at the beginning of the chapter.
And there is a way for your bandage to be tighter over the place of the fracture. And the more the fracture is elongated, the looser the bandage should be.Quod si non possis facere ut adire ad locum fracturae astellae et stricturas, sed habeas ad te adjutorem qui possit facere, quia non potes per te solum facere.
If you cannot do that the splints and bandages can reach the place of the fracture, but have an assistant who can do it for you, because you cannot do it by yourself. So if you see the position of the splints and the bandage, as we said, in the hour when you restore the limb immediately, then do that; and if you are afraid of a hot wound, then loosen the bandage and splints until the seventh day, as we said.
Then examine the ligature in all three days, so that there is no itching or swelling in the place, or food prevented from reaching the limb, because of the superfluity of the bandage.Et si in his tribus diebus accidit in locis quae diximus, propter dispositionem superfluitatis stricturae, tunc scies certum quod non potes per te solum facere, sed ad te adjutorem habeas qui possit facere. And if in these three days what we said happens because of the superfluity of the bandage, then know for certain that you cannot do it by yourself but have an assistant with you who can do it. Then rectify all that according to what we said.Si ergo disposueris totum sicut diximus per tres dies, et postea uideris situm fracturae, si non posset faciendum ut debet esse, si non possit reduci ad locum antea, sed accidit ut elongaatur: ponas super eam astellam aliam usque ad diem septimum.
If there is great trust that nothing will happen from it then do not release the ligature until three days or more have passed.
And let the patient sleep on his back and let his hand be over his belly; and put under the arm a pillow full of wool equally.
And consider at every hour of night or day that the figure of the broken limb not be released or the ligature softened. So rectify all that with your skill.
And let the patient have food according to what we have mentioned before, namely, that at first it be subtle food, until his mouth begins to get tight; then you ought to make his food more substantial.
For it is the custom of an assistant and a thigh to get tight for forty days; then therefore it ought to be released, and a bath administered, and medicated with ointments which straighten that out.
If the fracture were foul, worn away: then do not release the ligature and splints from it until fifty days, and until two months.Et postea oportet, ut administres balnea calida, et ungentes, et soluatis illud ut rectificetur: quod si non possit solari usque ad duos menses, sed debet durare in loca sua, et soluatur post duo mensium spatia.
And afterwards you ought to administer warm baths and ointments, and release it so that it is straightened out: if it cannot be released until two months, but must remain in its place, then release it after spaces of two months.¶ Of the restoration of a fracture of the arm.Et postea oportet, ut ponas super locum fracturae pannes calidas, et ungentes rectificantes.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called two little fires.Et postea oportet, ut ponas super locum fracturae pannes calidas, et ungentes rectificantes.
Of whom one is small, and it is that which follows the thumb.Et postea oportet, ut ponas super locum fracturae pannes calidas, et ungentes rectificantes. And one is large, and it is that which lies underneath the small part at its base.
Perhaps therefore only the larger knife is broken, or the smaller; perhaps both are broken.
When therefore the small upper knife is broken, then its restoration is easy, and its cure is easier.But when the large lower one is broken, its restoration is more difficult; but if it should be broken only at the top, where the wood is attached, it may perhaps be restored by means of a ligature; but if the whole knife be broken in this place, there is no way to make it whole, save only that they make another knife.
And when the lower knife is broken, its fracture is bad, and its cure difficult.If however it be broken only at the top, where the wood is attached, then perhaps it can be restored by means of a ligature; but if the whole knife be broken in this place, there is no way to make it whole save only that they make another knife.
And it is worse when both bones are broken at once.But when one only of them is broken, its restoration is easy, and its cure easier.And when the large bone is broken, its restoration is more difficult; but if only the small one be broken, there is no danger save only that he becomes incapable for a time of doing hard work with his hand, until the bone be made whole again; or perhaps also it may be cured by means of a ligature.
If therefore the bone that is broken is little above the joint, then it befits the doctor at its restoration to put a slight extension with ease until he equalizes it.
But if that bone is large which was broken, then one must put a much stronger ligature.
And one must put the form of a hand at its restoration and its extension extended above the pulp. And let the thumb of the hand be higher than all the fingers; and let the joint be lower than all the other fingers or the rest: and let the infirm one sit square on himself, and let the pulp be before him, or in front of his chest, at an elevation so that the infirm one does not encounter labor.
Then the assistant extends the arm from its lower part, either with his hand or with a ligature.Et uideatur uel ad inferiorem partem brachii, quae est propior pulvinari, uel ad superiorem partem eius, quae est propior articularis: et illa parte, ubi est puluinar, non incurrat laborem per extensionem: sed ita trahat, ut disiunxerit articulare. And another assistant should stretch from above similarly.
Then the doctor equalizes the bone until he reduces it to the best shape he can.
If there are pieces sticking out of the fracture, then try to reduce every fragment with your strength.Postea, ut reducatur os ad naturam suam, applica fames et ligaturen super fracturam.
Afterwards, in order to bring the bone back to its natural state, apply splints and ligatures over the fracture.But if you see that a piece separated from it, punctures the skin, and there is no hope for its restoration: then look for it above it, and take it out according to the way we mentioned before in what was set forth.
But if the fracture is with a wound, I have already made a special chapter on its treatment, therefore accept its cure from there.Ita que omnia reserata sint et ligata per quadrantes, sicut diximus; sed si in ullis partibus corporis non possit reserari per quadrantes uel etiam per plures, sed necesse est ut applicet super fracturam pannes uel lintea uaria, et super hanc laminas argenti aut aurea; nam de ea quaeris.
So that everything is split and tied up by quadrants as we have said; but if in any parts of the body it cannot be split by quadrants or even by more than one, then it is necessary to apply over the fracture strips of linen or various materials, and over this silver or gold plates; for you ask about that. If at the beginning of your restoration there occurs a hot pustule, then cut up a strip of linen with cautery, made from rose oil, and white wax, and let it be between being thick and thin: and tighten the strip above it by a subtle ligature, until when the pustule is healed; then remove the cauteries, and apply an ointment prepared from flour powder with egg white. Then put stars, and let the star which is placed over the fracture itself be somewhat wider, and stronger.Et minister alius extendat desuper similiter.
And know that the number of the stars [bones] of the arm is six, according to many dispositions; either if there is a fracture in one socket or two sockets simultaneously.
Then place your stitch over the site of the fracture more firmly and tightly, and somewhat more with the stitch towards the upper part of the fracture, or towards its lower part; or place a looser stitch with a little less pressure, according to what was previously mentioned in the beginning of the chapter.
And let the bandages which are wrapped over the fracture be soft, moist; and not hard, or rough. And let the thread with which it is bound be of linen, medium between thin and thick, as we have narrated.
And consider the limb and the ligament after a few days. Now, if something happens which requires rectifying, such as itching that occurs in the limb: then one must embrocate the limb with warm water until this itching goes away; and leave the limb unconfined until it has ceased; then renew the binding.
Now if the binding is already loosened and the bone removed and similar to these things, then rectify it all with your skill and consider again.
For if nourishment is prevented from going to the limb because of an excess of binding, then one must loosen it a little and leave it for several days until the food goes to it; then bind it.
Now if nothing happens to the invalid of what we said, then he should not be loosened unless after twenty days or about this time.Et qui facit ligaturam de lino, faciat eum in medio, ut sit ad articulum, quod est super os fractura.
And he who makes the binding of linen should make it in the middle, so that it is over the joint which is above the fractured bone. Then the hand of the invalid should be suspended at his neck.Quod si non potest subdoliis perferri, sed debet manere quiescentem: tunc oportet, ut suspendatur ad collum eius pedes eius per ligaturas super os ilium, donec possit ambulare per domum. And his neck be level and guarded by its strength from violent movements. And let him sleep on his back.
And you shall know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, and perhaps it is restored in eighty days. All that is according to the dispositions of complexions, and the dispositions of strength.
Of the restoration of fractures of the hand.
You shall know that a fracture seldom occurs in the joints of the fingers and the knuckles.Et si forte fractura in illis acciderit, et sit magna, fac ut iustitiariem super caput humeralis per quattuor uiginti dies: sed post haec non placet. And this does not happen to him unless he has a lot of friction.
When therefore there happens a fracture or friction to the leg, then it is necessary that the invalid should sit in a square chair and that there should be before him another seat according to equality. Then place his hand on it outstretched.
Then the assistant lengthens the fractured bones and the doctor makes them equal until they are joined with a good union.
Then it is necessary to put on the plaster and the poultice, if no warm pustule has occurred. Then place a splint over it according to the amount of space, and you have already enveloped it in a linen cloth.
But if the fracture is around below the belly of the foot, then make a similar ball out of cloth and order the invalid to tighten it over it with his fractured foot, then bind it with a long strip.Si autem est superius in parte plantae: tunc fac similiter uti spherae super eam cum panno lini: praecipe etiam sibi ut tecum coarteret plantam ad te: tu stringes super eam.
And if it is in the upper part of the foot, then similarly use a ball over it with a linen cloth: also order him to tighten his foot against you: you bind it over it. And let the splint be made of leather, in which there is flexibility, so that the leather is applied with the body of the foot: and bind it, as it should be.
But if the fracture is on the outside, then you should place a splint over it and another splint from below in the foot: and let the hand be open and straight.Et sint pedes ad quadram: et fac ut sit pedalis propediem quadrato et astella applicet corpori plantae: et stringantur omnia cum panno lini, deinde adde stuppam, donec quando consanabit ossum. Then put a bandage on, as would be done with the hand; and extend it between the fingers with a ligature.
If any of the joints of the fingers are broken, then if it is the thumb, it should be set straight according to what is appropriate. Then it is bandaged with the palm; and if you wish, put a small straight splint on it so that the fracture can heal and not be moved.
If the fracture is in any of the other fingers such as the middle, and index, or ear and ring fingers, then it should be set straight and bound to a healthy finger that follows it; or all of them can be bound according to their sequence, and this is better.Quamvis autem non esset bonum ligare fracturas cum plantis et pollicibus: sed potest fieri pro necessitate. Indeed it is not good to bind fractures with the palms and thumbs; but this can be done out of necessity. Or put a small splint over itself as we said about the thumb.
And consider in its restoration and after that the disposition of the hot poultice; and counter it with what is appropriate when something happens to it according to how it is used.
¶ Of the restoration of a hip fracture.De restauratione fracturae coxae.
The hip bone is often broken and made known to the senses because it is converted into the inner and back part.Et si est cum magno motu, et non teneatur, et confringatur per se: tunc est gravius fractura: quod si frangatur in loco statui, et non moveatur, sed resedet in loco suo: sic est minor fractura.
And its restoration is done so that the ligament above the fracture is bound, and another ligament below the fracture. And the invalid be laid on his face.
Then the assistant extends each ligament to its part according to equality: and this, when there is a fracture in the middle of the bone.
But if it be a fracture near to the root of the hip-bone, then there must be a ligament to the part of the comb, that the extension may fall upwards; and another ligament below the fracture.
And thus likewise if it be a fracture near the knee, then there must be a ligament near the knee, that the extension may fall downwards.
Then the surgeon equalizes the bone with both his hands, until he reduces it according to its natural figure; and the bone is joined by a good union.Et si non possit reduci ut debet, sint vna vel duo ligamina supra fracturam et sub ea: sed non sit superfractio ligaminum quae non possunt reduci secundum naturam.
Then one must apply a poultice and a bandage if there is no swelling on the limb. But if this occurs, then leave it for several days until the swelling is resolved, and then return to your treatment.
The bandage should be arranged as follows. You must wrap the hard, unyielding splint over the fracture and wind it around twice or three times, and some of it remains above. Then wrap the leg until it reaches the heel at the base of the toes.
And insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the knee to the lower parts, and let the ends of the threads come from the upper parts of both parts. Then wind around the leg and thigh what is above the splint.
Then place on the thigh at the site of the fracture an A-frame with one end on the bone of the leg.
Then fill the voids between the leg and the thigh with soft rags so that the bandage is even.Et ponat super eum qui habet fracturam tunica et mulla quae ueniunt a parte superiori, et inuolua crura et coxam.
Then the person who has the fracture put on a tunic and soft rags which come from the upper parts, and wrap around the leg and thigh.Then begin with a strong bandage from the middle over the site of the fracture in three or four turns.Et postea facite primum ligamen quod tenet astellas cum filis eorum qui traherunt. And afterwards make the first ligature which holds the A-frames with their threads. And as much as they are stretched by the ligature from the site of the fracture, your bandage must be less and softer, and gentler.Et facite aliam ligaturam super astellas cum filis qui traherunt ab extremitatibus eorum.
Then proceed to the two extreme ends of the wire which you introduced between thigh and leg. Tie therefore with both these three stars which are above it. Then pass the two end of the wire to the bottom until you reach the metatarsal bone of the foot. And tighten with both the ends of stars from the other side as well, so that the bandage will not be shifted out of place.
Then loosen the bandage over this, while it remains so that no corrosion nor pustule, nor inflammation or the like occurs to the limb. If anything of that happens. Go therefore with the cauterization of it and rectify all that has happened therefrom completely according to what we said so many times.
If however there is a splinter of bone that pricks in the bone: then it behooves you to remove it entirely if possible. And if not, find over this and move it, and care with him whose forerunner was mentioned until it heals.
And whenever the fracture of the hip is bound up, apart from that they must be added to it stars as we said in the aid and arm.Et cum facis uti uolunt omnes homines qui curant fracturas, namque postea non debet ibi corrodere, sed curat autem et bonum facit.
Indeed, in the restoration of this broken hip, it happens not to a cripple claudication. And if only one is restored, apart from that the other leg must be applied to it, then it is necessary that he by whose it is always claudicate.
And you may know that the hip is bound up within fifty days, or a little is added to it, or diminished a little; all this according to the difference of complexions and remaining dispositions.Et cum per totam diem ligatur, debet solvi, aut remoueri, quae ad illum pertinet.
¶ Of the restoration of a fracture of the kneecap.Si rotula non est confracta, sed tantum flexit articulus, aut etiam si ea cum ossibus quoque est confracto: ad illam remedia facienda sunt sicut super eam qui est cum osse confracto.
You should know that fractures of the patella are rare, but it is subjected to frequent attrition.
However, if a fracture does occur in the patella, it is either a fissure or an opening in one of its parts. And it occurs with or without a wound.Si autem est cum uulnere, tunc debes primum curare uulnera, prius quam ad patellam uenias. If there is a wound, you should first treat the wounds before attending to the patella. Stand over it and feel for yourself.Si autem est absque uulnere, et uisum tibi est, quod non est in loco suo, sed pendet, aut ad latera, aut infra, non debes eam remorare, sed debes statim trahere, et indurere.
And its restoration is such that the disrupted parts of it are brought into line with the fingers, until they are joined together, as much as possible, in terms of their alignment and ease and in terms of what can be achieved by manipulation.
Then apply a poultice made from the flour of sesame seeds or miller's flour with egg white, and place over it a round bandage if necessary; then tie it tightly with an appropriate ligature above that.
Then consider all the dispositions we mentioned for other fractures: as with a hot blister and similar things: so that you oppose every occurrence with it that is appropriate to it, until it heals.
¶ On the restoration of a broken Leg.Caput IV.
You should know that there are two bones in the leg; one is large and is named after the Leg, and the other is thin and is called the Calf.Et uterque os habet articulacione communem, et scyphos articulatores, qui per omnem diuersitatem crurarum in locum seu stationem suae dispositionis applicantur.
And it happened to both of these fractures that which happened to two bones of the arm: and because of that its restoration is made, just as the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation is one.
If both bones are broken at the same time, the leg is turned to all sides.
And if only the smaller bone is broken, the leg is turned forward.
And if the larger bone is broken, you will find it below: and it is of those which do not conceal themselves from you.
Then administer extension, and equaling, and ligation of the stars according to that equally.And if the larger bone is broken, you will find it below: and it is of those which do not conceal themselves from you.
However, if the fracture of the leg is a hideous fracture, having many splinters: let the extension be lesser, and gentler with your alleviation.Et si frangitur superius, et non potest in locum suum redire: fac ut sit flexio in crure cum extensionibus, et ligationibus equalis.
And if the upper one is broken and cannot return to its place: make that there is bending in the leg with extensions and ligations equally.And indeed in the leg there is something from the operation on the arm: and it is, when you equal the stars, and complete all your operation, then take two fascias from pine wood, which is administered in the making of solar panels that are placed under boards: and they are made from spatulas of palm: and choose from them which has small thickness, and neither are from minute ones: and let the length of them be according to the length of the leg from the knee downward.Et fac ut fiant flexiones cum extensionibus equalis, et facit bulla in medio, quod ponatur, secundum necessitatem, quando tu flexeres Crurem, et facias ligaturas equalis: sed postea removebantur fascias, et restabat bulla fienda.
Then wrap a bandage around each limb with two turns according to its length. And place one part of the leg from one side and the other from the other; and let them be from the knee down to below the foot.
Then tie two bandages in three places from both ends and the middle. For when tightness is prohibited, the leg inclines to the right and left, and stands in a good position.
And indeed let the cradle be administered out of wood according to the length of the leg, and let the leg be placed in it, so that it may conserve itself from motion.Et superponantur fasciae Cruris ultra fascias primas.
And bandages are superimposed on the leg beyond the first bandages.And indeed it is very necessary that you should do this when there is a fracture with it.Et post modum trium dierum solvantur omnes fascias.
Then consider the Arm every day, and be anxious about it as much as you would be about an aposteme, or swelling, or any other thing. If then anything happens to it, then apply to it what is proper, until it is healed, if God will.
Of the Fractures of the Bones of the Foot and Toes.
The heel does not sustain a complete fracture.
But the bones of the foot and toes sometimes are fractured, and they are fractured but little by attrition in many dispositions.
But if a fracture has occurred in the bones of the foot and you see those bones rising above one another, then let the sick person put his foot upon the ground as he walks.
Then stand and place your foot over that which is raised up from those bones; then press, or trample it down, and make it equal, until it returns to its places.De fractura ossium Manus.
And then put on the plaster, and over that the poultice; and under the sole of the foot place a small board having two flat ends.De fractura ossibus antebrachii.
Then you bind it with a decent foot binding after you have wrapped it with cloth and whatever else it needs.
When therefore three or four days have passed, then loosen the bandage. For you will find that the bones are reduced, whether they were broken or displaced. The operation on them is then as you see.
If however some fingers are broken, then restore them and reduce them according to what I have told you about the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Then put a splint on the finger according to its length and let it be a little wider; then put under the foot the board that I have described to you, and bind it with a decent bandage.
But if what is broken consists of two or three or more bones, then put over each finger a splint of its own size, wrapped in linen cloth; and bind the board under the foot at the bottom: and let it stand on one head of the board outside the instep of the foot so that it holds well.
And you must remember to consider all that I have said to you about the other fractures from the accidents which we have spoken of; and oppose every accident with what is appropriate for it.
Of a fracture of the pubic bone of a woman, and of the hip joint of a man.
When a woman's pubic bone is fractured, then let her sit on a square surface.Et si in medio osse pectinis uirilis est quod libido concupiscentiae carnalis non patiatur, ut inuoluit eum, et reliquit in quo sedet, cum pedibus in terram adhaerens, tunc oppone eorum qui loquuntur ad eum. And if there is something in the middle of the hip joint of a man which the lust of carnal desire does not allow to be enveloped, as it sits where she sits, sticking her feet to the ground, then oppose those who speak to him.Then tilt her slightly towards his back, and let her be held back.Et si non possunt eum aduersus os pectinis, ut loquatur, tunc faciatur sella de lino et de uestibus: et ponatur super os quod non potest aduersus illum loqui.
Then the midwife shall fill her vagina with a finger, until she fills it; and there will be made in the vagina from this, as if it were a sphere.
Then the woman is shaken, and her back gradually raised up. For this will come out of the vagina, until it becomes before the door of the vagina as a sphere, and the fracture returns.
Then put a little powder on her back. When then she wants to urinate, remove the catheter with ease, then she uritates; and reduce it according to the way you first put it in; then return to her powder again.
Let her do this for seven days or so, for the fracture is restored.
And if you wish, take a goose feather, and tie to the opening of the reed pipe, and put the whole goose feather into her vagina. Then blow into the pipe with strength, until it fills the bag within the vagina; for the fracture returns.
Then let her fill with a finger and let her stay for several days, according to what we have narrated, until she is healed.
And when the bone of man or woman is broken, then administer to its restoration and its equalization that which we narrated concerning the bone of the hip.
And do not conceal the anus in these close fractures which seldom occur, especially to one who has some study or use.
And understand my book well, for indeed the fracture itself indicates to you in many dispositions the straight way in its restoration and constriction; understand therefore.
But if a man's penis is broken, take a goose's neck, and put the neck into it. Then put over it a bandage of cloth, and wind it, and let it go for three days or so, and it will be healed, if God wills.
Of the restoration of fractures of bones, when there is a wound.
And it is necessary that he who suffers a fracture, especially if it is great, as of the bone of the hip or of an assistant, or similar to these, as we have said, should be bled speedily and phlebotomised: let him be phlebotomised if the conditions for phlebotomy are confirmed, as we have said before.
If the wound flows blood, then you must hasten to its incision, so that you strew powdered pepper on it, if there is no other at hand.
Then begin to restore the fracture that very day; and do not postpone it if pustulation does not occur.Praesertim autem si ueniat post diem secundum vel tertium, quod mox ad te referemus: nam saepe ex his rebus fit apostema et suppuratio.
Especially if it comes on the second or third day, to which we shall return shortly; for often from these things pustulation and suppuration arise. But if a hot pustulation occurs, then leave its restoration until the ninth day, till the pustulation is healed over.Et si uero frigidum est apostema, dimitta eum, donec sedetur, ut diximus: nam saepe fit suppuratio ex his rebus, ut antea paulo superius dictum est. And on the third and fourth days you should not approach her at all for fear that she might suffer ill effects.
But if the bone is broken and protruding through the skin: then you should try to push it back in, and smooth it out with your hand with ease and a slight extension.
But if its extension and smoothing out cannot be done by hand: then reduce the bone using this instrument. This is an instrument that is made of iron with a length equal to the width of seven or eight fingers and its breadth according to the size of the wound. For this reason it is necessary for the surgeon to take three or four of these, depending on how much he needs them, from among all the kinds of bone fragments involved in any kind of fracture.
It should be round and have a small thickness so that it does not bend when compressed on the bone during the operation; its tip should be pointed with an edge on both sides. Its upper surface should be thickest in the middle and taper towards the bottom.
This is its shape.
During this operation the pointed tip of the instrument should be placed against the prominent end of the bone and pushed back with it until the bone is reduced and smoothed out to some extent.
So try to smooth out the edges of the fracture.In this operation, the tip of the instrument should be placed against the protruding end of the bone and pushed back until the bone is reduced and smoothed out to some extent.
If its end is very narrow and the instrument cannot hold it well, then you must cut the end of the bone so that the instrument can hold it.In this operation, if the protruding tip of the bone is too small for the instrument to grip it well, the surgeon must split the tip of the bone so that the instrument can hold it properly.
If you cannot reduce it at all with the instrument we just described, then cut it with one of the knives we mentioned earlier or saw through it with any kind of saw that is convenient for you.In this operation, if you are unable to reduce the bone using the instrument described earlier, you should cut through the bone using a suitable knife or a saw of any type that is available to you.
Then scrape away that which remains in the bone from roughness and tiny cortices.
When therefore the bone is reduced and the sick person after its reduction feels violent pain, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
Do therefore this. For you confer a great benefit upon the sick person when your restoration of the bone is completed.
Then immerse the cloth in astringent wine, black. And if it happens to be in summer, properly, [immerse the cloth]. And do not place over the wound any of the ceratum nor anything in which there is oil, lest it cause putrefaction and corruption in it.
Then administer the pills at the end of your restoration of the bone. And leave the wound uncovered; thus cut with forceps an opening through the bandages according to the size of the wound.
And beware with every precaution lest you compress the wound with a fracture. Many times indeed have foolish physicians done this, and they have caused to happen upon the sick person death or putrefaction or ulceration, that is, pus. And may your compression be soft, smooth, different from the compressions of other fractures.
But if the wound is bad or is a large wound and you fear over it some bad accidents of which we have spoken, and you find the pain suspended at that place; then you ought not to place over it pills. And make for them bandages from hard cloth at the place of the pills and compress it with them.Si uero dolorem sentit per totum locum: tunc ponas super ipsum astellas.
But if the pain is felt throughout the whole place, then place over it pills. When however it is after one day or two days and you see the wound already beginning to generate pus, then take away from above it the cloth which you placed over it with wine. Then apply plasters and ointments with which we are accustomed to heal wounds: as the four-drug ointment and similar things.
You must then cut the ligament. And consider the wound every day in the morning and evening until it is healed and cured.
And the limb should be prepared so that pus runs out from it freely.
If many days go by and the wound is not healed or the pus does not dry up, then you should know that there are small pieces of bone in it. Therefore, one must probe the wound with a tent. If any small pieces of bone are separated, remove them and take them out.Et quando tentas remouuertur: conuenit, ut omnes partes adserantur cum tenaculis, quos praeparaueris ante incipiemus, et facias uulnus seruium. And if they are not separated from them and they puncture the limb and cause pain, try to cut them and take them out in any way possible for you.
If a wound is infected with a boil or an ulcer, that is, a wound or any other sign of corruption and putrefaction, then you should treat each of them as indicated by the cure for which its description precedes in its chapter.
And from that on which it is appropriate for my speech to dwell, and at which you should present your mind when the bone is broken and protruding above the limb, as with the hip bone or the helper bones, and similar large limbs; there is the attraction of that, many times death results from it, rather abandon it until it putrefies.
Perhaps it will fall off by itself after twenty days or thirty days.
Then cure the wound if you see fit; otherwise, abandon it.
¶ On the cure of a Swelling in the area of a Fracture.
This swelling occurs many times in the area of healing of a fracture.Et si ueniat de novo, non debet curari cum oleo, sed debet ponere super eam olebrum sicut antea dictum est. Firstly, that which is near to the joints and is joined together by means of that figure of the limb. And perhaps it prevents the limb from performing its natural functions.
Therefore consider then, if the swelling is recent; administer to it medicines which have an astringent quality, such as aloe, and frankincense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, and acacia, and similar things to these.Si tamen est antiqua nodatio et dura, administra in ea medicinas laxantes, sicut malva, et linum, et sucus lili.
But if the swelling is old and hard, administer to it laxative medicines, such as mallow, and flax, and lily juice.In this way, that you may obtain some or all of these: and prepare them with astringent wine, or with egg-white, or with vinegar; and place them on the swelling on a pad, and bind them tightly to it with a good bandage.
And leave the bandage untouched for many days.Et post haec si nodatio recedit, et fit ut possit flexi: tunc confice medicinas laxantes, et administre eas super nodationem, donec resorbeatur, aut donec concidat. Then cut through it and cut another one also, until the knot is removed.
Or you can tightly tie a thread on top of the lead plate crookedly. Lead is indeed a quality that removes everything that is feared from the limbs.
But if the knot has already become hard, tight and rapidly provokes necessity to remove it; then find on it from its upper part, and cut off the superfluity that protrudes, or scrape it with some scrapers until it is removed; and take care of it until it is healed.
§ Of the cure when it is restored, and the limb remains after that subtle, not according to its nature.Quod si in aliquo membra non restitet subtilitas, sed quaelibet debetur natura: sic eorum curatio debet esse sicut antea, donec restaurentur ad suam naturam.
When a bone fracture is healed, and the limb remains after that subtle, weak: then it does not happen unless for many causes.Et si quodlibet dolerit extremitas, quodlibet debile, et totum membrum post illud subtile: sic debet curari, donec restaurentur ad naturam suam. One of them is the multitude of solution of the ligament and its ligation not according to what is proper; or because of the excessiveness of the tightening of the ligaments, until it stops nourishment from running to the limb; or because of the multitude of superfluous embrocation in its non-proper time; or because of the lack of blood in the body of the patient, and his weakness.
And the treatment for this is to feed the patient, and make his body soft until there is a multiplication of blood in it. And administer a bath. And bring joy and gladness upon him.
Then put pitch on the limb, so that the pitch may attract to itself much nourishment.Et faciunt salsam super eam partem: et frictione illius salis curantur membra. And he should apply embrocations of it with warm water until the food runs and returns to its natural form.
Of the cure of broken bones when they are crooked in healing.
When there is crookedness of a restored part after its healing, and the eminence of a broken bone, or knotting; and the form of the limb is disfigured by it, yet the limb is not hindered from its natural action: then you ought not to heed the talk of him who thinks that the limb should be broken again.
And there have been many foolish physicians and surgeons who have done this in our land.
And this operation indeed is very blameworthy, leading to death or great fear, that it may be mortal.Et cum talibus membris non oportet ambulare nec agere opera naturalia sua, sed statim debent curari.
But if the crookedness and knotting are recent: then it is fitting that embrocations of warm water should be applied, in which there have been simmered soothing herbs, such as leaves of alder-tree, and its root, and melilot, and similar ones.Et si non redit ad figuram suam naturalem per dies octo vel decem: tunc oportet curatam eam debere, ut superius diximus de ossibus fractis et nodatis: And let there be made for him a plaster with the emollient, as we have described, in due manner, i.e. diaquilon.
Or take the mucilage of the root of alder-tree, and bruise it with chicken fat or sesamum oil; and let him be plastered therewith.
Or take fat figs, and rub them with dove-dung, and such like things as are called drugs that lessen the hardening of wounds.
And when the swelling is loosed by constant friction with the old and mild one, which is done with moist hands, and let the limb be moved to every part in all hours,
But if the swelling has already passed on to tortuosity and hardness, and turned into stone, and there is a need for its cure with iron; then it behooves that it be cut above it, and the continuity of the bone be loosed, and what projects from the swelling or bone with subtle instruments, and let facilitation be administered in it with care and effort.
Of speech concerning Dislocation.
Dislocation is the separation of one of the joints from its natural position. Why it is prevented from moving freely and the appearance of the limb is distorted. And it causes great pains and serious injuries to occur in the invalid.
When therefore a dislocation occurs, one must hasten its restoration without delay at all.
For if it is delayed the spot will become inflamed and perhaps the reduction of the dislocation will be lost with it.Et quia in dislocationibus multum est ad perniciem, ideo pro necessitate et utilitate eorum qui curantur, facimus uos scire de his quae sequuntur, et de solutione earum.
Because of this then it is not right for the dislocation to be moved or extended while it is still inflamed. Because often it causes spasms and painful injuries to occur.Et si resit illa, tamen quilibet medicus scit quod dislocationis causa est uolutio intrinsecus in articulatione.
But when this happens, one must quickly bleed the invalid.Et quae super uient per sanguinem, debent moliendis super ea, ne permixto cum sanguine fiant sordes. Then leave it alone until the inflammation subsides.Et in his quoque dislocationibus qui ex uiuo fiunt, debet moliendi super locis ueteribus.
Then, embrocate the limb with hot water and oil.Et si non possit per se reduci dislocatio, in quo caso est necessaria reducio ad machinas. Then it should be reduced with ease.
And every part that will come to mind in its place must be cleaned out.
I have indeed already arranged the chapters on dislocation, even according to what precedes about fracture, from the upper part of the body down to its lower part.
About the care of a dislocation in the lower jaw.
The two jaws are rarely displaced.
And the displacement of both is done according to one or two ways. Either they are displaced slightly from their places and loosened a little.Et velut inter se contendant. Or they are displaced by a complete displacement until they are loosened to the breast part, until the patient's saliva flows freely and he cannot hold it back, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue wraps around with speech.Et dislocationis rememoratio ueniat locis.
When, however, the dislocation is small, then it returns to many dispositions by itself with a few.
If the dislocation is complete and whole, then the reduction should be administered quickly, and not delayed utterly, and it is that the assistant should hold the head of the patient, and the doctor should introduce one thumb of his hand into the root of the mandible of the dislocation between the lips of the mouth of the patient, if the dislocation is on one side. Or he should introduce two thumbs simultaneously, if the dislocation is on both sides. And the other fingers of his hands are outside equalizing them.
And instruct the patient to cleanse his jaws and complete them for eating on every side.Et post modum temporis, si exstat uulnus cum dislocatione: faciat, ut sanguis fluat per os in uentrikulum, et intromittat medicus pollicem suum in radicem dislocationis, et trahat illam ad partem contra dislocationem. And after a period of time, if there exists a wound with dislocation: he should cause blood to flow through the mouth into the stomach, and the doctor should introduce his thumb into the root of the dislocation and draw it towards the side against the dislocation. And the doctor equalizes the jaw, and pushes on the jaw until it returns to its place.
If its reduction is difficult, especially if both mandibles are together: then administer vaporization with hot water and oil until the reduction of both becomes easy; and do not delay the reduction of both altogether, as we said.Et postea faciat eum, ut munda Mandibulas suam, et absollvat ad omnem partem, sicut praecepisimus: et mande postea sibi cibata, quae non trahant cum se multum laboris in manducando, donec dislocatio revenerit ad locum suum.
When they return and are made even, and the mouth of the sick person is closed and does not soften: then place over them small pieces of cloth, with cerate that is made from wax: and rose oil.
Then it is bound gently with soft ligatures.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be kept upright between two pieces of cloth, so that he does not move it to the right or left: nor is he choked, nor is he forced to chew anything: rather let his food be given him in a liquid, until such time as the pains are moved, and the jaw is bound: then let him eat what he will, and let it be administered to him with ease.
Let him not labour at the action of his mouth in eating, drinking, and yawning, until the jaw is bound up and healed.
If the return of the two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated for a time, and do not return to their places: then many times fever and constant heat occur from this in the sick person's belly, and perhaps he vomits pure bile.
When you see this: then know that it is a loss, and often he dies who has this happen to him within ten days.
Of the return of a dislocation at the collar bone and shoulder joint.
The collar bone is not dislocated from the inside of the side, because of its attachment to the breastbone.Cum ergo dislocatur, vel a parte externi lateris, vel in partem medii oris: et est in capite humeri, tunc debet ponere super eam ceratum factum ex cera: ac super eum mox ligatur, ne reuertatur intra os. And it is sometimes displaced towards the outside: and that is manifested to the sense.
And its restoration is, that the sick man lies on his back, and extends his arms. Then contract the place with your palm a strong contraction, for it will return itself.
Then place upon it an ointment, and dust, and tighten it.
But the ends that follow the elbow, and are continued with it, are not displaced unless rarely. If it is displaced on some day then it must be reduced and made even according to what we have said, and what is prepared for you.Et in hac dislocatione uelationes sint lintei, et super eam mox oleo.
And in this displacement there are foldings of linen, and upon it then oil.Then place over it an ointment, and dust, and a bandage.Et cum dislocatur ad interiora: et declaratur illud sensui. And if it is displaced towards the inside: then that is manifested to the sense.And command the sick man to adhere to rest and stillness until he is healed.
And with this same cure the extremity of the shoulder-blade is reduced when it is also separated from its place.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the shoulder-blade.Et dislocatur quandoque ad exteriora: et declaratur illud sensui.
You should know that the shoulder-blade does not get displaced except in three ways.Primus est ad exteriorym: secundus ad interiora: tertiusque ad latera.
The first is towards the outside: the second towards the inside: and the third to the sides.Of these one is, that it gets displaced towards the side of the titillating part towards the bottom.Et iste dislocationes debet curare medicus per rectum. And these displacements must be treated by a doctor through the rectum.The second is, that it gets displaced towards the side of the breast.Et iste dislocationes debet curare medicus per os. And perhaps it is dislocated to the upper part of the Humerus; and that happens rarely.
And it is not dislocated to the posterior, because of the spatula. And it is not dislocated to the anterior, because of the nerves.
And most often it is dislocated and comes out towards the lower side of the arm: especially in those, whose flesh is few. Because it comes out quickly in them, and enters quickly.
But as for those whose flesh is many, the contrary of this is, namely because it goes out with difficulty, and enters with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some men a blow, or a fall, and the Humerus is pustulated with a hot pustule, and it is thought because of that, that it is already dislocated.
You should therefore experience it until you are sure of it, and then proceed with the cure of it.
And dislocation is known when it is towards the lower side of the arm; and you should distinguish between a dislocated Humerus and a healthy Humerus. For you find between them a manifest difference, and you find in the head of the Humerus a hollow, and below the arm near the touch of the head of the Humerus as if it were an egg: and the weak one cannot bring his hand back to his ear, nor move it with all movements.
And likewise, if it is dislocated towards the breast, or upwards: then you find a manifest touch, and it is not hidden.
And the reduction of this dislocation happens easily when it is recent, or the boy is weak.
And its reduction is that the assistant lifts his hand to the upper side. Then put your thumbs under his arm, and lift the joint with strength upwards to its place; and the assistant lifts his hand, and extends it upwards. Then let him bring it down, for he will return quickly.
If, however, he does not return to his former state after this treatment, and the dislocation has been for many days from the beginning, then the patient must be bathed with hot water, and embrocations which soften and soothe should be applied; as though the roots of aniseed, fenugreek, and melilot were boiled in water and applied.
Then the patient must lie on his back, and under his armpit a ball of wool and lamb's wool should be placed which is equal in size between mildness and tightness.
Then the doctor must place his heel on the ball, and he will lubricate the head of the shoulder with force, and he will draw the hand of the patient towards the lower part.
And if you wish, reduce it according to this method; and there must be present a man who is longer than the patient, and he must stand on the side, and put his shoulder under the armpit of the patient; and he will lubricate his armpit towards the upper part, until the patient is suspended in the air. And another assistant must draw the hand of the patient to the lower part of his belly.Et medius pedem eius eruat a terra: et medicus stet sub titillico: et ponat titillicum super humerum suum, ut non obruat venas: et eleuet titillicum ad superiora, donec redierit in locum suum. And the middle of his foot must be lifted off the ground; and the doctor must stand under the armpit; and he must put his armpit over his shoulder, so that he does not block the veins; and he will lubricate his armpit towards the upper part, until it returns to its place.If, however, the patient is light: then something else must be suspended with him, in order to weigh him down; for the dislocation will return immediately.
And it is also reduced according to another method; and there must be fixed in the ground a long piece of wood, whose end is round in shape, like the pestle of a mortar: which is not thick, nor thin.Et ponatur sub titillicum infirmi: et resupinetur infirmus super ligno, et trahat medicus titillicum ad superiora: et eleuet caput humeri cum uirtute, et attrahat manum ad inferiora, sicut praeceperimus. Then put under the patient, after they have been placed above the head, soft pieces of wood; and let the patient be standing according to the length of the wood.
Then his hand is extended to the lower part on the other side, and his body is extended with strength on the other side; for the joint returns to its place with speed.
If its return is difficult through all which we have said, then use this care; and it is, that you take a piece of wood whose length be the quantity of two cubits, and whose breadth be the quantity of four fingers, and whose thickness be the quantity of two fingers: to whose head be round, that its entrance may be eased into the titillus, according to this form.
Then let soft pieces of cloth be bound above the round head, lest the wood hurt the patient.
Then let the patient be placed under the titillus, so that his hand or arm may be extended above the wood to its lower part; and let the wood be bound over the helper and the arm and the end of the hand.Deinde ligentur super eum panni lenes ut sit in loco: et deinceps per omnia faciunt usque ad finem quod diximus.
Then let the arm be placed across the width of a step in the ladder, and let the hand be extended to the lower part; and let the remaining body be allowed suspended on the other side.Deinde ligentur super eum panni ut sit firmus: et deinceps per omnia faciunt. Then let pieces of cloth be bound over him so that he may remain firm; and then they do everything as before. For the joint at once goes in.
When therefore its entrance is completed in whatever way it can be; then it is necessary that you place under the titillus a sphere equal in quantity made of wool.Et postquam ponatur super eum panni lenes: tunc oportet, ut ligas titillum ad extremitatem brachii et ad extremitatem manus cum ligamento certi. And after the soft pieces of cloth have been placed above it; then you must bind the titillus to the end of the arm and to the end of the hand with a certain ligament. Then place an ointment made from mill dust with frankincense, and egg white over the whole shoulder, as one would bandage it over.
Then tighten a decent girdle under the titillus; and let the bandage be wound over the ointment above; and the hand is attached to its neck, and it is released, so that the hand not be moved for seven days.Post septem dies per omnia uti cum eo: et si tamen non possit moveri manus eius, sed sit in locis suis, tunc ponatur super titillicum linteum, et ligetur ad extremitatem brachii et ad extremitatem manus cum ligamento certi.
And it is proper that a small quantity of food be given, until the member becomes strong; because it is more expedient for its healing.
Then a larger quantity must be given after seven days or five, and he must be exercised with motion. If then it is made firm and not softened, then it is now healed.
If however the joint is often dislocated on account of the moisture that has come to it or on account of some other cause, then a cautery must be applied to it with three perforations according to what was stated in the chapter on cauteries.
If this is done and the ligament is dissolved after seven days, if the joint does not become firm but the plaster keeps falling off as it is applied repeatedly over the spot without becoming firm, then you may know that the nerves of the head of the humerus are already cut, or stretched, or softened. And you may know that this joint will never be set in its proper place.
However, the dislocation that takes place towards the breast and mammilla or to the back, is reduced by pushing and stretching with the hands, until it goes back, and a bandage and treatment are applied to it, until it heals.
If after healing a heaviness occurs in the limb and sluggishness in its motion, then the patient must use the bath frequently, until this heaviness is relieved and it returns to its first nature.De dislocatione colli:
Of the cure of a dislocated shoulder:
You may know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty also, and it is dislocated to all parts, and especially to the front or back.De dislocatione humerorum per cauterio:
And its dislocation is not concealed from you, because it is apparent to the sight and to the touch, according to whatsoever form it may be dislocated.De solutione eius: And when you join the dislocated elbow with a healthy one it is made manifest to you by its very appearance. The joint is hollowed out and cannot double up the arm nor touch with it his shoulder.
And you ought to proceed quickly and reduce the dislocation at once, before a hot aposteme occurs in it.
For if there occurs in it a hot aposteme it is difficult to reduce; and perhaps it is not cured at all, especially when it is towards the back. It indeed of a worse kind than all the other dislocations and more painful for them; and death frequently comes with it.
And the reduction of it when it is possible to be brought back, is thus: extend his hand with both hands; and let the arm of the operator be outstretched and his hands above and under the elbow, and the operator press the joint with the tips of his fingers at once, or with the root of his palm, until he bring it back into place.
Or indeed if the dislocation is towards the front; then he returns it thus, doubling up his hand with his hand, until he strikes the dislocated elbow with the root of his palm.Et si non redeat cum hac, subteat eum manibus: et tangat cubitum eius quae est dislocata cum pollicibus suorum, donec uel similorum reducatur.
If there is no compliance to reduction with dislocation, then apply strong, forceful extension; and it is [as follows]: let two assistants extend the arm; and let two assistants also hold it, so that it does not move during extension.
Then the arm is to be rolled back and forth after a doubled up long cloth or wide bandage is wrapped around the hand.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with oil so that it is among those things which aid in lubricating the joint with ease. Then he should push on the joint with a forceful thrust until it pops back into place.
And after its reduction, it is fitting that a poultice be placed over it in which there is astringency and drying with egg white; and it should be bound up tightly with a decent bandage. And the arm of the patient should be suspended from his neck; and let it hang for several days.Postea remouetur per dies aliquos, et tangatur manu cum oleo: donec dislocaatio obeadit reductionem, et implet omnia quaerita ad normam.
Thereafter it is to be moved around for a few days and touched by hand with oil until the dislocation submits to reduction and fills all the desired requirements to norm. Then it is to be dissolved. If then the joint is set firm in its place, then untie the bandage from around it and leave it alone.Quod si obeadit dislocaatio reductionem, sed non obeadit dislocaatio ad reductionem, tunc impellatur illa iunctura cum extensionem uehementi: et reuoluatur postquam extenditur ad omnem partem.
And if you see a joint not bound well, then repeat the plaster and the bandage, and leave it for several days until it is bound tightly. Then loosen it.
But if heaviness comes to it after the reduction of the joint, and there is movement: then administer wetting in a bath, and gentle friction, and compression, until it is soothed, or put on top of the joint fat of lamb. Then let it be bound, and leave it over that day and night. Then take it off, and put it into a bath.Et post balneationem fricaturo subtili utantur, ita tamen ut non debita uigore fricent, ne uel exuitur. And after the bath let them use gentle friction, but not with too much vigour so that it doesn't come off. When therefore it sweats, then rub the joint with moderate friction.Et si uides linacem non bene curatam, iterato emplastrum et ligamentum. And if you see the lining is not healing well, repeat the plaster and bandage. Then again apply fat on it once, twice or thrice with entry into the bath until it softens.Et post ea omnia si iunctura debita uigore non curat, tunc fac ut sic agatur.
And after all these things if the joint is not healing properly with proper vigour, then let it be done thus. And if you will, put on top of it excrement of cow's dung, moistened and warmed with butter, and bind it tightly over it.Et si non est debita uigore curata, tunc fac ut sic agatur: fac plastrum de farina et oleato et posito super eam.
And if it is not healing with proper vigour, then let it be done thus: make plaster of flour and oil and put it on top of it. Do this several times.Et post haec si non curat debita uigore, fac ut sic agatur. And after these things if it is not healing with proper vigour, let it be done thus. For indeed it is soothed and returns to its condition.Et post haec si non curat debita uigore, fac ut sic agatur: fac plastrum de farina et oleato, et posito super eam.
And after these things if it is not healing with proper vigour, let it be done thus: make plaster of flour and oil, and put it on top of it.Et post haec si non curat debita uigore, fac ut sic agatur: ligatures super eam sartago et iocari.
The joint between the arm and the hand is frequently dislocated.
And the reduction of this dislocation is easy. On the contrary, the other joints. However, one must act quickly in the reduction of this dislocation when it occurs before the part is allowed to cool down or an apostem develops there.
And the reduction of this dislocation is such that one must place the infirm hand on a table and have an assistant stretch the hand, while the physician places his palm over the protuberance of the joint and pushes until it is reduced.
However, one must consider, if the palm is already drawn back towards the wrist of the hand, then let the infirm place the back of his hand on the table with the hand stretched and reduced; and if the dislocation is proceeding to the back of the hand, then let the position of the hand be reversed upon the table, that is, let the inner part of the hand be placed upon the table so that the hand of the physician falls over the protuberance of the joint.
If therefore it reduces at once, it is well; and if not, then bind it with a sedative plaster: and leave it, nor do you repeat the procedure.
For if it does not tolerate the reduction and you cannot bring the joint back into its proper position after a couple of days have passed, yet the joint remains as crooked as before, then you may know that either the nerves are severed or worn away.
There is no remedy for it except to bind it near its case with a cautery. And perhaps it will not benefit anything.
When therefore the Mahassem does not reduce, then apply over it the plaster which we have described. Then let it be bound and left for five days; afterwards let it be loosed and left, and the hand exercised.
But if it is deprived of motion and there happens something of heaviness in it, then warm it with hot water and frequently rub it until it softens.Et si accidit apostema intra uiginti dies, tunc ponas eum ad manum super locum dislocationis: et si non potes ponere, cum scaphium.
Of the cure for a dislocated finger.
When a finger is dislocated towards any part, or a finger towards the back of the palm, or towards its hollow: then extend your finger and push the dislocation with your thumb until it goes back into place.
Then hold the head of the finger, and suspend it towards the part to which it is dislocated, and let go of it for two days.Et in tertio die, uel antea si potest, curati erunt: si non, adduxito ei Digitos alios, et sustine caput dislocationis pollicibus tuis, et trahe eum usque cum digitis tuis ad partem ad quam dislocatur.
And on the third day, or sooner if possible, it will be cured: if not, bring the other fingers towards it, and hold the head of the dislocation with your thumbs, and draw it with your fingers to the part to which it is dislocated.Then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened out that very day.
When then it becomes night, bind it according to the same account: and do not cease loosing it during the day: and exercise it with motion: and bind it at night.
Do this for several days until it is healed.
And likewise do with him if he is dislocated towards the hollow of his hand: and bind it to that very part, and perform your first operation on him until he is healed.Et si dislocatur ad omnem partem, et impingerit os superius in inferius: tunc sustine dislocationem pollicibus tuis, et trahe eam usque cum digitis tuus usque cum dislocatione: et non dimittas ea donec sanetur.
And if it is dislocated towards any part and the upper bone strikes the lower one: then hold the dislocation with your thumbs, and draw it with your fingers up to the dislocation until it is healed.And likewise do with him when he is dislocated towards other parts.
Of the cure for a dislocation of the bones in the back.Caput XXXI.
When it happens to anyone that there is complete dislocation of the spine or neck, or many vertebrae are displaced from their places; then there is no treatment for this, since death quickly follows when there is such an injury.
And the sign of this is that when the patient stands up, he will fall out from weakness, and cannot hold himself up; and often some of his limbs, or two of his legs, or two of his arms, or one of them will grow limp: or one of the vertebrae will be displaced from its place.
This is because there are many times when they are displaced, and this often happens when there is displacement on all four sides.
That which is displaced towards the back is called Hunchback.
The treatment for this condition, however, is that you should consider when the hunchback appears from childhood; then there is no treatment for it, nor is there any chance of healing at all.Et si a senectute accidit: non curatur quoque.
And if it happens from old age, it also cannot be cured.However, the ancients have already spoken at length about the methods of curing those that happen from an accident, or a blow, or similar things.Ibi enim remouentur Spondiles in locis quibusdam, et quod debet curari: non debet esse omnino remotus de loco suo, sed adligatur, nec uelatur: nam si velatur, uelatur ut resit; sed postea debet esse dislocatus. There the vertebrae are displaced in certain places, and what should be treated: it should not be completely removed from its place, but bound, and not wrapped; for if it is wrapped, it is wrapped so that it may heal; but afterwards it must be unbound.Of which there is not much profit.
However, I have now abbreviated it, whose close proximity to me excuses its lack of detail from me; and my explanation, as I explained it, and formed its instrument in a different way than they showed it, and explained it itself.Et quoniam multotiens est mihi remissus ad curandum Spondilium dorsi: et multotiens curavi, et multotiens vidi curari: idcirco ostendere placebat mihi primum diuisio eius, sicut faciunt medici alieni: sed tamen non omnia quae ueniunt de illo in illa cura.
And since I have often received requests to treat a dislocated spine, and often treated it myself, and often seen it treated by others; therefore it pleased me to show the first division of it, as alien physicians do; but nevertheless not all that comes from it in that treatment.I say then, that there is no skill or healing in hunchback which happens on the front side.Quod autem accidit a posteriora parte, ibi est ingenium et sanatio eius, sicut dixi: nam si remouetur una Spondilis de loco suo ad posteriora: non debet esse remota absque omni dislocatione cunctarum partium corporis.
And likewise with the one that is done for both sides also.
And let not the body be moved from them unless it is one that occurs on the back properly, with that which I narrate: and it is, in order for the invalid to be extended on his face on an even podium near a wall; and a wet bed-sheet spread out under him so that his chest might not get hurt.
Then a straight piece of wood is fixed into the ground at one end of the podium near the invalid's head; and another piece of wood near his feet at the other end of the podium; and a servant holds the wood, and it is not firmly fixed in the ground. And another servant holds the other one.Et faciant eum inclinare ad pedes eius cum minister tenens lignum circum caput eius, et habens manum super pectore eius: et faciunt eum inclinare ad caput eius cum minister tenens lignum circum pedes eius, et tenens manu super pectore eius.
Then a soft bandage is wound around the invalid's head; and under his armpits a ligature that is flexible, yet firm. The end of the ligature is then extended to the wood at the invalid's head and tied to it.
Then the other ligature is tightened above his hips and above his knees and at his ankles.Et faciant inclinare infirmum ad caput cum minister tenens lignum quod est sub pedibus eius: et sic facient cum eo usque quasi ad pedes eius, inclinando alternatim, et stringendo ligaturas. Then gather up all the ligaments and bind them with a piece of wood which is at the foot of the patient.
Then all the attendants must pull on the end of the wood which has the ligaments and not move the two pieces of wood from where they are fixed; but as we said, let them not be tightened.
And the doctor must place his palms on the spine with strength until it returns to its place; or he should put a board on top of it. Then he must attach his feet above the board, until it returns to its place.
If however it does not return with this treatment, then take a board whose length is about three arms.Et annecte pedes eius super eam: et dehiscat omnem medicamentum et fomenta quae tibi placuerunt. And attach his feet on top of it: and open up all medicine and poultices that you like. And chisel a hole in the wall, about which we said is near the sick man, a place into which the end of the board will enter. Then place the middle of the board on top of the spine.Et mande ut alquiem tenebit extremitatem unae tabulae, et alkiem alteram, et trahatur ultra quod posuerunt pedes: et sic iterum donec redeat. Let the physician place his feet upon the other extremity. And he should tightly wind it until the vertebra is forced back into its proper position.
Then if you wish to operate with a lathe which is wrapped around your hand; and this is how you would do it: fix two pieces of wood in the ground beside the patient's head, each one as long as a forearm; and at his head, in front of the lathe, two other pieces.
And let the distance between each piece of wood be a palm; and now make a hole in every piece of wood through which the lathe turns; and firm everything in the ground well so that it does not move at all.
And let there be inserted a round piece of wood; and the lathe is to turn in two holes in the two pieces of wood.
And at its end there is a hole in which the piece of wood is fastened, whose length is a palm with that which turns; and in the other two pieces of wood it is likewise so.Et in extremitate eius est foramen, in quo firmatur lignum, cuius longitudo est palmus cum eo quod reuoluitur: et in duobus lignis aliis est similiter illius.
Then tighten the ligaments which you have tied on the patient's chest with the lathe that is by his head; and the ligaments which you have tied on his thighs with the lathe that is by his feet.Et ueniat ad te qui assistit tibi et manet, et stringat tornum quod est in extremitate ligamenti.
Then a servant should stand at each post, who will hold his hand with the leather strap with which the post is turned; and the surgeon should level the spinal column, as we have said.
This is the form of the screw that follows:
Then when the spinal column returns and becomes level, then one must put on an ointment with egg white. Then stop it up. After that place above the ointment a plaster star made of wood whose width is three fingers or about that. And its length must be the quantity that will take the Gibbosity and over the part of the spinal column that is healthy.
Then it should be bound with the ligature that we said. And the invalid should use food in small amounts until he is healed.
If anything remains prominent in the place at the end of the healing, then it is necessary to apply medicines that soften and smoothen with the application of the board of which we spoke for a long time. And now the lead plate is applied.
And sometimes there happens to be an eminence in the end of the spinal column; and this is thought to be a displacement, and that is what bone has now become prominent. Therefore it is not good to have the presumption of this medicine; perhaps indeed it will cause death.
¶ Of the curing of a displaced neck.
Know that the joints of the neck and the shoulder do not happen, unless there is a displacement only; nor does what happens to other joints from a slight removal and indentation happen to them.
And indeed the joint of the neck is displaced according to four parts.Quam primum ergo accidit dislocatio: primo caput omnium dislocatur, et a capite ad pedes per totum corpore: et illud quod est super spondilim dislocatur ad illud quod est sub eo: et antea cum non sit dislocata Ancham: postea primum dislocatur sub capite, et cum omnia quae supra spondilim, et intra primam dislocationem. When indeed a displacement happens first: at the head of all the neck is displaced, and from the head to the feet throughout the body; and that which is above the spinal column is displaced against that which is under it; and before this, when the neck is not yet displaced, then first is displaced below the head, and with all that which is above the spinal column, and within the first displacement.This is because it is displaced towards the front and towards the back.
It is dislocated very often inwards, seldom forwards and backwards.
And its treatment is dislocation inwards because when you join the sick thigh with the sound one, it is longer; and the knee of it projects out more than that of the sound one, and the sick one cannot double his foot at the hip; and there is a spot which follows the hip, swollen by a hot swelling, for its head has already reached there.
And the signs of it are when dislocation occurs outwards; for they have opposite accidents to those mentioned above.
And the sign of it when dislocation occurs forwards is that he extends his sound thigh according to its complement; yet he cannot double it without pain in the knee, and if he tries to walk, he cannot do so forwards over it, and his urine is retained and his hip becomes swollen, and there is bruising at walking over the heel.
And the sign of it when dislocation occurs backwards is that he cannot extend his knee nor can he double his thigh before doubling his hip; and his thigh is also shorter than the other one; and his hip is relaxed and its head is by the navel.
However, the reduction of this dislocation depends on whether you consider that it is an old dislocation which has already occurred while he was having it. Then if you administer a reduction of it and it remains as before; then there is absolutely no treatment for it.Sed si dislocatur ad interiora ueteri et per accidens, curari potest per reductionem suam. Therefore it is not necessary for him to be suspected deeply.
But in that which is recently dislocated, and is of one of the four species of dislocation, then hasten to this, that you unfasten the joint, and extend it to the interior and exterior, and move it right and left: for perhaps it returns, and does not need other care.
But if it does not return in this way, then you must prepare a strong servant, and extend his thigh from the lower part: either with his hands, or with a bandage which is tied over his thigh above the knee: and another servant extend his hand from above, so that he may insert his hands under his armpits. Then tighten with a soft bandage over the hip joint, and hold the end of another's bandage.
And may his extension be either from before the groin to the furcula, or from behind to the back.
And may their extension all be at once, until the invalid is lifted up with his body from the earth, and remains hanging.Et si non posset sublatus esse per unum uolumen, ut supradictum est: tunc debet minister alter, cum suo mano, subligare crura eius, et extendere, sicut antea dictum est.
And this is the kind of extension which is a common kind of four species.
If therefore the dislocation returns with that which I said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary in every species of that which I say about proper cure.
Indeed, in its own reduction when the dislocation is to the bowels, the invalid must lie on his healthy side. Then he must put a ligature over the root of the hip-bone, at that which is between the head of the hip-bone and the part under the groin.Et si ad exterios dislocata sit, debet resupinare super latus contrarium sano. And if it is dislocated outwardly, he must lie on the contrary side to that which is sound.Then he must extend the ligature upward from the groin to the higher part of the body, to the part of the fork.Et sic debet tenere usque quod dislocatio revocatur in locum suum.
Then another strong assistant should take hold of his weak arm and lessen the pressure on the swollen hip by extending it outward with great force. For he will then return to his place.
And this kind of treatment is easier than the others for reducing this limb.
But if he refuses to submit to you and does not obey the treatment at all with this kind of cure, then the two feet should be bound together with a strong bandage, gently, over the two heels, and over the two knees: and let the length from each heel to the knee be equal in both legs, and the infirm leg be extended by more than the length of two fingers.
Then let the infirm man be suspended over the head of a wooden pole that is in the house, and let the distance from the ground to his head be equal to two arm-lengths.
Then command a strong youth to guard the head of the hip joint; and let another youth be suspended with the infirm one; and have another push the infirm one, guarding the hip with strength, for then the joint will return quickly to its place.
But when this dislocation returns to its natural place after being displaced outward, then the infirm man should lie on a bed as we have said about the one having a hunchback. And let a bandage be bound over his thigh, the infirm one, and over his chest.Et praecipere iuueni forti, ut muniat caput eius cum manibus suis ubique per totum diem, nec obeatur tibi ad introitum, et faciatur per totum diem, donec redit ad locum suum: sed neque oportet eum inuere subligare pedes sui.
Then two wooden splints are put in place, one near his feet and the other near his head. Then a wooden board is placed along the length of the stretcher, firmly fixed: over which are laid folded damp cloths so that the patient is not hurt; and the wood should be between his thighs so that he is not drawn down towards the lower end when he is stretched out.
Then all the attendants stretch at their sides, and the surgeon makes an even reduction with his hand.
If therefore he obeys in being returned, it will be well.Deinde ponatur super eum ponder, ne resumpere conuerter.
And if not, put a weight on top of it, and press it down as we said before about the hunchback, evenly.Deinde minister tenet pedes eius, medicus caput: et per agendo sic ad modum trahere et per verberare, faciunt reduccionem. However, the sick person must lie on his sound side.
And when the dislocation is towards the front then the sick person's leg must be quickly extended; and this is according to the same account above while upon the couch; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand over the hip of the sick person. Then he pulls it with his other hand and, while pulling it, places it extended towards the lower part of the knee.
And if the dislocation is towards the back then the sick person does not have to be extended towards the lower parts and must be raised above the ground; rather he must lie over a hard object just as it also happens when his shoulder dislocates towards the outside, according to what we already said about how he should be laid on both shoulders: and this is on his face and with the ligaments extended just as we said before.
And a bandage must be applied with a board also over the place from which the joint is emerging once the reduction is complete according to what is proper.
And the sign of its reduction will not be hidden from you; and it is that you extend both legs of the sick person and when you see them equal and he tightens his leg and extends it without complaint then you will know that the limb has returned as it should: then join both thighs and put on a bandage and bind with a belt, i.e., a wheel so that the shoulder does not move to any part; and let the sick person remain quiet for three or four days.
Then loosen the bandage and bandage and compare one leg with the other; then if you see them equal in status you will know that the dislocation has been set firm: therefore release the sick person to walk.
And if you see any softness then return and bandage it again and bind it according to your first binding; and leave it also for three days.And if you see that the limb has not returned to its status then return him to lying down on his back as he was before; and do not release him until it returns or becomes soft.
Then let him loosen it and make him delay his walking on both sides for a few days until he is completely healed.
[On the dislocation of the knee.]
The knee is dislocated in three ways. It is dislocated outwards, inwards and downwards, that is to say backwards.Si ergo cum commotione corporis videas Genu esse dislocatum, sic procedas ut infra describitur:
And if with the shaking of the body you see that the knee is dislocated, proceed as described below:If it be dislocated outwards, and this you will know by feeling, take a sharp scalpel and make an incision over the patella through the skin to the bone, then insert the hook and draw out the patella.
And a sign of this dislocation is that you order the patient to apply his shin to his thigh.Et si videas, quod non possit applicare crus ad coxam, sed debet applicare ad exteriora vel ad interiora, scire debes, quod dislocatur in uno quaecunque modo. But if it does not adhere to the thigh but has to be pressed either outwards or inwards you know that the knee is dislocated.If however it does not adhere, then you know that the knee is dislocated.Si autem videas, quod non possit applicare ad posteriora, sed debet applicare ad anteriora: scire debes, quod Genu est dislocatum.
But if you see that he cannot apply it to the front but has to press it against his chest, then know that the knee is dislocated.The restoration of all these types of dislocation is to make the patient sit upright so that he can stretch out his leg over it if possible and adhere his back to your face; and place his foot between your feet.Et tene eum per pedes tuos, et fac ut manu sua abducat Genu tuum usque ad posteriora eius, et ponat eum in locum suum.
Then hold his feet with your feet and make him draw back his knee to his posterior with his hand and put it in its place.Then have the knee adhere to your palms and straighten them between your fingers over his knee.Et tene eum per pedes tuos, et fac ut applicet crura sua ad coxam suam, usque quod possit ponere talonem super os femoris sui. Then apply with your palm the two sides of his knee firmly. And another assistant should extend his foot until the knee returns to its place.
And the sign of reduction is that the leg sticks to the thigh gently, not with force.
Then plaster it and make the leg adhere to the thigh.Et postea stet ille vir, cuius est crus cum coxa, donec curentur omnia lachrymae. Then he should stand with his leg and thigh bound for three or four days until all the bruises are gone. Then loosen them.Et iterum applica ut supra, donec redeant omnia lachrymae.
And the invalid should not walk for a few days until he is healed.
But if you cannot achieve reduction, then apply strong extension with bandages as described earlier for curing a dislocated elbow until it is reduced.
¶ On the cure of a dislocation of the Heel.Si calcis dislocatur cum malleolo, per contusionem, vel per aliam causam, non debet indubitanter reduci, sed debet primum curari contusio.
The calcaneus is sometimes removed with a small incision and sometimes it is dislocated according to its complement. And its dislocation occurs either towards the inner side or the outer side.
And a sign of this dislocation is that you see the calcaneus swollen and protruding in the direction in which it is dislocated.
And its cure is simply to reduce it; and this involves extending it with ease by hand and adjusting it until it is restored.
However, when it is dislocated according to its complement, the invalid must be made to lie straight down; and a strong assistant must hold him by his back, in the middle of his body.
Then you hold with your right hand the top part of his foot, and with your left hand the bottom part of his foot in place of a peg.Et deinde trahe pedem ad partem dislocationis secundum complementum: et cum uultu tegeas dislocationem pedis eius, donec reduxerit.
Then draw your right hand to your foot. Then with your left hand grab the leg in two places.
Then extend with the left and push the instep of the foot turned towards you with the right without exerting any effort.
Do that twice as we have described.
Then push the instep of the foot towards the leg for a third time while you draw out the nail.
If therefore it returns to its place once or twice in this manner and you see the foot straightened, that is good; but if not, then repeat the operation on it, for it will return to its place.
But if its return is prohibited by what we have described, then let the patient lie on his back on the ground and fix a stake firmly in the ground so that it falls between his thighs; and you have already spread a cloth over him so that he is not hurt.
Then the assistant should take his thigh; afterwards the other assistant should extend his foot, or with their hands, or with a bandage which they tie around the ankle of the foot. Then all the assistants should extend against the comparison of each other; and the stake is standing between the two thighs of the patient holding him back so that his body does not get pulled down upon extending.Et postea minister pedis trahat contra omnes, et ministrum, qui est super eum, ad se, donec pertingat in uice tertia, ubi redit ad locum suum.
And afterwards the assistant of the foot draws against all, and the assistant who is above him towards himself until it reaches in the third place where it returns to its place; then the doctor makes the dislocation equal by his hands, and the other assistant holds the healthy leg towards the bottom.Et sic factum sit dislocationem de pedibus: quomodo dislocamus manibus dislocari debet. Then the dislocation returns with speed.
When therefore the dislocation returns and you are told of its cure, then put on the plaster and the pad, and bind it firmly with a bandage, and tie up the foot to the thigh with a ligature.
And you must take care lest you harm or injure the nerves which lie behind the heel, that the bandage does not lie harshly over them and hurt them.
Then let it be for two days, or three. If the bandage is made soft, then tighten it; then untie it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the invalid from walking for forty days. If however he tries to walk before that space of time, there is no doubt but that the dislocation will return and be ruined and will not receive a cure afterwards.
If however an ulcer should happen to him, then you must apply to it what we have already said in another place about treatment, and fomentations until it is healed.
¶ Of the dislocation of the toes and its cure.Cuius causa est, ut debes scire, quia habemus ossa digitorum pedis in uno articulo, eorumque articulus cum calcanio est una res.
It is necessary that what is displaced from them be made equal with a little extension without labor; and indeed that is not difficult, but rather easy.
But if the displacement is at some of the knots of the back of the foot: then it is necessary that he make the invalid sit with his foot above an equal place on the earth, or above a board; and he stands just as he walks.
Then you stand, and put your foot over that which projects from those joints. Then trample on it with your foot with strength, until it returns, and you see that it is already equalized, and no prominence appears in the place.Et si tamen apparuerit prominentia in locis quibusdam: tunc est necessarium, ut deglutiatur eam cum chero, donec dislocet, et faciat equam.
Then place under his foot a board that takes in the whole of the foot and has two ends. Then bind it with a decent band for three days. Then loosen it and let him rest from walking for many days until he is bound up and secured by the reduction.
Of the species of dislocation with wound or fracture.
When something has happened to it, and you try to cure it and bring about its restoration, death often results; because of this one should not presume to act on the curing of it unless he is prudent in the art and long-used, merciful, pious, slow to anger, not presumptuous: and that he make use with hot medicaments in the incaeption only: and let the weak person go a long time by divine judgement. Unless you see or hope for salvation from perdition with gentleness of sickness and where something of hope appears.Si dislocatio in artus ueniat cum fractura, et uel cum vulnere, debes primum scire quod dislocationis natura est per accidens uel per defectum nervorum: aut uel per excessum motus qui fit a contrariu motu ad contra partem. If dislocation comes to a limb with fracture and also with wound you should first know that the nature of dislocation is by accident or by defect of nerves: or even by excess of motion which happens from contrary motion towards the contrary part. Try therefore its reduction straightaway at the beginning, before the hot aposteme happens.Quod si non possis facere per te ipsum, adhibe alium qui possit, et teneat eum per pedes uel per manus, donec tu reducas dislocationem per illa qua fuit; et quod si sit in artibus dislocatus, debes adhibere ad ea parte qua dislocata est.
If therefore the limb returns according to that which we wish, then administer a régime which quiets aposteme; and cure the wound with that which suits it out of desiccative ointments.Si dislocationem faciat in contraria parte qua est dislocata et contra naturam ei per modum quod describere non possumus, sed quod habemus experientia, non debes curare eam nisi prius disloqueris et reducis ad naturam suam: postea cura eam ut antea.
If there is a dislocation with the fracture and they occur in separated bones of the jaw, then try the removal of them, and do in that which we said in simple diseases from that which preceded in their places.
And beware according to your power, and keep yourself from going astray into the way of fear: according to that which preceded my prophecy to you.
For it is better for you before your Creator and more permanent for your glory and more safe for your body among them at that time.
