He who compiled this book said when he completed for you, O people, this book which is a part of the science of medicine in its entirety and reached the goal in it from its clarity and explanation, I saw that I complete it for you with this article which is a part of the work by hand.
Because work by hand is refined in our country and in our time completely absent, so that it was almost about to be studied and its trace would be cut off. And what remained of it were simple drawings in the books of the ancients which my hands corrected and made their errors and confusion clear until I clarified its meanings and distanced its benefit.
So I saw that I revive it and compile in it this article on the path of explanation, clarity, and brevity and bring forth images of instruments,  and all tools of work because it is from increase of explanation and help of what is needed for it.
And the reason why there is no skilled craftsman by hand in our time is because the craft of medicine is long and it befits its owner to study before that the science of anatomy which Galen described. Until he stands on the benefits of the organs and their systems and temperaments, their connection and separation, and the knowledge of bones, nerves, muscles, their number, their exits, veins, arteries, and the places of their exits.
And therefore Hippocrates said that physicians by name are many and by deed few, especially in the craft of the hand, and we have mentioned from that a part in the introduction to this book.
Because he who is not learned in what we have mentioned from anatomy has not escaped falling into an error that kills people by it, as I have seen many times who imagined themselves in this science and claimed it without knowledge or study.
And that because I saw a physician ignorant who cut on a tumor of a swine in the neck of a woman, so he severed some arteries of the neck, and she bled until she fell dead before his eyes.
I saw another physician who advanced in removing a calculus from a man who had been wounded in the bladder, and the calculus was large so he was afraid, and he removed it with a piece of the urinary bladder's membrane. And the man died after about three days, and I was summoned to remove it, and I saw from the size of the calculus and the state of the sick man that I estimated his condition accordingly.
And I saw another physician who was making a living with some leaders of our country on medicine.
So it happened to a black boy who had a fracture in his leg near the heel with a wound, and the physician, out of ignorance, hastened and tightened the fracture on the wound with splints and bandages tightly, leaving no room for the wound to breathe.
Then he left him on his whims and abandoned him for days, ordering him not to remove the bandage until his leg and foot swelled, and he was headed towards death.
So I was summoned to him and hastened to remove the bandage, and he found relief and escaped from his pain except that the corruption had become strong in the limb, and I was unable to reverse it.
And the corruption continued to spread in the limb until he died.
And I saw another physician who treated a cancerous tumor, and it became worse after days until the suffering of his patient increased greatly because if cancer is from black humors, it should not be exposed to iron at all.
Unless it is in a limb that can be completely removed.
And for this reason, my sons, it is necessary for you to learn that the work with the hand is divided into two parts: work accompanied by safety and work that brings harm in most cases.
And I have warned in every place where this book is reached about the work that involves danger and fear, so it is necessary for you to avoid it and reject it.
So that the ignorant may not find a way to speak and revile, take for yourselves firmness and caution, and satisfy yourselves with gentleness and steadfastness.
And use the best way that leads to safety and a good outcome, and beware of dangerous and difficult diseases.
And guard yourselves from what you fear might enter upon you of doubt in your religion and worldly affairs, for it is more lasting for your own sake, and higher in this world and the next for your destinies.
For Galen said in some of his instructions: "Do not treat a bad disease so that you are called bad physicians."
And this treatise has been divided into three chapters.
The First Chapter.
On cauterization with fire and cauterization with a sharp drug, described systematically from the century to the present, and pictures of instruments and cautery tools, and everything needed in manual work.
The Second Chapter.
On incision, evacuation, bloodletting, cupping, and surgery, including the extraction of arrows and the like, all described systematically and arranged, with pictures of instruments.
The Third Chapter.
On setting bones, dislocations, and treatment of fractures and the like, described systematically and arranged from the century to the present, with pictures of instruments.
The First Chapter.
On Cauterization.
And before we mention how to work with it, it is necessary to mention the way of its benefits and harms, and in what temperament it is used.
And I say that the talk on how to benefit from cauterization and its harms is a long discussion, a precise science, and a hidden secret, and many of the wise have spoken about it.
And they differed about it, and I have abbreviated from their words as much as possible for fear of prolixity.
I say that the purging is beneficial in general for every bad constitution that exists with a substance and without a substance, except for two constitutions: the hot constitution without a substance and the dry constitution without a substance.
As for the dry constitution with a substance, there has been disagreement about it. Some have said that purging is beneficial in it, while others have said the opposite, that purging is not suitable for a disease that is from heat and dryness because the nature of fire is heat and dryness.
And it is impossible to cure a hot and dry disease with a hot and dry medicine, and he who says the opposite said that purging by fire can be beneficial for a hot and dry disease that occurs in people's bodies. Because when you add the body of a human being and its moisture to the nature of fire, you make the body of the human being cold.
And I say what he says because experience has revealed that to me many times, unless it is not supposed by one who has practiced and traveled in the field of purging to a great extent. And stood on the difference of people's constitutions and the conditions of diseases in themselves, their causes, symptoms, and duration.
As for the rest of the constitutions, there is no fear for you from them, especially the cold and wet diseases, because all physicians have agreed on it and have not disagreed on the benefit of purging in them.
And know, my sons, that the secret of healing is purging by fire and its preference over purging by burning medicine because fire is a single essence whose action does not exceed the member that is cauterized and does not harm another connected member except for slight harm.
And purging by burning medicine may exceed its action to what is beyond the members and may cause a disease in the member that is difficult to treat and may even kill, and fire because of its honor and generosity of essence does not do that except if it is excessive.
And this has become clear to us by experience through the length of service and care for the craft and standing upon the realities of the matter.
For this reason, I have dispensed with lengthy discourse, although if it were fitting for this book of mine, I would have presented to you in fire a secret and hidden manner and the way of doing it in bodies and removing it from diseases by philosophical and demonstrative speech that would strike your understanding.
And know, O sons, that they have differed concerning the time which is suitable for cauterization and have made the best time to be the time of spring.
And I say that cauterization can be suitable in every time because the harm caused by time is overshadowed by the benefit brought about by cauterization. Especially if the cauterization is from a necessary and strong pain, a menacing one that cannot tolerate delay because of what might follow it, which would be a harm greater than the slight damage caused by time.
And do not put in your mind, O sons, what the common people and physicians imagine that cauterization which cures a disease will never return again and make it final.
And it is not fitting for you to think that cauterization is like a medicine that corrects the humors and dries up the humors which are the cause of pain.
Except that cauterization is preferable to medicine in the speed of its success, strength of its effect, and intensity of its power.
And the disease may return after a time, depending on the patient's temperament, the strength of his illness, and what is prepared in his body from the gathering of humors within him and his negligence in acquiring them from food and so on from such causes.
God willing, except that the disease in which cauterization is used would be a mild one and in an organ with little humors and dampness. Like the pain of a molar and its likes, it is possible that there will be no return of that pain, and this occurs at the least.
And as for the saying of the common people, that when a wound occurs its treatment is finished, it is a correct statement contrary to what they think because they believe that there is no remedy that will benefit after the occurrence of a wound, and the matter is otherwise.
And the meaning of that which is said that "the wound" is the last of treatments is that when we used types of treatment for a disease from among diseases, and those medicines did not benefit, and then we used another thing that was a wound, then it benefited; therefore, it happened that "the wound" is the last of treatments. Not on the meaning to which the common people and many ignorant physicians went.
And those before mentioned said that a wound with gold is better than a wound with iron, and they said that because of the moderation of gold and its noble nature, and they said that it does not cause cauterization of the place of the wound, and that is not at all true.
Because I have tried it, and found that it does that in some bodies but not others, and the wound with it is better and more excellent than iron as they said, except that if you heat the gold plate in the fire, it will not become clear to you when it heats to the degree you want for the redness of gold.
And because it quickly becomes cold, and if you increase it in heat, it melts in the fire, and if you break it, then the craftsman is ruined by that in his work, therefore, the wound with iron has become faster and more correct for us in action, God willing.
And I have arranged this chapter on wounds into sections that I have organized from the head to the foot so that it is easy for the student what he wants from it, God willing.
The First Section.
In wounds of the head, one kind.
This application is beneficial from the excess of humidity and coldness on the brain, which are the cause of headache and much discharge from the head towards the eyes and ears, and much sleep and toothache and sore throat. And in general for every disease that appears from coldness like stroke, epilepsy, and muteness and similar diseases.
The picture of this application is that you order the sick person first to vomit with the purgative medicine for the head three nights or four, according to what the strength of the sick person and his nature and habit require.
Then you order him to shave his head with the razor, then sit him in front of you seated with his hands on his chest.
Then you put the root of your hand on the root of his nose between his eyes, and where your middle finger ends, mark that place with the lead.
Then warm the olive-green iron whose picture is this.
When a part of the skull has been exposed like the size of an almond or a lentil, raise your hand, otherwise, re-apply your hand with the same iron or another if it cools. Until you see what I told you from the bone, then take some salt and dissolve it in water and soak a piece of cotton wool in it and place it on the spot and leave it for three days.
Then carry upon it cotton wool soaked in ghee and leave it on until the char has gone from the fire, then treat him with the four ointment until he heals if God wills.
And they have said that the wound as long as it remains open extends the pus, so it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them have mentioned that the skin should be cauterized to the bone and hold the iron until some thickness of the bone burns, then after that what has burned from the bone is removed, then treated.
Others say that one should exaggerate the cauterization until it affects the bone strongly, so that it falls away from the bone like a small gemstone or star, and they claimed that it exhales fumes from the head and leaves the wound open for a long time.
Then he treats until it heals, and I do not see these two types of cauterization at all except in some people and on the path of conjecture. Leaving it with me is better, and safe, if it is, because the head swells when its natural connection is separated, as we have seen in other organs.
Especially when the patient's head is naturally weak, and the first type of cauterization is safer and better for me, and with it I act, and do it safely, God willing.
The Second Chapter.
In the head also.
If there is a chronic headache that has lasted for the patient and he used poultices, cauteries, compresses, ointments and bandages, and especially if he had been cauterized with the single cauterization we described and nothing of that helped him, then look. Then if the patient's head is strong in its structure by nature and was not weak, and he found a severe coldness, cauterize with another cauterization slightly above that one. Then cauterize on each horn of his head until the thickness of the skin goes and the bone is exposed to the degree we described. And cauterize on the back of his head in the place known as the axe, and lighten your hand in this one and do not expose the bone because the patient finds great pain from it unlike the pain of all other cauterizations of the head, and I will mention this cauterization in its place.
The cautery that is used to cauterize the horns of the head and its back should be gentler than the one used to cauterize the middle of the head, and this is its shape.
Chapter Three.
Concerning the unprotracted headache.
If headache occurs in the fissure of the head with a pounding pain and the pain extends to the eye, empty the patient with purgatives for the head and use all the treatment mentioned in the classifications of diseases. If this does not work, then treat it on two faces. Either with a sharp, burning medicine or with iron.
As for treatment with a burning medicine, take one clove of garlic, peel it and cut off its ends on both sides, then split the location of the pain in the temple with a wide scalpel until there is a place under the skin that can accommodate the clove.
Insert it under the skin until it disappears, then pull on it with forceps in a tight grip and leave it for about fifteen hours, then remove it and take out the garlic and leave the wound for two or three days, then carry on.
Cover it with cotton soaked in butter until the place is greasy, then treat it with ointment until it heals, God willing. And if you wish, do this with some of the burning medicines that I gave you in article eighteen on burning medicines.
As for treatment with iron, it is like this: heat the iron whose picture is shown here.
And it is called the nail-shaped iron because its head resembles a nail with some engraving and in its center, a small protrusion.
Then place it on the location of the pain and hold your hand while you turn the iron slightly, and the amount that burns from the thickness of the skin should be like half of it. And raise your hand so that you do not burn the artery below which causes bleeding, then absorb cotton in salt water and place it on the location and leave it for three days. Then carry the cotton with butter and treat it with ointment until it heals, God willing.
And if you wish, cut this fistula with the instrument born from the steel and preserve it from severing the artery in this unchronic fistula particularly.
Chapter Four.
On chronic fistulas.
If you have treated the fistula with what we mentioned of the aforementioned treatment and what we mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and the treatment did not work, and you saw from the cause what does not respond to what we mentioned from the first kind by medicine or the second kind by fire. Then it is necessary to heat the steel instrument until it whitens after you have learned on the place of pain with a line equal in length to half a finger or thereabouts, and leave your hand once while you tighten it until you cut the artery and reach near the bone.
Except that it is necessary for you to beware of the jawbone which moves when chewing, so it burns the muscle or the nerve that moves it, and causes tension.
And be careful and vigilant from the bleeding of the artery you cut for there is danger in cutting it. Especially for one who does not know what to do and has no experience, leaving the work is preferable.
And it will come to mention the treatment of the bleeding that occurs from the artery in its place in this book, God willing, if you see from the cause what this kind of cauterization does not do.
And if you see the body of the sick person  likely to be cauterized in the middle of the head as we described and treated the wound until it heals, God willing.
And if you wish, use the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter of searing the artery with a double-edged blade, for it is a better and more effective cautery than this.
Chapter Five.
On cauterizing ear pains.
If pain occurs in the ear due to cold, it is treated with laxatives and all the treatments mentioned in the division. And if the pain does not go away, apply the plate called "al-naqtah" whose image is this.
Then it is placed on it after heating it around the whole ear as it revolves, or around both of them if the pain is in both. And it is removed by the cautery a little from the base of the ear after learning its position with lead, and the cautery should be the size of ten points in each ear or thereabouts. Then the places are treated until they heal, God willing.
The Sixth Chapter.
On the Power of the Cautery.
The cautery that is treated with cauterization is one of the types that arise from phlegm as mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
And it avoids the cautery that arises from phlegm and hardening of nerves.
When this type of cautery is treated with poultices, compresses, and gargles and your treatment was not effective, then it is necessary that the diseased area be cauterized with three cauterizations. One at the base of the ear and the second slightly below its crest, and the third at the meeting of the lips.
And make your cautery from the opposite side of the diseased side because relaxation occurs in the side that appears healthy.
And the image of the cautery is that you make it with a cauterization opposite the top of the ear under the corner of the head slightly, and another in the crest, and its length should be the length of the thumb.
Lower the cautery with your hand until it burns about half the thickness of the skin, and this is the image of the cauterization plate, which is a type of knife whose image has been shown to you, but it is slightly gentler than that, as you see. The blade should be slightly thick and then the place is treated with what has been mentioned before until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Seven.
On Chronic Stroke.
If the stroke persists and you have treated it with what has been mentioned, and your treatment did not work, and there is no fever in the patient, then give him four doses of  the drug One dose on each horn of his head and one dose in the middle of the head as we have mentioned, and one dose at the back of the head as previously mentioned.
The recipe for the cauterization as previously mentioned, and it may also be cauterized with one dose on the mouth of the stomach to be more effective, then treated as before.
Chapter Eight.
On Forgetfulness.
He who has forgetfulness from phlegm should first be given the patient large quantities of purging drinks and purified pills for the brain.
Then his head is shaved completely and a mustard poultice as written in the article on the plasters is applied to the back of his head several times because it is a kind of cauterization.
And do it on the same order that was mentioned there, if he is healed by this, otherwise give him three doses at the back of his head arranged from the top of the head to the base of the neck.
And make between each dose and the next a thickness of a finger, then treat the cauterization as before, if you want to increase it and the patient is capable of it, give him the middle dose.
And if you want to increase it, then give him doses on the horns, then treat him until he is healed, and the cauterization should be olive oil as previously mentioned.
Chapter Nine.
On Paralysis and Relaxation of the Whole Body.
It is necessary that you proceed in purifying the head with the implements and what we have mentioned then shave the patient's head, then make a incision in the middle of the head and an incision on each horn of the head and an incision on its back.
And three on the vertebrae of the neck, if it is necessary in a case of relaxation of the body to more than that and the patient was likely for that and the disease is strong and severe then make four incisions on the vertebrae of his back. And make the incision until it burns from the skin most of it and raise your hand then treat him as has been mentioned before until he heals if God wills, and be the cauterizing instrument olive-like.
The tenth chapter.
On how to treat epilepsy.
Only the epileptic who is afflicted with epilepsy from phlegm should be cauterized, so it is necessary that his nose be cleansed first with the large implements and all the treatment that we have mentioned in the division if the patient is large and likely to take the medicine.
But if he is a child who cannot tolerate medicine, then let him use gargles and cleansing mouthwashes for the brain before that for many days with improvement of his nutrition.
Then shave his head and then make one incision in the middle of the head as has been mentioned before, and another incision at its back. And on each horn of his head, an incision; if the patient is strong and likely, then make the incisions that were mentioned for paralysis and relaxation of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and back, and be the cauterizing instrument olive-like as in the description that has come before.
If the patient is a child, then make the cautery gentle in this form.
The eleventh chapter.
On how to treat intestinal worms.
If the cause of melancholia is putrid moisture and thick phlegm, use the cauteries mentioned in the chapter on apoplexy.
If the cause of melancholia is a black, viscous humor and the body of the sick person is moist and corrupt, purify his nose as mentioned before in the division.
Then shave the head of the sick person and then make a tight cake of cotton like a circle and put it in the middle of his head, and the sick person is sitting upright holding from each side, and take one cupful of old sheep fat.
Then heat it on the fire at a moderate heat as much as the finger can bear if it is inserted in it, then empty it in the middle of his head in the circle and leave it until it cools, do this to the sick person every week once with all his good treatment until he heals, if Allah wills.
And if you wish, cauterize it with small, many drops without holding your hand to the cautery, but make it a smearing, for this type of cautery moistens the brain moderately.
Then apply cotton soaked in fat or chicken tallow on top of it.
Chapter the Twelfth.
In cauterizing water coming down from the eye.
If it becomes apparent to you the beginning of water coming down from the eye with the signs mentioned in the division, then hasten to purify the head of the sick person and protect him from all moisture and make him sweat in the bath on an empty stomach for days.
Then once, shave his head and cauterize in the middle of the head, then cauterize two cauterizations on the temples if the beginning of the eye water coming down is from both eyes, or from one side if it is from one eye.
Then cut with the cautery all the veins and arteries under the skin, let the cauterizations be long in width on the temples and take care not to bleed.
If you see something of it, cut it where it is with any treatment that you can manage and I will come to the wisdom in the matter of severing the veins and cutting them and guarding against bleeding.
And it may be seared in the nape of the neck under two bones, smooth ones.
The Thirteenth Chapter.
On Chronic Flowing of Tears.
If the tears of the eye are chronic and constant, and they come from the veins and arteries in the outside of the head, and you are certain that this is from a cold and large phlegm, boil the cautery which I have described at the beginning of the flowing water. Boil a cautery in the middle of the head and two on the temples, and two at the nape of the neck under the bones. And if you need to increase it, boil a cautery on each side from the angle of the eye to the edge of the eyebrow with a small soldering iron.
The Fourteenth Chapter.
On Cauterizing a Nostrils Malodour.
If you treated it with what we have mentioned in the section and the treatment did not benefit, then immediately make the patient put on qinqiya three nights, then shave his head and cauterize the middle of the head with the olive soldering iron. Then cauterize with the nail soldering iron two above the eyebrows under the hair slightly, and guard against the artery, do not cut it. And this is a picture of the nail soldering iron.
The Fifteenth Chapter.
On Cauterizing the Relaxation of the Eyelid.
If the eyelid has relaxed because of a disease or moisture, cauterize the eyelid with one cautery using this crescent soldering iron.
And if you wish, cauterize slightly above the eyebrows, two on each side, and be spaced from the temples, and let the length of each cautery be along the eyebrow.
Do not extend your hand in cautery beyond what burns a third of the skin, and the appearance of the cautery should be like this.
The Sixteenth Chapter.
On Cauterizing the Eyelid.
If its borders turn inward and the eye is sunken, then cautery in it is of two kinds. Either cautery by fire or cautery by a burning drug, as for cauterizing it by fire, order the patient before that to leave its borders if he is one whose they are inflamed until they grow long and equal.
If it is cauterized at its growth, then tie his eyes with a bandage so that they do not move until it grows, and if it has grown and become equal, place the patient's head in your stone block, then teach on the eyelid of the eye with lead pencil a sign in the shape of an As leaf.
And the beginning of the mark is near the borders, then you place under the eyelid cotton soaked in egg white or in the saliva of the quince, and heat the cautery with this image.
Then cauterize on the shape which you have taught little by little in many times until the surface of the skin burns, which is like the shape of the As leaf altogether, a special appearance and a sign of the health of your work that you see the eyelid has become tanned and the hair has risen above the fleshy lining of the eye.
Then raise your hand at that time and leave him three days, then carry on it cotton with butter until the scabs are shed, then treat him with ointment until he heals, if God wills, if something of the hair returns after a while and the eyelid relaxes.
Then repeat the cautery on that place as you did first, if the hair is in the lower eyelid, hold it until it returns to its natural place and do not remove the hair from the eye, as for cauterizing with a burning drug, order the patient to leave the borders until they grow long and equal.
Then you make a sheet of paper, and take from the usual soap and unquenched lime, one drachm or so of each, then grind them both well together and do this quickly lest they dry. Then you spread it on the paper you made in the shape of a leaf of as, and put it on one or both eyelids and place under the eye cotton soaked in egg white and the patient's head in your stone.
And you place your index finger above the medicine and press it lightly and move it whenever the patient feels the sting of the medicine because he will feel a sensation like fire, as long as he feels the sting, leave the medicine and move it with your finger, if the sting stops, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And look, if you see the eyelid has risen as it does when you smell fire or cut, otherwise, repeat on it of the medicine on the place which was not affected by the medicine and did not turn black until you complete your work and the eye is inflamed then put cotton on it with butter until the sting of burning subsides.
Then treat it with palm ointment or another until it heals, and it is necessary for you when working that you exercise extreme caution that nothing of the medicine falls into the eye, if the eyelid relaxes after days and we fear something in the hair entering the eye.
Then repeat the medicine on that place of the eyelid which relaxed especially as you did at first, then treat it until it heals, and this is a picture of a leaf of as.
And know that people's eyes differ in size and smallness, so according to that, let your inflaming be, and it is not a hidden path of right for one who has experience in this craft.
The Seventeenth Chapter.
In the kind of ulcer which appears in the corner of the eye.
If you have treated the ulcers as mentioned in the classifications of diseases and your treatment has been ineffective, then it is necessary to cauterize them with this method.
Command the patient to place his head in a block and have an attendant hold his head between your hands, holding it so that it does not move or strike against anything.
Then, place cotton moistened in egg white or the saliva of the black fig on his eyes, and then heat the cautery whose image is depicted here.
It should be hollow like the tube of an eagle's feather from one end which is for cauterization, and if you wish, the other end can be open, and if you wish it can be solid like a probe; however, this hollow one is better for your work, God willing.
Then, if it is open, squeeze the ulcer and remove the pus from it, or dry it out; and if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus, and then place the cautery on top of it while it is very hot, holding it with your hand until it reaches the bone.
And keep your hand a little distance from the eye, towards the nose when cauterizing so that your hand does not slip or make the patient nervous causing the cautery to fall into the eyelid and spoil it; if in the first cauterization it reaches the bone, otherwise, reheat the cautery again if needed.
Leave him for three days, then apply cotton soaked in butter to it and treat it with a drying ointment until it heals; if it has gone forty days and has not healed, apply the sharp medicinal powder until the bone is exposed and follow what will be mentioned about it in its chapter, God willing.
And another method of cauterizing ulcers, mentioned by some earlier physicians, is to aim at the location of the ulcer, make a cut there, and place a fine probe in the same incision, whose image is depicted here.
Pour into it a measure the weight of a drachma of melted lead and hold your hand firmly on the beak, pressing well so that the patient does not move at all, lest the molten lead flow into his eye. And it is necessary to place on the eye of the patient a cotton swab moistened in albumen or in water.
For lead burns the place of the nasal polyp and cleanses it with a wondrous cure, if the polyp is cleansed by what has been mentioned of cauterization and treatment, otherwise there is no choice but to use the nostril puncture and return the polyp to the nostril's passage as will be mentioned in its specific place.
Chapter Eighteen.
In cauterizing a cleft lip.
A cleft in the lip, called a harelip, occurs frequently, especially in boys' lips; it happens often. If this cleft is treated with what has been mentioned in the section and the treatment did not work, then take a small, knife-like iron to cauterize like this...
Its hollow is like the blade of a knife, then you place it firmly into the same cleft until the cauterization reaches the depth of the cleft and then treat it with honey until it heals God willing.
Chapter Nineteen.
In cauterizing a polyp that occurs in the mouth.
If it appears at the root of the gums, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, as a swelling then bursts and becomes a flowing pus polyp.  And you treat it and it did not benefit from treatment, then it is necessary to heat an iron cautery in a measure that fits the polyp...
... then you insert it firmly into the polyp's hole and hold your hand until the heated iron reaches its entire depth, doing this once or twice then treat it afterward with what has been mentioned of treatment until it heals God willing.
If the substance is severed and healed, otherwise it is necessary to examine the place and remove the decayed bone according to what will come in its chapter, if God wills.
The twentieth chapter.
Of loose and relaxed gums.
If the gums have become loose because of moisture and the teeth have moved, and you have treated them with medications but they did not benefit, then place the head of the patient in a stone mortar, then heat the iron instrument whose image comes after this, after placing the tube on the tooth.
And insert the iron instrument into it with a handle of quicklime, and hold your hand slightly until the patient feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth, then raise your hand and repeat the iron instrument several times according to what you desire, then the patient fills his mouth with salt water.
And he holds it for an hour and spits it out, then the loose tooth will be fixed, the relaxed gums will tighten, and the rotten moisture will dry up.
The twenty-first chapter.
Of toothache.
If the toothache is from cold or there is a worm in it, and the treatment with medications did not benefit, then its treatment is in two ways: either treatment with butter or treatment with fire.
As for treatment with butter, take the cow butter and boil it in an iron ladle or a bowl, then take cotton, wind it on the end of a stick, dip it in the boiling butter, and put it on the aching tooth quickly, and hold it until it cools.
Then repeat it several times until the heat reaches the root of the tooth, and if you want, dip a bandage or cotton in cold butter and put it on the aching tooth and place the heated iron above it until the fire reaches the bottom of the tooth.
As for cauterizing it with fire, you should resort to a copper or iron pipe with some thickness in its body so that the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient. Then, take the heated iron and place it on the same tooth and hold your hand until the iron cools. Do this several times.
If the pain goes away on that same day or another, it is necessary after cauterizing to fill the patient's mouth with good fat and keep it for an hour then spit it out. This is the picture of the cauterizing iron.
You cauterize with any side you wish and on the count that you can, and this is the picture of the pipe.
The Twenty-Second Chapter.
Cauterizing Pigs.
If the pigs are due to phlegm and cold humors and they do not respond to ripening with medicine, and you want rapid ripening, then heat the hollow iron cauterizing instrument whose picture is shown, open at both ends.
So that the smoke comes out from the other end when cauterizing, place it covered on the same tumor once and a second time if you need to until you reach the depth of the tumor. If the tumor is small, make the cauterizing iron equal to the size of the tumor.
Then leave it for three days and apply cotton soaked in butter on top of it until what was burned by the fire goes away, then treat it with ointment and cauterizing until it heals God willing.
The Twenty-Third Chapter.
Cauterizing from Hoarseness of Voice and Shortness of Breath.
If the phlegm has overwhelmed the windpipe, especially if this is accompanied by a cold temperament, it is necessary for the patient to first evacuate with laxative medicines, then cauterize in the notch of the chest at the root of the larynx in the lower position.
Beware that you do not reach the pharynx with the cauterizing iron and burn from the skin except half of it, then cauterize again at the juncture of the neck at the end of its last pearl with a burning point and make the cautery as described before.
Then treat it with what has been mentioned before until it heals, God willing.
The Twenty-Fourth Chapter.
In cauterizing ailments of the lungs and cough.
If the cough and lung disease is from cold humors and there is no fever or plague, and the illness is chronic, cauterize two irons above the collarbones in the low, soft, empty places and another iron in the middle of the chest between the breasts.
And make the cautery nail-shaped as described before, and if you wish, let your cauterizing iron be a point, with the cautery called "the point," whose image has been described previously in the section on cauterizing earaches, and let it be thirty points or so.
Then treat him with what has been mentioned before until it heals, and you can make a cautery with three branches in this form, and hasten the cauterization with it because you cauterize with it three cauterizations in one time, and this is the image of the cautery.
The Twenty-Fifth Chapter.
In cauterizing the armpit.
If the head of the humerus has become dislocated due to slippery humors or it did not set properly when returned after being dislocated, so that it becomes a habit to return then become dislocated at the slightest movement as we have seen, then it is necessary to return the jaw first. Then, the patient lies on his back or right side, and you raise the skin inside the armpit upward with your left hand fingers if the joint has dislocated inward.
Then comes the heated cauterizing iron with two points, the picture of which is shown here.
Then, with it, the skin is cauterized until it penetrates to the other side, and the shape of the cautery comes out as four cauterizations.  It may also be cauterized with a cauterizing iron having three points, in which case the shape of the cautery will then be six cauterizations, and the points are on the back of the instrument.
And this is the picture of the cauterizing iron with three points.
And one may be added to this number, so that the cauterizations become eight. Then, the cauterized instrument with a crushed salt-bearing mortar is applied on top of it, and then the patient is put to rest, and the limb is not moved for a while until it strengthens, although dislocation upward rarely happens.
So it is cauterized over the shoulder joint with one well-made cautery incision or many cauterizations in drops, because the articulation hardens, moisture goes away, and the wound heals.
The Sixth Twenty Chapter.
On Cauterizing the Stomach.
If, in the stomach, there is cold and a great deal of moisture until it is expelled from its nature and phlegm has increased to it, and it was treated with various treatments but it did not benefit, then it is necessary that the patient lies on his back and extends his legs and arms, then three cauterizations are made. One cauterization under the chest spoon-full, as much as a finger, with a well-made cautery instrument, and two cauterizations below on both sides of the single cautery until the shape of the cauterizations becomes triangular, and they are kept apart so that they do not meet if they should merge. And the depth of the cautery is one-third the thickness of the skin, and this is the shape of the cauterizations.
On this picture and to this extent no more.
If you wish, you may cauterize it like one large spot in the middle of the stomach, in this way.
And the cautery iron with which you cauterize this single spot should be circular, in this way.
And the stomach may be cauterized in spots for one who has been injured from this cautery, which is to learn on the stomach dots on the extent that you desire with the stylus, then cauterize it with a pointed cautery iron, then treat it with the treatment that I present until it heals.
The Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
In cauterizing a cold liver.
If it is presented from the liver pain about coldness and moisture or about a boiling wind until it has gone out of its natural temperament excessively, and the sick person was treated with what we mentioned in the division, and that did not benefit him. Then it becomes necessary that the sick person lie on his side and with the stylus learn three cauterizations in this shape and this measure exactly on the liver below the ribs where the human arm ends.
And after each cauterization, it should be on the thickness of a finger, and the cauterization should be straight along the body and do not squeeze your hand with the cautery iron yes indeed.
And let the amount that is burned from the thickness of the skin be half, no more, and the sick person should stand on his feet, if he cannot stand, then he should be lying down with his legs stretched out and his arms raised, and this is the image of the cautery iron.
And you can cauterize these cauterizations with the scalpel-shaped cautery if you have a companion and proficiency in the craft, and beware lest you overdo the cauterization so that it burns all the skin, so that it burns the abdomen and reaches the intestines, for the skin there is thin, so know this.
The Twenty-Eighth Chapter.
A tumor in the liver treated with cupping.
If a fistula appears in the liver and you want to know if the tumor is in the liver flesh or in its peritoneum, then if it is in the liver flesh, the patient will feel heaviness and pain without sharpness.
And if it is in the peritoneum of the liver, there will be severe pain with sharpness, and you see that physicians have been unable to treat it, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on his side, then outline the tumor location with charcoal.
Then heat the iron over the fire, and this iron resembles a hoe, and this is its image. And cauterize it with one stroke until it burns all the skin and reaches to the peritoneum, so that the entire abscess comes out, then treat him with the treatment of fistulas until he heals.
And this type of cauterization should not be used except by one who has long practiced medicine and whose hands have performed these diseases repeatedly through experience, so then he proceeds to such work and leaving it to me is better.
The Twentieth Chapter.
Cauterization of the Suture.
The ancients described cauterization with the roots of ziraund for a cold suture in this way: take one long, dry root of ziraund, as long as you can find, and as thick as your finger, then soak it in oil and heat it in the fire. Then cauterize with one stroke between the attachment of the clavicle and the neck, and two small strokes a little away from the armpits, leaning towards the side under the chin, and two large strokes above the breasts between the third and fourth ribs.
And two strokes also between the fifth and sixth ribs, leaning slightly backwards, and one stroke in the middle of the chest and another above the stomach, and three strokes from behind, one between the shoulders and two on either side of the spine below the cauterization that is between the wrists.
It is not proper that your hand should go deep into the abscess, but it should be on the surface of the skin with a probe; and some of the ancients have mentioned that there are people who use an iron cauterizer resembling a hoe and heat it and insert it between the ribs until they reach the tumor itself.
And it is removed as we have mentioned in the case of a liver abscess, and in this incision made with a probe from pus, either the patient dies within an hour or else there appears at the site a sore that does not heal.
Chapter thirty.
Concerning the spleen.
If you treated the spleen ailment with what we have mentioned as treatment in the classification, and your treatment did not take effect, then probing it has three aspects, all of which are correct: one is that you cauterize it with three probes or four arranged along the length of the spleen.
In the shape of the probes for the liver, which we mentioned the shape of before; and there should be between each probe and the next the thickness of a finger or slightly more. And the nature of the cauterizer is as we mentioned in the case of probing the liver.  And do not go deep into the spleen with the probe, and the posture of the patient lying on his back.
And the other aspect is in the elbow; you raise the skin opposite the spleen where the left arm of the patient ends, and you raise the skin opposite the spleen where the right arm of the patient ends, and your raising of the skin should be across the body so that the probes fall along the length of the body.
Then you insert the three probes very carefully until they pass through the skin on the other side, and then you withdraw the cauterizer so that there are four probes; and if you wish, you may cauterize with the other cauterizer which has three probes.
Then you treat the site of the probe after leaving it to drain pus for many days; this is better than all other treatments that have been mentioned.
Chapter Thirty-one.
On the Treatment of Hydrops.
The cauterization is effective in hydrops, especially the watery kind, if the patient who has been treated with the treatments mentioned above did not benefit from them, then it is necessary to apply four cauterizations around the navel and one on the abdomen.
And another cauterization on the liver and one on the spleen, two behind his back between the ribs, one in front of his chest and one in front of his abdomen, and the depth of the cauterization should be almost equal to the thickness of the skin, then the cauterization is left open to allow for pus drainage for a long time.
And do not neglect the patient after cauterization with the necessary treatment so that the appropriate medicines are gathered for him and his recovery is expedited, and the shape of the cauterizing iron used on the back is like what has been mentioned before, and the one used to cauterize the back is olive-shaped.
Chapter Thirty-two.
On Cauterizing the Feet and Legs.
If they swell in hydrops and are filled with yellow water, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot in the notch between the thumb and the next toe.
And press your hand with the cauterizing iron and do not move it, then raise your hand and do not return it at all, because it drains the yellow water, and the cauterization iron should be like this shape.
Then cauterize the legs, two on each leg, and the cauterization should be with the blunt end of the iron, and the cauterization on each thigh should be two, one below the knee and another lower than that towards the middle of the leg, and on each thigh two cauterizations.
And leave the cauterization open without treatment for a long time, draining the water from it, then treat it with all that has been mentioned.
Chapter thirty-three.
Regarding the treatment of diarrhea.
If diarrhea is from cold and moisture until it weakens the forces holding and digesting in the stomach and intestines, and this was treated with various treatments but did not heal, and I saw the patient likely to die, I would perform a large enema on his abdomen. As mentioned above in the enema of the stomach with a circular  instrument and four enemas around the navel, I would use the gentle nail instrument, and an enema on the cotton on top of the coccyx large or two.
If I saw the moisture abundant and the patient likely to die from that, I would perform an enema on the anus and an enema on each rib cage, and perhaps two smaller enemas on the abdomen near the large one; for this is a successful treatment which does not err in its benefit if Allah wills.
Chapter thirty-four.
Regarding the enema for hemorrhoids of the anus.
If there are chronic hemorrhoids in the anus, many or one, and they are from thick cold humors or putrid moisture, and treated with what was mentioned in the classification but the treatment did not benefit, I would perform three enemas on the patient's lower back under the table slightly triangular.
And an enema under the navel with about two fingers, and if I judged that his stomach had become cold and his food was not digesting and I saw his face swollen, I would perform a large enema on the abdomen as mentioned above and an enema on his liver. And another on his spleen with a nail instrument, and I would leave the enema open for some time then treat him until he heals if Allah wills.
Chapter thirty-five.
Regarding the treatment of warts.
After cutting them if the wart was cut, take the instrument resembling a file and insert it into the same cut wart with your hand until the instrument reaches the mouth of the sweat gland from which blood flows, do this once or twice.
If the warts are numerous, then cauterize each one as described above and treat it with an ointment suitable for it until it heals. If the cautery is also done with cotton wool, this is more beneficial.
Chapter Thirty-Six.
Of cauteries for those in the buttocks and its surroundings.
If the ailment does not respond to the incision and procedure described in its place, then perhaps it will heal with cauterization. If one of the sores happens, and pus and foul humors flow from it, the first thing you should do is measure it with a fine probe.
Then, know the depth of its pit with the probe, then take a hot iron that resembles a plum and insert it cautiously into the same sore in a straight line along the depth of the sore and to the extent the probe entered. Repeat the cauterization until all those foul substances are burned once or twice or three times, depending on your need.
And be careful not to burn a nerve if there is one or a large sweat duct, and if the sore leads to the bladder or the intestines.
So be careful of all these places, but do this only if the sore is in a fleshy place and you have assessed that it is not penetrating. Then treat the area until it heals. If the area closes, its discharge stops, and it remains so for a while, know that it has healed completely.
And if its discharge does not stop, know that it is penetrating or has a rotten bone deep within it or something similar to what will be mentioned in its place.
Chapter Thirty-Seven.
Of cauteries for the kidneys.
If a pain in the kidney occurs from cold or a severe wind and as a result, there is a lack of sexual desire for the patient, it is necessary to cauterize it on the lower back above the same kidney with an iron cautery like the one mentioned before. Perhaps you can even cauterize it three times on the same spot, so that three cauterizations are aligned, which is more beneficial.
The Thirty-Eighth Chapter
In the case of bladder stones.
If weakness and relaxation occur in the bladder due to cold and moisture until the patient is unable to retain urine, make a cautery below the navel on the bladder where the beginning of the pubic hair starts and another cautery on the right side of the navel and another on the left.
And after the cautery on each side, make it the size of a thumb knuckle and form a cautery below the lower back or two cauteries if needed, and the cauterization implement should be as previously described.
The Thirty-Ninth Chapter
In the case of a uterus cautery.
If a substance of cold and moisture occurs in the uterus, by which it refrains from the umbilical cord and spoils its milk, and its cervix becomes difficult to pass, or if she experiences pain upon urination, it is necessary to cauterize three cauteries around the navel as mentioned in the bladder cautery. And a cautery on the cotton below the lower back or two, and the cauterization implement should be as previously described.
The Fortieth Chapter
In the case of a hip joint cautery.
Mucous fluids may accumulate in the hip joint, which causes dislocation and its sign is that one leg appears longer than the other when placed together, and you feel a gap in the location of the dislocation. It is necessary to cauterize the patient on the hip joint itself in a shape similar to a circle.
After learning about the hip with the pencil as it revolves, let the same hip fall in the center of the circle and the cauterization implement which is shown in the stomach cautery should be used. If this cauterization implement is not available for you, make three cauteries with the large olive-colored cauterization implement.
And direct the cautery to a depth equal to the thickness of the entire skin, then treat it until it heals, God willing.
Chapter forty-one.
Concerning sciatica.
If pain occurs in the area of the hip and its cause is cold and moisture, and the patient has been treated with what was mentioned in the previous division but to no avail, and time passes, it becomes necessary for the physician to soften the thick humors with a poultice of henbane or quince seeds or something similar.
Then, he should apply a warm compress and direct the treatment toward two things: either a treatment with stimulating drugs or a treatment with fire. The treatment with fire has many forms, one of which is to cauterize the area of the hip itself with three applications in this form.
And it should be made with a suitable depth, and the distance between each cauterization should be equal to the thickness of a finger. The cautery should be olive-shaped. And one cauterization may be applied in the middle on the top of the hip itself, so that there are four cauterizations. If you wish, apply one cauterization in the circle that was mentioned previously in the treatment for relieving the hip.
So that the circle encompasses the entire hip and burns through the entire thickness of the skin. This is the method for cauterization in sciatica if the pain is persistent to the hip itself and does not extend to the thigh and leg.
If it extends to the thigh and leg, then apply two cauterizations on the thigh at the location indicated by the patient as painful, and one cautery above the ankle four finger widths toward the outer side, slightly. The cautery should be like a thin blade, and the depth of the cauterization should be equal to the thickness of the skin only.
And if he indicates that the pain extends toward the toes of the foot, apply cauterization where he indicates, with three or four or more applications as needed. And if he indicates the pain below the knee towards the leg, apply one cautery there like a thin blade.
Be cautious in all your cauterizations so that you do not reach the nerve or a large artery, lest you cause harm to the patient, either through a bad wound or illness.
And I have seen one and two who were cauterized above the ankle and burned in the cauterization, so that the leg became swollen until it reached the foot and all of it festered and decayed, then diarrhea occurred followed by death. If the pain is on both sides, cauterize them both in this way.
And some of the wise men have mentioned in cauterizing the hip, that this is how it should be done: a vessel resembling a cup is made from iron and its diameter is half a cubit. At its mouth, it should be slightly thicker than a date pit or a little less, and inside that cup there is another cup and a third.
And what is between each two cups should be the size of a thumb's joint, and the cups should be open on both sides and their height should be about a fist or two fists, and they take handles from iron that are tightly fitted to the cups, and this is its form.
Then it is heated in the fire until it becomes red and sparks fly, then it is placed on the right hip of the patient, who leans on his healthy side. Three cauterizations are made, round in one go, then it is left for three days, bandaged with butter, and the wound is left open for days.
Then it is treated with ointment until it heals, said the author of this book, this type of cauterization is rarely used because of its strangeness and its awful appearance, and few are those who can endure it except that it is good cauterization for whoever endures it and is afflicted in its place.
As for cauterization with burning medicines, it is made by making two cups resembling the one that descends into the mouth of a baboon from copper or iron.
There will be a rise in their edges of the height of two knots or so, and there will be after that between them the thickness of a finger, and it will be open at the bottom, open at the top, and some of it will have grasped each other like this.
Then you bring it down to the right hip, and the patient lies on his healthy side, and you tighten your hand firmly, then pour between the two circles hot water, which is warmed by fire, and hold it for an hour of sand, and the patient endures its prickling and burning, for he feels a burn like fire.
Until the prickling subsides, then you raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away the hot water from the whole hip with fresh water, then leave him for three days and apply butter to it until the blackness of the burn disappears, and leave him for days until pus flows from it, for this is more beneficial.
Then you treat him with ointments until he heals, but if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make a plaster for him like what was made for the hip, which holds water, and this is the description of the hot water, which I have proven in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Take from the salt of the kidney and lime, unquenched, one part of each, grind them together, and put them in a new pot that has been pierced at the bottom with a small hole the size of what enters through it, and place under the base of the pot another pot mixed.
And pour on the kidney and lime fresh water to cover them with a finger after you have firmly mixed them with your hand, and leave the pot until the hot water descends into the bottom of the mixed pot, then collect all that water and pour it onto another lime and kidney, renewing them as well.
For it becomes at that time very powerful in its intensity, and is used in many medical procedures and for treating all other parts of the body because it does the work of fire itself. And some medicines are also used to treat the hip with it, such as  thaffsia, honey from the balder tree, and lime mixed with soap, finely ground.
Galen claimed a story about an ancient man who treated pain in the hip and sciatica, greatly exaggerating the matter and claiming it did not need any other treatment and that it cured him at once.
He may have even entered the bath carrying him and came out cured. It is to be taken from the green shiraaj, but if the green one is not found, the fresh dry one is taken, finely ground with some tallow, and placed on the hip where the pain is or in the leg or thigh.
It is tightened and left for three hours or as long as the patient feels stillness in the burning, then he is entered into the bath, and if his body is relaxed, he is entered into the basin, for the pain goes away and it is cured by God's permission. If it does not heal, the poultice is repeated on him after ten days once more.
For it is cured if God wills, and know that it is not fitting for anyone to use these remedies except after emptying the body. Dioscorides mentioned that the goat's sweat when cauterized with it benefitted sciatica.
And the cauterization is like this: wool is taken and soaked in old oil and placed on the deep place between the thumb of the hand and the wrist, which is closer to the wrist, then take dry goat's sweat.
Then ignite it with fire until it becomes a coal and place it on the wool and leave it until it goes out, then take another one and continue doing this until the feeling reaches the middle of the arm to the hip and the pain subsides by God's permission. This type of cauterization is called the goat's sweat cauterization.
Chapter Forty-Second.
Cauterization for Back Pain.
Pain in the back may occur from many causes, either due to a fall or blow or excessive vomiting and the like, and it is from the outflow of cold, moist matter, and cauterization is only done in this type alone.
If a cold substance has been applied, after emptying the patient's stomach with ginger and the like, it is necessary to roast him on his back where the pain is, three rows in the same width as the table. After learning the location with lead in every row five portions or more according to what you see of the patient's condition and strength.
And the portion is with a point iron, and if you wish roast it three or four portions with an average nail-studded iron like this picture.
Chapter Three Thirty.
In a portion starting the hump.
This ailment is often found in young children, and its sign at the beginning in a child is shortness of breath when standing up and moving, and you find in the last vertebrae of the back a bead that has protruded, exceeding all other beads.
If you see this and want to stop it, roast it with an iron that is circular like this picture. To take the portion on each side of the vertebra evenly, and if you wish, roast it around the vertebra with a point iron two or three rows, and let the points be close to each other, then treat the location until it heals as mentioned.
And beware that you use the portion in the hump that is from the tightening of the nerve.
Chapter Four Forty.
In a portion for gout and joint pain.
If the pain of the joints is from cold dampness that settles into any member of the body, and if the pain occurs in the legs, it is customary for physicians to call that gout especially.
So if the cold gout is treated with the types of treatment mentioned in the division, and the pain does not go away, then the portion removes it, which is to roast after emptying around the joint of the legs many portions, and the iron is medium-sized olive color like this picture.
And if you need to cauterize on the face of a man, do so with a cautery point. If the pain ascends to the knees or other joints, and this often happens, apply to each knee three or four times from each side with this olive-colored cautery alone.
And if you need more than this cautery, apply it and do not plunge your hand deep with the cautery but make it about the thickness of the skin only. If the pain ascends to the hips or back, use what we have mentioned from the cautery in its chapter.
And if the pain is in the hands only, cauterize around the wrists as two circles turn. If the pain remains in the fingers, cauterize each knuckle and on the palm of the hand. If the pain ascends after days to the elbows or armpits.
Then cauterize them from each side and let not the sick be deprived of good care and taking medicines, for if he has good food and expels phlegm, he will heal with this cautery, God willing.
Chapter Forty-Fifth.
On Cauterizing a Fistula.
If a hernia appears in the groin and some of the intestines and stool descend to the testicle, and this is beginning near, it behooves you to order the sick man to leave off eating for a day and that he use laxatives which bring down the feces from his belly.
Then he should lie between your hands on his back and order him to hold himself until the stool or intestine protrudes, then return it with your finger and then learn by lead under the hernia on the pubic bone a mark resembling half a circle with its sides toward the top of the body.
Then heat the cautery, shaped like this.
Until it comes white and throws sparks, then return the intestine or stool into his belly, then a servant puts his hand on the place so that the intestines do not protrude, and you have loosened between the sick man's legs and placed a cushion under him and another servant binds around his legs.
And another on his chest holds his hands then the iron comes down on the same mark and your hand with the iron standing straight holding it until it reaches the bone or you return it again if it does not reach the bone in the first time.
And be cautious of your effort from the protrusion of the intestines while you are cauterizing lest you burn it and thereby cause to the sick either death or a great affliction, and know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work has not succeeded, and it is necessary that the cautery for young boys be gentle on their bones and for the elderly on their bones.
Then you treat the place of the cautery after three days with butter until the dryness of fire goes away and then treat it with all ointments until it heals, and let the sick be lying on his back for forty days until the wound is sealed.
And it is necessary that you make his food during his treatment the following in order to keep his stomach tight so that the intestines do not protrude when he belches and flatulence then if he wants to stand after forty days, you use a firm bandage and hold it for another forty days and lessen from fatigue and fullness from food and drink and excessive shouting.
For if he uses this arrangement thus, he will heal completely, God willing, and I will mention the treatment of a hernia by cutting into it in its chapter, God willing. As for the hernia that occurs in the rest of the abdomen and was just beginning, if you want it to not increase, cauterize the hernia with a rounded iron according to its size. And let what you burn from the skin be like one third of it, then treat it with what we have mentioned, for it will not increase, God willing. And some of the ancients have mentioned that they cauterize the hernia with a three-pronged iron in this form.
After you have learned on the hernia with the cautery and make the line that is in the side at the upper part of the hernia, and the other line to the bottom, and you descend your hand in the middle with one cauterizing iron, and the first cautery is easier and best, God willing.
Chapter Sixty-Four.
In the treatment of ulcers.
If in some members a drop or strike happens, and the pain from that lasts for a long time, and there is no cure with medicine, then it is necessary to cauterize the point with a soldering iron and make the cauterization of each member according to its size, whether large or small, its weakness and its strength.
And if the pain and the ulcer are cured from the first cauterization, otherwise, repeat the cauterization because it is customary for these pains to transfer from the member to what is near it, so it is necessary to follow them with the cauterization until the sick person heals.
Chapter Seventy-Four.
In the treatment of leprosy.
As for those suffering from leprosy, they benefit greatly from cauterization, especially the type of leprosy that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and black bile.
If you want to cauterize someone, if the leprosy is just beginning and you treated it with what we mentioned in the section, and it did not subside and did not stop, and you fear that corruption will take over all of the patient's constitution, then cauterize the head five times. One in the center of the head as is customary, and the second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hair, and two on the temples, and one from behind on the nape of the neck, and be careful with the cauterization a little until it affects the bone slightly.
And remove the scales from it to make it easier to breathe the thick vapors from it, and cauterize it in the same way on the spleen as mentioned before. As for if the leprosy has persisted on the patient and appeared clearly, then it is necessary to cauterize these cauterizations that we mentioned in the head. And cauterize on the tip of the nose, and two on the cheeks, and two on the vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one on the coccyx at the end of the tailbone, and another above it in the same position, and two on the shins on each leg, one. Two on each knee, two on each ankle, two on each elbow, and two on the armpits, and he shapes it over every joint of his fingers and toes, and on every heel of his feet and hands.
And he takes care from the nerve that is on the back of the heels so as not to burn them, and it may cauterize a little over the pubic bone, and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver, and know that every time you increase cauterization it is more beneficial and better.
And know that the sick person does not find pain for cauterization as the healthy person finds it because his body has been numbed, and it is necessary that the cauterizations be of large or small size according to the organs and joints according to what has come before from the qualities of the instruments.
Then he treats cauterization with a fine linen cloth with honey and all other treatment until it heals, if Allah wills.
The 84th Chapter.
In cauterization for numbness, when a member of the limbs has been treated with medicines, ointments, and bandages but did not heal, then cauterize the same numbed limb with cauterizations according to what it deserves, based on the size of the bone or its smallness, and let your cauterizations be slightly thicker in the thickness of the skin.
Then treat it with an ointment until it heals, and it may cauterize for some numbness that occurs in the hand and foot in the vertebrae of the back at the exit of the nerve that moves that limb, so that the numbness goes away.
And do not proceed with it except for one who is knowledgeable about the anatomy of the organs and the exits of the nerves that move the body.
The 94th Chapter.
In cauterization for leprosy.
If leprosy has become old and no cure from the arts of medicine has benefited it, then cauterize on it with cauterizations in its depth a little according to the thickness of the skin until the whiteness disappears and its color changes.
Then treat it with finely ground lentils, with rose oil, the tongue of a lamb, and the blood of a pigeon or a quail, one part of each, mixing them all together and applying them to a cloth and bandaging the site until it heals.
The Fiftieth Chapter.
On the Crab (Cancer).
If the cancer is just beginning and you want to stop it, cauterize it with a circular iron around it as it revolves. Some sages have mentioned cauterizing a blunt instrument in its center, but I do not see that because I expect it to be scorched and I have seen this happen several times.
So the right thing is to cauterize around it with a circle as we said, or with many small cauterizations.
The Sixty-First Chapter.
On the Cautery of the Scab (or Tumor).
If a scab occurs and it delays in ripening, either because of the force that brought it about, or because of the age of the sick person if he is elderly and has little blood, or because of time, and you want to speed up the ripening of the scab, cauterize around it with many small cauterizations, dropping them.
Then leave it and it will speed up the ripening. If you want to apply a larger cauterization, heat the iron whose shape is shown.
And bring it down to the center of the scab until it pierces the skin, and let the cauterization be from below so that the pus flows easily, then treat it as appropriate until it heals.
The Seventy-Second Chapter.
On Cauterizing a Eating (Ulcer)
An eating (ulcer) is a corruption that advances in the limb and eats it, as fire consumes dry wood. If you see an eating in a place suitable for cauterization with fire, heat many small and large nail-shaped cauterizations according to what suits that location where the eating is.
Then you should remove it from every direction until all the corruption is eradicated and nothing of it remains at all, then leave it alone for three days and apply to the burnt areas sulfur powder mixed with oil until all the scabs and all the corruption are removed.
Then treat it with the healing ointments for flesh; if you see after three days that the flesh is growing healthy growth with no corruption, otherwise repeat the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted areas, and some ulcers may be treated with a strong medicine.
Because it acts as fire, more rapidly beneficial; I mentioned its treatment with a strong medicine in the section, so take it from there whenever you need it.
Chapter thirty-five.
Cauterizing Nails, Upright and Inverted.
This ailment frequently occurs in the soles of the feet, a rough thing that troubles the man; and cauterization is done on two types: either by fire cauterization or by hot water cauterization.
As for cauterization by fire, it is to heat a curved iron instrument resembling an eagle's feather, made of iron to enclose the nail on all sides as much as possible and have a thin edge; then place it over the nail and turn your hand with the instrument around the nail until the instrument reaches the depth of the nail.
And leave it for three days to become covered with pus; then bandage it with a piece of dough made from flour, pounded with salt, and leave the bandage on it for one night; for it will come loose from its roots, then treat the wound site with a healing ointment for flesh until it heals, if the nails are not inverted.
And this frequently occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet; so it is necessary to take a tube of copper or iron or an eagle's feather, place it over the nail or wart, and then pour a small amount of hot water into the tube.
Hold your hand and as you turn it with a slight movement of your wrist, so that the edge of the tube acts upon the root of the screw, and the sharp water finds its way to penetrate the root of the screw, and let the patient endure for a little while the prickling of the sharp water for an hour.
Then leave it, for the screw will be extracted with its roots. Thus do you act with each one until you come to all that is in the body, then treat the places after they are extracted by what grows flesh from ointments.
The Forty-Fifth Chapter.
On treating a fistula.
If a fistula occurs from cold in the nerve or from fever of a quarter or otherwise, it is necessary to make four or five cauterizations on the spine bone between each vertebra a cauterization and in its chest a cauterization. And on his belly, a cauterization with the olive iron so that the fistula subsides and accelerates the ripening of the cold disease.
The Fifty-Fifth Chapter.
On treating a bruise that occurs in the body.
A tumor may appear on the body that is unsightly, caused by cold, thick, and rotten materials, so when it first appears, you should cauterize on the top of each tumor a gentle cautery with an iron rod whose tip has been ignited with fire or with a long willow twig's root or with a lens cauterizer.
And you cauterize the tumors at their first appearance in this manner, so that it does not increase and the useful effect is dispersed from it and the patient heals, except that this should be done after the patient has bled.
The Sixty-Fifth Chapter.
On treating bleeding that occurs when an artery is cut.
Often, bleeding occurs from an artery that has been cut during a wound that is exposed from the outside or when cutting a tumor or cauterizing a member, and so on, making it difficult to stop its flow.
If this happens to anyone, hasten with your hand to the artery's mouth and place your index finger upon it and pull it tightly until you constrict the blood under your finger so that nothing comes out of it. Then put in the fire small and large olive-seed kernels several and heat them until they become very hot.
Then take one, either small or large, according to the wound and the place where the artery opened, and put the hot kernel on the same vein after you have quickly removed your finger and hold the kernel until the blood stops.
If blood surges when you lift your finger from the artery's mouth and the kernel cools, take another kernel quickly from the prepared ones in the fire and continue doing so with one after another until the blood stops.
Be careful not to burn a nerve, which could cause another affliction for the patient. Know that if an artery bleeds from it, it cannot be cut at all, especially if it is large, except in one of four ways: either by cauterization as we mentioned, or by amputation if it has not already been amputated. For if it is amputated, its ends contract and the blood stops, or else it is tied with strong threads, or else medications are applied to it that have the effect of stopping blood and tightening with bandages tightly.
As for those who try to cut it with a ligature or by tightening with thread or applying burning things and the like, blood does not stop entirely except rarely. If this happens to anyone and a doctor and medicine are not available, he should hasten to put his index finger on the mouth of the wound itself as we described.
And pull it tightly until the blood constricts and leaks from above the wound, and the finger does not remove from it with cold water always until the blood freezes and thickens and stops, and during that time, look at what is needed for cauterization or medicine.
Chapter Two.
On incisions, drainage, venesection, and similar operations.
Al-Khalf said, "We mentioned in the first chapter every illness that is treated with cauterization by fire and corrosive medication, its causes and reasons, instruments, types of cauterizations, and I made that into chapters from the top to the bottom."
And I follow in this chapter the same path so that it is easy for the student what they seek.
Before I begin with that, it is necessary for you to know, O sons of mine, that this chapter contains more difficult matters than what is in the first chapter regarding cauterization.
And for that reason, it is necessary for the warning to be stricter because the work in this chapter often involves draining blood which is the basis of life when opening a vein or making an incision on a tumor or abscess, or treating a surgery, or removing an arrow or cutting open a stone and similar things which accompany all of them with danger and fear and death occurs more often in most of them.
And I advise you to avoid falling into what is doubtful because in this profession, kinds of people with different illnesses may come to you, some who have become weary from their illness and death has become easy for them.
Because of the severity of what he finds from his disease and the length of his suffering, and with the illness being so close to death, and some who spend their wealth on you in hope of health, and their illness is a struggle, so it is not right for you to help those who are like this at all.
And let your caution be greater than your desire and eagerness, and do not proceed with anything from that except after knowledge that is certain to you of what happens to the blessed outcome, and use in all treatment of your illnesses, advancement of knowledge and warning of what leads to safety.
For in that you have assistance in acquiring praise and glory, mention and thanks, may God guide you, O sons of mine, and not deprive you of truthfulness and success, for that is in His hand, there is no god but Him.
I have arranged this chapter into sections according to what was mentioned in the chapter on the types of wounds from the front to the back so that it would be easier for you to find what you want from it, God willing.
The first section.
In the treatment of water that collects in the heads of boys.
This ailment often afflicts boys at birth if the midwife presses the head of the boy without gentleness, and it can also occur from a hidden cause that is unknown.
I have not seen this ailment in anyone other than boys, and all those I saw among them died quickly, so I saw fit to leave treatment for it.  I also saw a boy whose head was filled with water, and the head grew larger every day. Until the boy could no longer sit on himself because of the size of his head, and the moisture increased until he died.
This moisture is either collected between the skin and bone or collected under the bone on the peritoneum, and the treatment for it if the moisture is between the skin and bone and the swelling is small, then a single incision should be made in the middle of the head, one across, with a length of about two spans until the moisture drains. And this is the image of the scalpel.
If the moisture is more and the swelling is larger, make it two incisions intersecting on this pattern:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and its sign is to see the sutures of the head open from every direction, and the water decreases if you press it with your hand inwards, this should not be hidden from you, then three incisions should be made in the middle of the head on this pattern:
And after the incision, all of the moisture comes out, then the incisions are closed with thread and bandages, and it is anointed from above with syrup and oil until the fifth day, then the bandage is removed and the wound is treated with gauze and ointments, and do not leave the head tightened moderately, and feed the patient with all dry food, little moisture.
Until the member becomes strong and healed, another recipe for incision is to look where the bone of the tumor appears and the water gathers because it may be in the back of the head or in its front or on the right or on the left.
So, by incision, it is meant where you see the tumor and fullness of water, so you cut it as much as you can, and be cautious not to cut a vein so that bleeding does not occur and the patient dies from that bleeding along with the discharge of moisture.
Chapter Two.
Cutting the two arteries behind the ears known as the jugulars.
When a sharp ailment is presented to the eyes or chest and it persists for a time and medicine has not helped, then the treatment in this case is to cut these two arteries.
When you want to cut them, first shave the patient's head with a razor then rub the place with a rough cloth so that the artery appears, then tighten the patient's neck by his garment, and look where the pulse is and their places, the two hidden places behind the ears. And rarely are they hidden except in some people.
Then mark them with the pencil and cut them with the scalpel, a cut to the bone, and this should be across the head, if you wish, insert the scalpel from under the artery and sever it upwards by cutting, and the length of the cut should be about two fingers squeezed together.
If the pulse stops, blood will flow out with a pulsating flow that rises forward in a steady stream. If the artery does not appear to the touch, it is necessary to determine from the ear after a distance of three fingers then mark it with the pencil and cut to the bone, and what is necessary.
Send from the blood six ounces in total and perhaps you send more or less all of that according to what appears to you from the strength of the patient and fullness of his arteries, then look at the wound if anything remains on the bone from the peritoneum cut it.
That it may not present a hot tumor and then tighten the wound with a thread of coarse linen, then treat it with ointments until it heals.
The Third Chapter.
In the two arteries that are in the fingers.
If it happens to a person with chronic sciatica or acute attacks from the effects of hot and humid moisture in the muscles of the fingers or chronic severe headaches, and he was treated with various medical treatments but it did not benefit him, then we have tried in these diseases  cutting the arteries of the fingers or cauterizing them as we have described.
And the way of working in cutting them is to shave the hair that is on the fingers, and we mean the visible artery in the temple because it becomes apparent to you from its pulse and rarely is it hidden except for individuals among people.
Or if in the case of extreme cold it is hidden from you, let the patient  tighten his neck with the help of his garment and then rub the place with a cloth or cover the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly visible. Then take the scalpel whose picture is this. Then you dissect it gently with it until you reach the artery, then you throw a snare into it and pull it upward until you bring it out of the skin and free it from the membranes that are underneath it on all sides, if the artery is thin, bend it with the tip of the snare. Then you cut off a part from it as much as the distance between its ends contracts and does not cause bleeding, for if it was not amputated and severed, the blood did not flow at all, then empty the blood from six hours to three.
If the artery is large, it is necessary to tie it in two places with a strong doubled thread, let the thread be either from silk or from bowstrings so that it does not quickly become infected before the wound heals and bleeding occurs.
Then cut the surplus between the tendons, do that immediately or after a while, and if you wish to mold it like bone with a thin iron scalpel until its edges become smooth, it will perform this task as well or even better as we have mentioned.
Unless the patient has a fever or an imbalance of humors, because molding helps to eliminate fluids and is more beneficial in this case, after cutting both arteries it is necessary to pack the site with tightly wound lint and place a firm dressing on top. After healing, treat with dry medicinal plants that promote tissue growth and a poultice until healed, God willing.
If bleeding from the artery occurs during your work, immediately cut it either with a scalpel or fill the site with stibium and tighten your hand until the blood stops. If you have neither of these, place your finger to stop the blood flow.
Wash the site with very cold water until the pain subsides and tighten it as necessary. And what is easier and simpler than cutting the artery, is molding the vein with this double-edged scalpel after marking the locations with lead.
And lower it deeply until it reaches the bone, and the vein cuts in two places so that the distance between its ends is widened because it will not fuse with this molding at all, and this is a picture of the scalpel.
The sharpness of the blades resembles two small daggers except that they are much less sharp than a scalpel because if they were as sharp as the knife, coldness would reach them faster and the flesh wouldn't stop bleeding quickly; and if there is some thickness to them, hot fire will stick to them.
And it cuts flesh quickly, and this work is better than all works and lighter and easier, let there be a thickness between the blades equal to the thickness of a finger.
Chapter Four.
In the treatment of hot, constant tearing from the eyes.
If the tears are constant and their flow is from the veins on the skull from outside and there was no benefit in treating it with medicine and you saw the face of the sick person become red. And he feels on his forehead a buzzing like the crawling of ants and his eyes are sunken, wet, with their eyelids swollen and thickened from the intensity of the tears, so they were forced in treating them to this work, which is called treatment by the sword, which is that you order the sick person to shave the hair on his forehead.
Then you make three parallel incisions on the forehead, along the length of the forehead, with each incision about two finger widths long, one parallel to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, the second a short distance from the movement of the muscle in the temple, and the third on the other side.
And be careful not to cut the two arteries on the sides, and keep your hand away from the contact of the jaws, with each incision being three finger widths apart, and have at your disposal pieces of sponge prepared or a large amount of dry cloth to absorb the blood.
Then you insert the sharp-pointed scalpel whose image is this. From the incision following the temple to the middle incision, and you scrape with it all the skin that is between the incisions, along with the peritoneum on the bone, then you do the same from the middle incision to the third incision, and then you extract this scalpel. And you insert into the first incision another tool called a sharp-edged scalpel, blunt on one side and sharp on the other, whose image is: .
And you make its sharp side upwards towards the flesh adhered to the skin and its smooth side towards the bone, and you push it until it reaches the middle incision, cutting with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes without reaching the outer skin.
Then you do that in the middle incision to the other incision, and after blood has flowed moderately, you squeeze the places of clotted blood. Then you place a piece of cotton thread in each incision and put on top of it a pad soaked with wine or oil or vinegar and oil.
So that a hot tumor does not occur and on the third day, the bandage is removed and a large amount of poultice with warm water is used, then it is treated with a balm of baslikon with rose oil and all that is used to treat wounds until it heals, God willing.
The Fifth Chapter.
In the Treatment of Tears and Discharge from the Eyes from Within the Head.
When one has a copious, acute, painful, constant discharge from the eyes and sees two small spots of pus from them and his vision is weak and his eyelids are ulcerated and the eyelashes fall out from them. And there is a severe, painful headache deep in the head and persistent sneezing.  Know from these symptoms that those substances and discharges come from many deep veins, and the best treatment for it is this treatment, which is to order the patient to shave his forehead and then make one incision in the middle of the forehead.
And there is a severe, painful headache deep in the head and persistent sneezing.  Know from these symptoms that those substances and discharges come from many deep veins, and the best treatment for it is this treatment, which is to order the patient to shave his forehead and then make one incision in the middle of the forehead. Or raise it slightly in breadth and begin the incision from the left temple to the right temple, making the incision to the bone, and keep your hand away from the muscle of the temples that move when chewing until the bone is exposed and all the blood is wiped with a sponge.
Then separate the edges of the incision with soft cotton or a linen thread, and then pull it taut from above with pads and soak the pads with wine and oil so that a hot tumor does not occur. When you have removed them and see that the hot tumor has broken, it is necessary to scrape the bone until flesh begins to grow in it.
Then treat it with the drying preparation that causes flesh to grow, such as taking two parts of wheat flour and four parts of calamine powder, preparing a balm from them, and using it for the growth of flesh in such wounds.
Chapter Six.
In the treatment of what falls into the ear.
All that falls into the ear is one of four types: either a mineral stone or something like stone, such as iron and glass, or a plant seed such as chickpeas, kernels, and the like, or a fluid thing such as water, vinegar, and the like.
Or an animal, so if a stone or kind of stone fell into the ear that does not exceed in the ear, receive it with sunlight, then if you see the stone, put something of  a scent from violet oil or sandalwood in it, then try to remove it by moving your head or wiping it with a swab. And plug the nostrils when sneezing comes after placing a band of linen or wool around the ear and stretching the ear upwards, then often it exits with this treatment, if it does not exit, then try to remove it with a soft cotton swab like in this image.
If it exits with the swab, otherwise try to remove it with a blind probe that is soft and slightly flexible, if it does not exit by this means, then make a tube of copper and insert one end of the tube into the hole in the ear yes.
And plug what is around the tube with dough mixed with oil so that there is no way for air other than the tube, then pull it with your breath with a strong and repeated pull, often it exits by this means, if it does not exit by what we described, otherwise take from the Nabataean chew or the pointed chew used to catch birds, something small and place it on the tip of the probe.
After wrapping a tight cotton around it and inserting it gently into the ear hole after drying the ear from moisture, if it does not exit by all that we described, then hasten to the incision before a hot swelling or congestion occurs.
The incision prescription is to make a small incision in the scalp first and extract the blood from it according to its strength, then seat the patient between your hands and turn their ear upwards and make a small incision at the root of the ear near its fatty tissue in the lower position.
The incision should be crescent-shaped until you reach the stone, then remove it with whatever instruments you can manage. Then sew up the incision as quickly as possible and treat it until it heals.
As for if the thing that has fallen into the ear is one of the grains that swell and become inflated, try to remove it with what we have mentioned. If it does not come out, then take a delicate and fine scalpel in this manner.
And try to cut that kind of grain that has fallen into the ear with it. But only do this if you are certain that the grain has become soaked with the ear's vapor until it becomes small pieces, then remove them with a blunt probe or a soft sponge or by sucking.
As we mentioned, it is easy to remove them. As for water that has entered the ear, it is necessary to use a  clogged cotton swab first, and after filling the ear with some fluffy cotton while lying on that ear containing the water if it exits by that.
Otherwise, take many pebbles along your fingers, smooth and delicate, warm them slightly with fire, and insert one of them into the hole in his ear, and he grasps his leg with that side, and strikes a stone with the stone in his ear.
So he continues to do this with pebble after pebble until all the water comes out. It may also come out by taking a reed or feather, inserting one end into the ear, and heating the other end until it burns mostly, then replacing it with another feather.
Do this several times until all the water comes out, or draw it out with the tube as we mentioned before in the case of the pebble. As for removing an animal that has entered there, look if it is small like a flea and similar. Treat it with what we mentioned in the section. But
If its body is large enough to be felt, try to remove it with a sponge and probes. It is easier than all that happens in the ear.  As for removing the worm born in the ear if you have treated it with what we mentioned in the section on earwax and your treatment did not help
It is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun, if something appears to you from the worm, then take it out with a probe or with fine forceps. If nothing appears to you from it, then take a tube like this one's form.
Narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, and insert the slender end into the ear as much as the patient can bear, then grasp it with a firm grip and do this several times until all the worm comes out. If it does not yield to coming out, seal around the tube with wax as I mentioned to you in the pebble.
If it does not come out with what we mentioned, use the catheters I mentioned that the ancients used to kill the worm and you will find that in the article of the catheters. And pouring medicines into the ear with this tool is like its form:
As you see, it is made of silver or copper, narrow at the bottom with a small hole and wide at the top. And if you wish for the projectile in the tube's belly to be of well-fitted brass, or if you wish, take mercury and wind cotton tightly around its tip.
Then pour the oil or juice or whatever you wish of these medicines into the tube while it is in the ear, then insert the mercury with cotton from above and squeeze it with your hand, squeezing moderately until the oil rushes into the inner ear and feels it.
With the patient inside, let what is poured into the ear be warmed slightly in the fire and beware that the thing being dropped into it be not very cold or very hot, for the ear cannot withstand that.
The Seventh Chapter.
In treating the temporary obstruction of the ear.
Some children may be born from their mothers with their ears unpierced.
And it may also happen to some people that there is an obstruction in the ear canal from a wound or flesh growing there, and this obstruction may be deep inside the ear's opening, invisible to the eye.
Sometimes it may be slightly visible outside the hole, and can be seen by the eye. That which is in the depth of the ear and cannot be seen by the eye, in most cases, is difficult to remove. And that which can be seen should have the ear of the patient placed in the sun. And look at it, and if you see the obstruction visible, open it with a gentle scalpel, the shape of which is:
Its tip has a slight projection, limited somewhat, and the rest of the scalpel is smooth on both sides so that it does not harm the ear. If the obstruction is from flesh that has grown in the passage of the ear, then grasp it with a gentle clamp and cut it gently, firmly until all the flesh is removed.
If the obstruction is in the depth of the ear, take a gentle, smooth probe and warm it slightly in the fire, then insert it into the passage of the ear. If you feel the obstruction and the patient feels heaviness of hearing, then push against it gently.
And be careful not to injure the nerve of the ear, then put a wick in the ear, commensurate with the size of the hole, which has been dipped in Egyptian ointment. Do this for days until you are safe from the wound closing or take a wick and moisten it in water and sprinkle powdered saffron on it.
Use it, and if you see the ear has swollen and there is hot pus, then it is necessary to remove the wick and replace it with another wick that has been dipped in a preparation of rose oil until the hot swelling subsides, then treat it until it heals.
If bleeding occurs, dip a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use the rest of the treatment that stops the bleeding mentioned in the section on cauterization.
The Eighth Chapter.
In the Treatment of Warts that Appear in the Eyelids.
These blemishes which appear in the eyelids may be moist and dry, so it is necessary to grasp them with a forceps or a pincer and cut them from their roots with a scalpel, then apply powdered lead on the site.
If blood flows from it, cauterize it with a delicate lentil-shaped iron and cover it best after the cut, and often it returns if something remains of its roots, and if cauterized by fire, those roots are burnt and do not return.
The Ninth Chapter.
In treating cold arising in the eyelids.
Often, a thing resembling cold in intensity and hardness appears in the eyelids.
Therefore, it is called cold, which is the gathering of thick moisture in the upper and lower eyelids, and the action taken in it is to look, if the cold mass is protruding on the outside of the eyelid, it moves to every direction so its matter is easy, then cut a slit across it.
Then gently exfoliate it from every side until it is removed, then suspend it with the forceps and cut it, if it did not become ready to be cut except after the eyelid passes through the cut, it does not harm the patient at all, and if the slit is large, collect it by sewing, and treat it until it heals.
And if it is small, there is no harm in it, for the ointment will mend it and heal it, and if the cold mass leans towards the inside of the eyelid towards the inner surface, turn the eyelid and suspend the cold mass with a forceps without needing to make a slit, and cut it from every side.
If the eyelid passes through the cut, it does not harm at all, then wash the eye after cutting the cold mass with salt water and treat the site with what heals until the ailment is healed.
The Tenth Chapter.
In treating pterygium which appears in the eyelid.
Pterygium is a growth in the layers of the upper eyelid, and it appears more frequently in boys. It weighs down their eyes and exposes them to discharges in the mornings, and they are unable to look at sunlight. So that tears flow rapidly towards them.
Therefore, they are always leaning on their faces and sleeping on them, and their eyelids are under the eyebrows wet with swelling and the pterygium is clearly visible to the eye. And when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the pterygium between them, and the procedure is to place the patient's head in a block.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare a wick from it, and make a circle from that wick corresponding to the extent of the pterygium on each side, then place it on it and press it with your fingers on each side to gather the pterygium in the center of the circle.
Then, make a cut in the center of that moisture with a scalpel, a longitudinal cut, and the cut should not be larger than the incision made in bloodletting. As for depth, you should cut through all the skin until you reach the pterygium.
In most cases, the pterygium protrudes from the incision in the form of a white fatty piece. You pull it out with a cloth wrapped between your fingers to the outside while you turn your hand right and left until it is completely removed. Beware that you do not increase the incision lest the scalpel pierce the eye and harm it.
If the pterygium does not appear in the first incision, it is necessary to increase the incision slightly gently until the pterygium appears, then pull it out as we have said, and then soak a cloth in vinegar and water and place it on the site and hold it gently, and some people crush salt.
and place it in the incision to dissolve what remains of that moisture, then treat him until it heals. If a hot tumor occurs at the site, treat it with soothing poultices until it heals,.
Chapter Eleven.
Types of Eyelid Stitches.
If hair grows in the eyelid exceeding its natural course under the normal eyelids and it is tightened, it harms the eye and causes various diseases such as continuous tearing, relaxation of the eyelids, whiteness, and thickening until this becomes a cause for blindness.
And eye stitches are of four kinds: either by cauterizing with fire, or by a sharp medicinal agent as mentioned previously in the chapter on cauterization, or it is by cutting and stitching, or by using a reed, as I will describe later.
It is necessary to make the patient's head on your stone, then turn the eyelid with your left hand if it turns, otherwise, insert a needle in it with a thread from below the eyelid and pass the needle with the thread from above near the hair itself, and pull the thread upward to the eyelid.
Then turn it with the needle, and then cut into the inside of the eyelid without the excess hair with a knife from the larger opening to the smaller one, then guide the thread and place under the eyelid a small pad of cotton or linen, and then apply to the eyelid with a pencil.
Like the shape of a fig leaf, except that the shape should be to the extent you want to raise the eyelid because it may differ among people, some need to cut from the eyelid a suitable amount according to how relaxed the eyelid is.
And some need less cutting, all of it according to the relaxation of the eyelid, then cut with a knife along the two lines I have taught you and begin from the larger opening to the smaller one, and the incision should be near the natural hair like the thickness of the needle.
Then insert the thread into one of the corners of the skin, then guide it through all of it, and gather the edges with a needle and fine wool thread, wipe away the blood, and stick what remains of the threads on the eyebrows with some fine things.
If you wish to do this, otherwise it is of no consequence, then the suture and thread are left for about three or four days, then it is treated, and if you wish, you leave the wound without suturing and treat it with what dries and contracts; for the eyelid rises when the wound is sealed and joined together, and suturing is better.
This face of the tashmir was mentioned by the ancients, except that it is a burden on the patient and it is good work and there is no danger in it, and another face in tashmir also, which is to learn on the eyelid a shape like the shape of a sycamore leaf as we described. Then the eyelid is raised with three supports that are spaced apart or grouped in this image:
Then what remains of the eyelid is cut with a small pair of scissors in this image, cutting moderately.
If you cannot hold the supports and it does not suit you, take a needle with thread and insert it in the center of the shape and insert another thread near the larger aperture and a third thread near the smaller aperture, and gather the threads together with your fingers moderately, then raise it with them a moderate raising.
And raise the skin that is attached to it all, as we described, then gather the edges of the wound with the suture and treat it until it heals. If a hot tumor appears when you cut or split it, soothe that tumor with qairot (turmeric) and its like from soothing ointments.
And the lower eyelid may also be exposed to the turning of its edges, so it is necessary to use what we mentioned from cutting, suturing, and cauterization with fire and sharp medicine; cauterization with fire or sharp medicine is more effective and easier on the patient than cutting and suturing, and cutting and suturing are both finer.
Cauterization with cane is like this: turn the eyelid and cut the incision from inside as described, then make two or three thin pieces of wood whose length is equal to the length of the eyelid and their width is less than the width of a scalpel.
And I have placed in the edges of both sides where the threads adhere, then gather them together gently on what is left of the eyelid and tighten the two parts from both sides tightly, and leave it for days, for the stretched skin dies and darkens and decays.
Until it falls off by itself, if you delay, then cut it with the scissors and treat it until it heals. If it joins, the eyelid rises and the eyelashes do not fall from the eye, and this is the image of the two parts that you make in this shape and amount in length and width precisely.
The Twelfth Chapter.
On raising the eyelashes that have fallen from the eye with a needle.
If it is one or two hairs to work on that, take a fine needle and thread it with a thin, smooth silk thread, then gather its ends and tie them in a very fine knot, and let the length of the thread be about a span.
Then, thread another thin thread into the  lash and put it in the middle of the base, tie its ends if you wish. Then place the patient's head on a stone near the sun so that the work is clear, for it is delicate work, then insert the needle with the lash into the root of the extra hair.
And thread it into the eyelid quickly until it comes out above the natural hair, then pull the thread up towards the lash and insert that lash if it is one or two or three, no more.
Then pull your hand with it until the hair comes out with the lash in the eyelid along with the natural hair. If you pulled the lash and did not bring the hair out with it, pull the lash down with the thread you put into it until the lash comes out from the upper hole.
Then put the hair back in and pull both of them, do this until it rises in the upper hole and you see it with the eye. Then release the lash and thread and take them out and tighten the eyelid and leave it tight for two or three days until the hair stays in place and flesh grows on it.
If the hair is short, either add to it a long hair of natural hair so that it rises with it, or leave it until it grows longer after a time, then raise it.
The Thirteenth Chapter.
On the Treatment of Hairs that Grow in the Upper Eyelid.
The condition these hairs cause is called an arnab, and these hairs can be either natural or acquired. The acquired ones result from the closure of a wound or scar, such as from a cut or puncture.
And the way to treat it is to cut that closure and separate its sides, making a thread of cotton between them, and tying it until it heals. One should not use things that dry and constrict in its treatment.
If you do that, the hair will return worse than it was. Instead, use things that soften it, such as fenugreek, a poultice of flaxseed with a little bit of saffron mixed in water, and Diachilon ointment which is diluted with a little fat, applied to the wound, and treat with it.
And the goal of its treatment is to try every means possible to prevent it from healing in the same way it was originally. This work we have mentioned is only some repair of the hair, not returning the area to how it was before.
The Fourteenth Chapter.
On the Treatment of Hairs that Grow in the Lower Eyelid.
These hairs that grow from the lower eyelid are truly called "shtera." They can be either natural or acquired. Acquired ones result from a wound, cut, or puncture.
And the way to treat it is to take a needle with doubled thread, insert it into the flesh, and pass it from the left edge to the right edge until the thread reaches both sides of the flesh. Then, stretch the flesh upward with the needle and cut it with a wide scalpel.
If the shape of the eyelid returns to what is proper, and if not, take a needle and place it in the position of the incision and turn the eyelid with it and make two incisions on the inner side of the eyelid and make the ends of the incisions from the angles of the cut that was made until they meet, so that there is an angle. Until when they come together it becomes shaped like this shape.
And it is the Greek letter lamad, then remove that flesh as much as the sharp side of it is lower than what is below the eyelid, then gather the separated parts with two stitches sew it with wool thread and then treat it with what we mentioned from softening and ointment until it heals.
And if the eyelid is exposed from an incision or suture or elsewhere, then it is necessary to make a simple incision without eyelashes as mentioned above and then separate the lips with ointment as mentioned.
And the general rule in treating the eyelid if it is from above or below is that work is done on it according to what appears to you of the shape of the eyelid, for it can be diverse in its image and the craftsman adapts the means in any way he is able.
Until the shape returns to its natural form or approaches it, and the same illness tells you what is suitable for it from work and tools in most cases.
The fifteenth chapter.
In the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
This adhesion may occur to many people, that the upper eyelid adheres to the white of the eye, preventing it from moving easily and hindering its natural actions, so it is necessary to insert the tip of a needle under the eyelid.
And lift it up or extend it with a wire, then cut the adhesion with a gentle scalpel that is not sharp like the edge of the scalpel but rather a little so as not to alarm the patient when working, and the scalpel slips and injures the eye with its sharpness, and the cutting is as if you are peeling off that adhesion.
And expect that when the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed, you should pour into the eye salt water to wash it or instill in it from the ginger-colored saffron solution diluted with water, then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a cotton thread.
And you place on top of the eye a cloth soaked in egg white and after the third day, use the ground saffron until it heals.
The sixteenth chapter.
In cutting off the nail and removing the flesh of the eyelids.
The nail is of two kinds, either it is nervous and resembles a thin, firm membrane, or it is not nervous and resembles solidified white moisture; if iron touches it or it is thrown into the fire, it breaks when grasped by tongs.
And no tongs have been proven to be effective on it, and both types begin from the larger part of the eyelid until they gradually grow thin, covering the eye completely and preventing light and movement; and the method of work in cutting it is to place the patient's head on a block.
Then he opens his eyes and lifts the eyelid with your hand, then you take tongs that are slightly curved and extend them upwards, then take a needle and insert a hair from a horse or cows mane into it along with strong thread; bend the tip of the needle slightly and insert it into the middle of the nail.
And you push it through with the needle and tie the nail with thread, extending it upwards; then you peel away the side of the nail next to the pupil with the hair as if you are spreading it with the hair to the end, then cut the remaining part at the base of the eyelid with a fine scalpel or small scissors, leaving the natural flesh of the eyelid.
So that it does not cause constant tearing from its cut, and the nail may be extended with tongs alone or with thread as we have said, then peeled away with the smooth scalpel, the end of which is pictured:
Be cautious that the knife does not touch the corneal membrane, for this will cause inflammation of the pupil, and after cutting, something of powdered salt or zanjabeel should be placed in the eye, and it is left until another day, then it is treated as appropriate until it heals.
If the wart is not nervous and it was impossible to insert a needle into it or fix a snare in it, this type of wart is often treated with medicine and heals as described in the division. And if you wish to cut it, open the patient's eye.
Take a gentle, smooth scalpel with a weak edge as shown here: . And scrape the wart with it gently, from above, and if you see that it is breaking apart and crumbling, and its trace was only by scraping, then place something of zanjabeel, or red zanjabeel, or powdered salt in the eye, and pull the eyelid for a day.
Then repeat the process until all of it disappears, except if a hot tumor appears in the eye, then leave it and treat the hot tumor until it heals, then repeat the scraping process until it heals. And as for a piece of fleshy meat...
If the piece of flesh hurts the eye painfully, then tie that piece with a snare and cut some of it, but do not overdo the cutting so that tearing will occur, then instill red zanjabeel or zanjabeel into the sockets until it heals.
Chapter Seventeen.
In cutting the  eye-wart and what grows from excess flesh in the eye.
Some people may have red flesh growing in their eyes, piled on top of each other until it covers the sight or comes close to it or overflows onto the eyelids, and perhaps the eyelids turn outward resembling a jasmine flower.
And the treatment for it is that the patient places his head in a block and then opens his eyes, and all of that red flesh is captured with the snares corresponding to it.
Hold it with forceps or a probe, then cut the first layer of flesh until all of it is cut away, taking care not to injure the eye during the operation. Your cutting can be done either with the scalpel described for cutting the nail or with small scissors. like those used to pick up wool as it comes out, its form being shown in the chapter that follows this one.
And when you have finished cutting and all of the wool has gone, fill the eye with powdered salt or instill in it a few drops of red ochre or such like soothing medications, and place a pad made from white egg yolk over the eye to prevent inflammation.
And if some wool remains and the bleeding is excessive and you fear inflammation, leave the eye and treat it with something that soothes inflammation, then return to the operation when it has healed. Do likewise with any excess flesh exposed in the eye from this type.
Except that it is necessary for you to avoid treating any weak eye either by natural means or by surgical operation, and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that the organ is capable of withstanding it.
Chapter Eighteen.
On Removing Wool from the Eye.
Wool are red veins that grow on the eye, obstructing vision and weakening the eye with the passage of time. It is necessary for you first to examine, if the eye affected by wool is strong and there is no other ailment in it besides the wool.
Then the operation, which is to command the patient to place his head in a block and then attach those veins with one or two threads, according to your skill, and the threads should be fine and flexible in this form:
or two threads joined together into one body in this form:
Then grasp those veins with a fine pair of scissors gently, and wipe away the blood every now and then until you see that the eye has been cleared of the wool and the bleeding has stopped. Take care not to injure the eye with the edges of the scissors, and let your work be done in the middle of the day facing the sun.
Be steadfast in your work, so that you do not cut any other veins; when finished, put a green or red scalpel into the eye to eat up what remains of the vessels. If you cannot remove all of it at that moment, then apply something to the eye that will soothe the pain.
Leave it for days until the pain subsides and the hot swelling is gone, then repeat the operation on this same spot until this image of the painful cutting disappears.
Leave it [and have the head of the patient in the apprentice's lap and the other wiping away the tears and looking into the front and back of the eye and you] The original method for the operation is to open the eye with a fixed or triangular tool held by an apprentice.
Pierce [and have the head of the patient in the apprentice's lap and the other wiping away the tears and looking into the front and back of the eye and you] You can choose to start cutting from the top or bottom of the eye, but it is preferable to wipe away two pairs of folds in the upper arch; one at the end of the halo and the other at its beginning.
Hold them between the middle and index fingers, then attach folds from underneath opposite them; then grasp them between the ring finger and little finger, and move your hand lightly until you see all the vessels raised, cut from the smaller west end with a scalpel if it is visible, and with a fine knife otherwise.
Then insert the tip on a needle and carefully sever all the vessels until they are raised on the membrane, and do not cut off the weeping because the tears and blood will mix (and confuse) you.
Then cut with the scalpel what remains beyond the halo, both above and below so that no more is left except on the cornea; if you can raise it from the cornea, scrape with the tip, for this is better, and it may be easier in some people.
And if you cut it, let it heal for days until the pain subsides and the hot swelling is gone, then repeat the operation on it.
The Nineteenth Chapter.
In the Setting of the Feather in the Nose.
Physicians call a feather "nasoura" if they treat it with cauterization or a strong, burning medicine as described previously, and if it does not heal, there is no remedy except to split the swelling when it ripens and extract all of its moisture or pus.
Until the bone becomes exposed. And if, when it is exposed, you see corruption or blackness in it, remove it with an instrument whose image is:
And it is called "the head rasp" and it is made of Indian iron, and its head is rounded like a grain, with the inscription of a scraper or a scalpel carved finely. You place it on the site of the corruption in the bone, then rotate it between your fingers as you gently squeeze your hand until you feel that the corruption has been removed.
And you do this several times, then cover the place with drying and astringent medicines. If the place is closed and flesh grows in it and the flow stops, and remains for forty days without recurrence or suppuration, and no incident occurs within it.
Then know that it has healed, otherwise there is no remedy except to return the "nasoura" to the nostril opening in this manner: expose the bone again with iron or a burning medicine. And if the bone is exposed, take a swab on this image:
Its tip is triangular and its shaft is conical, drawn to the tip as you see it, then place it on the bone itself, and that should be near the nostril, and move your hand away from the eye a little, then rotate your hand with the swab until it penetrates the bone and the patient feels it.
Until he feels the wind coming out of it, if he holds his hand over his nose, then cover the place with astringent and drying medicines as I have taught you. If flesh grows and the place hardens, then the material that was protruding outwards returns to the nose, and this will be easier on the patient, God willing.
Chapter Twenty
The Treatment of a  Prolapse of the Eye.
If the eye protrudes in its entirety and there is no defect or loss of vision, it is necessary to ease the patient then dissect it in the scalp and place a bandage on the back of the head without condition and suck out pus with a thin tube.
Then, place on the eye a poultice made from acacia gum, spikenard, frankincense, and cloves, then tighten the eye from above onto the bandage with many pads. The prescription for the pads is to take many soft cloths and fold each one four times to make many.
Then, place them one on top of the other according to what the eye needs, then tighten them with a firm cloth firmly and reapply the bandage with a thin tube without condition. Then remove the bandage and leave the eye tightened for a day and night.
If the bandage relaxes during that time, it is necessary to tighten it again. Then remove the bandage after a day and night as we said. If you see that the eye has returned, otherwise, repeat the bandage, pads, tightening, and suction until it returns.
Chapter Twenty-One
The Treatment of a  Cut on the Eyelid
If there is a hernia in the eyelid layer, and it protrudes and appears outside the eyelids like an olive, deforming the human image, and you want to cut it, then proceed as I describe.
Which is to insert a needle into the base of the hernia from below upwards, then insert another needle with doubled thread from the side of the eye socket and pass it through. Leave the first needle as it is.
Then, cut the place where the doubled thread bends and tie some of the hernia to the needle tightly. Then remove the needle and place cotton wool soaked in egg white on the eye and leave it until the threads fall off with the hernia. Then treat the eye with something that strengthens it.
Until the wound heals, and one may tighten the bandage from every side with a circle of cloth until the eye becomes more comfortable, then it is cut with a fine scalpel reaching to the depth of the eye so that the white discharge flows out and the eye descends and dries on its place, then tighten it until it heals.
The Twenty-Second Chapter.
In the Treatment of a Canker Sore.
This ailment called a canker sore is when matter gathers in the eye resembling flowing water but without it. The procedure for this is to make the patient sit on an upright chair, then take his head from both sides with your hands.
And move him until you see the matter descend to the bottom with your eye, then stabilize and it will not leave and light will proceed and the patient will see things as he used to, and if it does not descend to the bottom we know that it is water. And if the matter does not happen to descend as mentioned.
Otherwise, make the patient sit in front of you, then take a fine scalpel and cut with it above the cornea slightly at the junction of the conjunctiva with the cornea in the circle until the matter comes out.
Then if it comes out, instill into the eye hot water which has been mixed with honey or water that has been boiled with fenugreek and honey, then treat with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
The Twenty-Third Chapter.
We have mentioned the types of water in the classification and which one is suitable for irrigation with a detailed and explained explanation, so take it from there on the right track. Then, you should make the patient sit in front of you upright facing the light near the sun.
And bind his healthy eye tightly, then raise the eyelid of his eye with your left hand if the eye that has water is the left eye or with your right hand if the right eye.
Then you place the point of the probe near the edge of the white of the eye from the direction of the smaller pupil, and push the probe forcefully while turning it with your hand until it penetrates into the white of the eye, and you feel that the probe has reached something empty.
The depth of the probe's insertion should be equal to the distance from the pupil to the end of the black, which is the edge of the eye. The copper [speculum] allows you to see inside the eye because of the clarity of the cornea. Then you turn the probe upwards to the place where the water is.
Then you press it downwards repeatedly. If the water comes down from its chamber, the patient sees what has opened for him from his chamber and the probe in his eye. Then he rests a little. If the water rises, lower it again without withdrawing the probe.
If it settles and does not rise, withdraw the probe gently while you slightly loosen its hold with your hand. Then dissolve a little of pure salt in the water and wash the eye from within. Then place over the entire eye outside a poultice or wet wool.
Anoint it with rosewater and egg white and bind the healthy eye over it. As for us and people of our time, we place ground cumin mixed with egg white on top. If the probe does not enter the eye because of its hardness, as some people's eyes are very hard. Where you should take the scalpel called "the bridle," whose image is:
Then you pierce it with this instrument only, and do not overdo the piercing; rather,  you should aim for a gentle spot for the probe, then introduce the probe as mentioned before. When your work is complete, prepare the patient lying down firmly on his back in a dark room.
And he refrains from all movement and coughing, and you make his food what softens his nature, nor does he move his head to the right or left at all, and the bandage remains on him until the third day, then you uncover him in that dark room and test his sight.
Show him things then return the bandage on the seventh day and it is not permissible to do this during the time of treatment or after the removal of your cauldron from your hour but it is necessary to avoid this before the water rises quickly by careful looking.
If a hot swelling appears then it is necessary to release the eye before the seventh day and  repair that with what soothes the swelling until when it has subsided then at that time you release his sight and place on his face a blindfold which trains his sight from beneath for days while he is in that dark house then.
He exits from the house gradually and behaves in his affairs, and know that the cauldron is not dispensed with by the learner without viewing it several times then he proceeds to work.  And it reached me about some of the Iraqis that he mentioned that he makes in Iraq a useful cauldron which absorbs water.
And I have not seen anyone in our country make that nor read it in a book from the first books and it may be that it is new. And this is an image of types of cauldrons for him to stand upon from his ignorance:
It is made from copper especially and its end has this thinness with this very eye triangular end sharp,.
The Twenty-fourth Chapter.
In the Treatment of Flesh Growing in the Nose.
Flesh of various kinds may grow in the nose, some of it resembling scorpions with many legs, and some of it being cancerous flesh hardened like the color of mud, and some of it being soft flesh not like the color of mud.
As for the flesh of this kind that is soft and not malignant or cancerous, it is necessary to make the patient sit before you facing the sun and open his nostril and place the snare in that flesh and then pull it out and cut what you have grasped from it with a sharp, delicate scalpel on one side.
Until you know that all the flesh has gone, and if anything remains of it that you were unable to cut, remove it with one of the delicate instruments gently so that nothing remains of it. If blood overwhelms you or a hot swelling appears.
Treat it with what is appropriate, or if it was from malignant tumors, be swift in cutting it until the blood stops and all flesh disappears, then place it inside the nose after cutting, empty or with water or drink, and if the nose opens up and moisture flows from it to the throat.
Know that it is cured, if the moisture does not flow as it should, know that inside it there is flesh growing in the upper part of the loose bone and the instrument did not reach it with the cutting, so then it becomes necessary to take a thread of linen with some thickness.
And tie it with many knots, making between each knot the size of a finger or less, and make it possible for the patient to insert one end of the thread into his nose with a rod or whatever he can after making it like a bead, and pull on its breath until it reaches the nasal cavity.
And it comes out on his throat, and often the boys do such things in school, which is easy for him who desires it, then gather the two ends of the thread, one end that came out of the mouth and the other that remained in the nose.
Then use the flesh-spreading with the knots on the thread, do this until you know that the flesh has been cut by the thread of the knot, then take out the thread and it becomes in the nose after wiping the blood a wick soaked in Egyptian ointment, do this for three days or more.
Until the ointment eats up all that remains of the flesh, then the last thing in the nose becomes a lead pipe for days until it heals, if it needs treatment to dry it out, that is what you use.
And this is a picture of the instrument with which drops medicine into the nose:
It is made from silver or brass, like a small candlestick, open at the tip and with a passage as well.
And if you wish, make the tube closed like a pipe, and the tip of the instrument flat.
It has a handle at its end as you see, and one grasps it when it is heated with oil or whatever juices or flowing things you wish.
The twenty-fifth chapter.
In the ingrowing pimples on the tip of the nose.
Many times a pimple grows on the tip of the nose, and it increases and becomes larger with the days until its appearance is ugly.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut it at its first appearance and remove all of it, then apply to the place either cauterization or a burning medicine that takes the place of cauterization, if you missed cutting it until it becomes large, look if it is hardened, solid, pale in color and little feeling.
Then do not expose it to iron, for it is a cancerous tumor and I have seen many who had this tumor cut from them and returned with a great affliction on their owner, if the tumor is soft to the touch, not pale in color, and you see that the cutting can be done throughout. Then empty the patient and cut it without hesitation or delay, and treat the place with what dries and contracts until it heals.
The twenty-sixth chapter.
In sewing the nose, lip, and ear. If the connection of them is separated from a wound or something like that, know that when a separation of connection occurs in one of these cartilages, there is little that is beneficial to do in most people.
It is necessary that when one of these things is presented, look if the wound is fresh with blood, then you gather the edges of the wound with stitching and treat it until it heals, but if the separation of the connection has separated its edges and each incision has become correct, it is necessary to peel each incision with the thickness of its outer skin until it bleeds.
Then gather the edges with stitching and tighten them, and apply a mixture of mastic and frankincense powder on it, and place above the layers a patch of palm ointment or another similar soothing ointment and leave it tightened for two or three days then remove it.
The medicine is changed and left until the threads separate of themselves, then it is treated with an ointment until it heals. The description of suturing is to gather the separated parts either with needles as we described in suturing the abdomen or with thread as we have informed you about there.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
On extracting a cyst that appears in the lips.
Many people may present to you with small, firm growths inside their lips, some resembling a wart and others smaller or larger. It is necessary to turn the lip inside out and make an incision over each cyst, and then tie it off with a thread.
And it is cut on each side, then the place after the cutting is stuffed with powdered sulfur until the bleeding stops, and then rinsed with vinegar, salt, and the places are treated with what you have mentioned until the wounds heal.
Chapter Twenty-Eight.
On cutting excess flesh in the gums.
Often, excess flesh grows on the gums that the ancients call a "boil," so it is necessary to tie it off with thread or grasp it with forceps and cut it at its root, and leave it to bleed for a while, then place powdered sulfur on the spot.
Or one of the clamping, drying cautery instruments, if that flesh returns after treatment, it often comes back so cut it again and cauterize it, for it does not return after cauterization.
Chapter Twenty-Nine.
On filing teeth with iron.
There may gather on the surfaces of the teeth, both inside and outside, and between the gums, rough, ugly scales which may darken, yellow, and green until that brings about decay to the gums and disfigures the teeth because of this.
So it is necessary to make the patient sit in front of you with his head in a block and file down the molars and teeth on which you see scales and things resembling sand until nothing remains of them, and do the same for blackness, greenness, yellowness, and the like until they are cleaned.
If the matter inside it has gone from the first incision, or else you repeat the incision on it another day and a second time and a third until you reach the goal of what you desire. And know that the molar tooth requires different shapes of drills many forms according to what appears for your work.
For the drill that drills a molar from within is not the same as the drill that drills it from the outside, and the one that drills between molars is of another form. And these are several forms of drills that will be with you all prepared.
Chapter Thirty.
On Extracting Teeth.
It is necessary to treat the tooth for its pain with every method and delay its extraction because it has no replacement if it is pulled out, for it is a precious element, even if there is no alternative but to extract it.
And if the patient insists on its extraction, then you must ensure that the painful tooth is healthy. For often the patient is deceived by the pain and thinks that it is in the healthy tooth, so he extracts it, and then the pain does not go away until the diseased tooth is extracted. We have seen this many times done by barbers.
If the painful tooth is healthy in your opinion, then you must cut around the tooth with a scalpel that has some strength until it separates from the gums on every side and then move it with your fingers or with forceps gently at first little by little until it loosens.
Then when that happens, you can grip it with the large forceps securely and the patient's head between your knees so that he does not move and then pull the tooth in a straight line lest it break. If it does not come out, then take one of those instruments and insert it under it from each side gently and rock it as you did first.
And if the tooth is hollowed or broken, then it is necessary to fill that hole with a strip of cloth and seal it well with the tip of a thin instrument lest it be torn while you pull on it with forceps, and it is necessary that you carefully examine the gum around it from every side.
Be cautious in your effort so that you do not break it, and some of it remains, returning on the patient a harm greater than his first pain.  And beware of doing what ignorant barbers do in bridge-building and boldness in attacking a fortress without using what we have described.
For often they inflict great harms on people, some of which is that a tooth breaks and its root or part of it remains. Or, if he pulls out part of the jawbone as we have seen many times, and then gargles after pulling it out with vinegar or salt water, if bleeding occurs from the place, often this happens, so that at that time something of alum is ground and put in the place.
And if this is not useful to you,  take it. If the kallalip images that move the tooth first are long-handed, short-handled and thick so as not to bend when grasped by them on the tooth, and these are images of the large kallalip:
Be as you see, thick handles so that when you grasp them they do not give themselves nor bend. Short in length, and let it be of Indian steel or well-forged iron with fixed ends. And at its end are teeth which enter into each other so that it grips tightly and securely.
And the ends can be made in the form of a clamp, also becoming strong for clamping.
Chapter Thirty-Three.
On the Extraction of Tooth Roots and Removal of Broken Jaw Bones.
If, when extracting a tooth, the root remains broken, it is necessary to place cotton soaked in grease on the site for a day or two until the area relaxes, then you insert the  (givet) or (khalilib). Which resemble the beaks of birds called bulraqjah. This is a picture of the khalilib:
It is made like a clamp from the inside or like a (asklifag). If these khalilibs do not help you to remove it, then you must excavate around the root and expose all the flesh with a scalpel, then insert the instrument that resembles a small  (attala), which is pictured:
Short in the end, slightly thick, and not fixed so that it does not break. If the root comes out with this, otherwise use these other instruments, which are pictured: The first is triangular at the end, with some thickness:
Another picture of a delicate triangle:
And we may also use this instrument with the two prongs, which is also pictured:
And without others of the instruments and tools mentioned before in the list of tooth extractions. We may also use this instrument that resembles a large (sannarah), which is pictured:
Triangular in end, curved, with a little thickness so that it does not break, and not fixed. Know that the instruments for teeth are numerous, as well as all other tools, they are almost uncountable. The skilled artisan in his work may invent for himself instruments according to what the work and the diseases themselves indicate.
Because some diseases were not mentioned by the ancients due to the diversity of their types, if a bone of the jaw or one of the bones of the mouth is fractured or suppurates, search for it in its place with what is suitable from among these instruments and probes that were mentioned for extracting roots.
And we assist ourselves with a graft of its image:.
It should be somewhat thick so that it can control the bone and not escape until the bone comes out, and we force the place with appropriate medications, if the bone has slight pus, cleanse it of its pus and blackness until it is purified, then treat it until it heals.
The second thirty-third chapter.
On planting teeth that have sprouted on others.
If the molars sprout on a path other than their natural course, they become deformed thereby, especially if this happens to women and slaves, it is necessary to look, if the molar has sprouted behind another tooth.
And if it was unable to grow or be returned, remove it, if it is stuck with another tooth, cut it with this instrument whose image is:
And it resembles a small beak, and let it be from very sharp Indian steel, and let your cutting of it be over many days because of the hardness of the tooth, so that it will not shake any other teeth, as for if it is coming out with a strong root, remove its root with a scraper from India whose image is:
It is all from India, and its tip is very finely engraved, it is like the scraper used to make needles, with it, gently scrape the tooth little by little over many days so that the tooth does not shake and fall, then smooth it afterwards and remove its root with some pliers.
And if a tooth has broken off from it, and it hurt the tongue when speaking, it is necessary to scrape it also until the roughness of that break disappears and it becomes level and smooth so that it does not hurt the tongue or spoil speech.
Chapter Thirty-three.
In wiring loose teeth with silver threads or gold threads.
If the front teeth are shaken and move from a blow or fall, and the patient cannot bite on anything to eat lest they should fall out, and they have been treated with astringent drugs but there was no benefit in treatment.
The remedy is to tie them with a gold or silver thread, and gold is better because silver tarnishes and rots after days, while gold remains as it is forever, and it will not be subject to that. The thread should be of medium thickness, neither too thin nor too thick, according to what fits between the teeth.
And the image of wiring is to take the thread and insert its loop between the two sound teeth, then weave at both ends of the thread between the loose teeth, one or more, until the weaving reaches the sound tooth from the other side.
Then she weaves back to the side where she started and pulls her hand gently and wisely so that it does not move at all, and the tightening of the thread is at the roots of the teeth so that it does not come loose, then cut the ends of the excess thread with scissors and gather them together and tie them with a needle and hide them between the sound tooth and the loose tooth.
So that it does not harm the tongue, then leave it like this until the end, if it unravels or breaks, tighten it with another thread, and he will enjoy it like this for his whole life, and this is the image of the teeth and the form of wiring in two sound teeth and two loose teeth as you see:.
And the one tooth or two may return after falling in their place and be wired as we described and remain, but this is done by a skilled craftsman, and he may carve bone from ox bones to make it like a tooth and put it in the place where the tooth went. And he is tightened as we said and remains so and enjoys it .
Chapter Forty-Third.
In the cutting of the tether that appears under the tongue and prevents speech.
This tether that appears under the tongue may be natural, born with it by the human being, or it may be accidental from a wound that has healed.
And the work in it is that you open the mouth of the sick person and his head in your block and raise his tongue, then cut that nerve tether across until the tongue releases from its hold, if there was some stiffness and complexity in it and it was from a wound healing, then make a suture in it and cut it across until the tether is severed and the knot dissolves.
And beware that the cut is not in the depth of the flesh, so that a vein is cut there and blood appears, then gargle after the cut with rose water or vinegar and cold water, then place under the tongue a wick of cotton which the sick person holds every night.
So that it does not adhere together again, if bleeding occurs, put on the place powdered saffron, if the blood overcomes you, cauterize the area with a lens-shaped soldering iron suitable for this purpose. Then treat him with all treatment until he heals.
Chapter Fifty-Third.
In extracting the frog that is born under the tongue.
It may happen under the tongue, a tumor like a small frog that prevents the tongue from performing its natural function and perhaps grows until it fills the mouth, and the work in it is to open the mouth of the sick person facing the sun and look at the tumor.
If you see it as a dark color or black, solid and the sick person does not feel any sensation in it, do not treat it because it is cancer. If it tends towards whiteness and has moisture, make a suture in it and cut it with a fine scalpel and free it from all sides.
If blood overcomes you while working, put powdered alum on it until the bleeding stops, then return to your work until you complete it, and then rinse with vinegar and salt.
Then treat it with all appropriate remedies until it heals.
Chapter Thirty-Sixth.
On the Treatment of Swollen Tonsils.
And whatever grows in the throat from other tumors may appear inside the throat, glands that resemble the glands that appear outside and are called tonsils; if you treat it with what was mentioned in the classification and it did not heal.
Then look, if the tumor is hard like a dry color with little feeling, do not expose it to iron; and if it is red in color and its root is thick, do not also expose it to iron for fear of bleeding, but leave it until it matures, either that you will press it down or that it bursts from itself.
And if it is white in color, round, and its root is soft, this is what should be cut; and the work in it is to look before you work, whether it has calmed its heat completely or with some lessening.
Then, when that is the case, seat the sick person with his heel in the sun and his head in a block, and open his mouth, taking a servant between your hands, you press his tongue down with an instrument, its image is:
It is made from silver or copper and is thin like a blade; if you press it against the tongue, and the tumor becomes clear to you, take a pair of pliers, and insert them into the tonsil and pull them outwards as much as possible without pulling with them any part of the membranes.
Then cut it with an instrument, whose image is like scissors, but the ends of each are bent at a right angle to each other, very sharp, made from Indian iron or Damascus steel:
If this instrument is not available, then cut it with a scalpel. This is its picture:.
Sharp on one side and not sharp on the other. After you cut one almond, cut the other in this same type of cut, then after cutting, gargle the patient with cold water or vinegar and water.
If bleeding occurs, gargle with water that has been mixed with pomegranate rind or myrtle leaves or something similar until the bleeding stops. Then treat him until he heals.  Sometimes tumors may grow in the throat other than the almonds, so they are cut as described for cutting the almonds.
And I treated a woman from a tumor that had grown inside her throat, striking the palate slightly and nearly blocking her throat. The woman was breathing through a narrow passage and it had prevented her from eating or drinking water.
And she was close to death if she had lived another day or two. The tumor had risen from it, with two branches until they came out through her nostrils. I acted quickly and inserted a hook into one of them and pulled it, and a piece that was good was drawn out.
Then I cut it where I reached it from the nostril, and then did the same with what protruded from the other nostril. Then I opened her mouth and pressed down on her tongue, and inserted the hook into the tumor itself, and cut some of it away. Only a small amount of blood came out.
Then the woman's throat cleared, and she immediately started drinking water and then eating food. We did not stop cutting from that tumor repeatedly for a long time, and the tumor would replace what was cut until a long time passed for both of us.
Then it shriveled and the tumor inside the throat healed, so it stopped growing. Then she left, and I did not know what God had done to her after me.
Chapter thirty-seven.
On cutting a tumor of the scrotum.
A tumor that is called a fig if it descends into the scrotum and becomes swollen, and white, elongated in shape. If it is thick at the bottom and round, then it is called a fig. If treated with what has been mentioned in the classification, and treatment was not effective.
And I have seen the hot tumor subside from it and become soft, then it is necessary to cut it. And that which was from it, gathered round, and had no length, and was reddish or like blood color, or black, or had no sensation, then it is necessary to avoid cutting it.
So there is danger for the patient, so it is necessary if you see it in the description that was mentioned of its whiteness and length, to make the patient sit with his heel toward the sun and clamp his tongue with the instrument that will be described later, then insert the scalpel into the fig.
And pull it downwards and cut it with one of the two instruments that have been mentioned in cutting the tonsils, and it is necessary that you do not cut from it except what exceeds the natural state without more because if you cut more than that you will harm the voice and speech.
Then after the cutting, use what was described in cutting the tonsils and treat it until it heals. If the patient fears being cut, it is necessary to use the trick in healing it without fear or caution, and the direction of the treatment is with a sharp medicine, which is to place the head of the patient in his stone.
Then clamp his tongue with the instrument that was mentioned, then take from the sharp water that was mentioned in the chapter of treatment and knead it with a paste not extinguished, making it neither thick nor thin, and fill its cavity with this tool, and this is its image:.
Its end, where the medicine is placed, has a cavity like that of a spoon's bowl, and you place the instrument with the medicine on the scrotum itself, and the patient lies on his side so that saliva flows from him from inside his throat so that nothing falls down into his throat to harm him.
Then you hold your hand on the medicine while you crush it on the wound for half an hour until you see that it has darkened and the sting of the medicine has subsided. And if you wish to take cotton, you wrap it on the end of a rod and moisten the cotton in the medicine.
And you insert the rod with the cotton into a tube from above until it adheres to the wound. You do this repeatedly until you reach the desired amount of stuffing for the navel, then leave it; it will wither and fall off after three or four days. If you need to reapply the medicine, apply it again.
After stuffing, you wipe around the navel with cotton moistened in ghee and dry it with what surrounds it of the medicine, then rinse with cold water. It is treated externally with plasters and internally with gargles until it heals. This type of treatment is safer than cutting and further from fear.
And the navel can also be treated with something gentler than stuffing and cutting; it is treated with incense in this manner:  Take fennel, saffron, ginger, licorice, frankincense, marjoram, cumin, and similar herbs. Gather all of them or some of them in a pot and immerse them in vinegar.
And it is boiled while the pot is lined with clay and there is a hole in the middle of the lid. Upon this, a funnel-shaped instrument is placed, made of silver or copper:
And the end with the opening is inserted into the patient's mouth until steam ascends to the navel through the tube until the navel feels comfortably full, then it is repeated several times until it withers. And beware of making this treatment at the first occurrence of the swelling.
For it often increases the swelling. However, it is best to do this when the swelling has subsided and becomes less hot. If you do not have this instrument, take a tube and attach a piece of eggshell to its end so that the patient's mouth does not burn.
Because the eggshell prevents hot steam from burning the mouth and this is good treatment with safety.
The Thirty-Eighth Chapter.
In extracting thorns and anything that grows in the throat other than that.
Often a bone or thorn of fish or something else grows in the throat, so it is necessary to extract what is visible to the eye after pressing the tongue with the instrument at the sun (the uvula).
To make it clear to you what is in the throat, and if something does not appear to you and hides in the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit before his food is digested in his stomach, for perhaps the thing that has grown will come out with the vomit or the patient may swallow a piece of bread or even a whole piece of  a date.
Or he may swallow a piece of dry bread or take a piece of soft sea sponge, tie it in a thread, then have him swallow it, and when it reaches the place of the thorn, pull the thread quickly, do this several times.
For often the thorn or bone sticks to it and comes out, but if it does not come out with what has been mentioned, then use an instrument of lead in this form:
It should be thicker than the reed slightly, and at its tip there is a hook that the patient inserts into his throat gently while raising his head, and he must be careful not to touch his larynx so that it does not cause him to cough, and pushes out the bone or thorn, or the physician can insert it with his hand.
And it is better for the patient to insert it himself so that he knows the place of the thing that has grown, and pushes down or pulls up with his hand on the instrument all that appears to him until it comes out.
The Thirty-Ninth Chapter.
In extracting a lodged lump in the throat.
If you have treated the clot with what was mentioned in the division of treatment with medicines and it has not been effective, then look at the throat of the patient in the sun after you have pressed his tongue with the tool that was described to you.
If your sight falls upon the clot, then draw it out with a small fishing line or a soft, tight cord. If you are unable to do so, then take a hollow pipe and insert it into the throat of the patient near the clot, then insert a piece of iron protected by fire into the inside of the pipe.
Do this several times, and have the patient abstain from water for the whole day, then he takes a container full of cold water and opens his mouth into it and gargles with it without swallowing a drop, and moves the water occasionally with his hand.
If the clot falls into place if it feels the water, then if it does not come out with what we have described, vaporize the throat with urine and with the halite by the instrument that was described in the incense of the leha, do this several times because it will fall.
And the way to work with incense is that you take a pot containing hot embers in the fire and the pot covered with a lid in its center has a hole, then put the tip of the instrument into that hole and throw the incense, and the patient puts his mouth on the end of the pipe and closes his mouth so that the incense does not come out until he knows that the incense has reached his throat.
If the clot falls into place, then if it does not fall, repeat the incense several times and have the patient endure thirst and eat salt and garlic and do not drink water, there is no doubt that it will come out with this arrangement, and this is a picture of an instrument that attracts the clot from the throat if it comes to sight.
And it resembles the kallalb as you see, except that it has this attachment that enters the throat and its ends resemble the beak of a bird in it is roughness if it bites on something it does not leave it:
And another instrument which is used to press down on the tongue, it is a wide ring of iron the size of the mouth, above the tongue, it enters the mouth standing on its side and the mouth remains open involuntarily for the patient and he cannot remove it at all until it is removed.
A description of the instrument which opens the mouth in this same manner.
The Forty Chapter.
In it there is a discussion of the cutting into tumors and splitting them.
Tumors have many diverse types, as will be mentioned one by one in this book, and they differ in their cutting into and splitting from two aspects: one from the nature of the tumor itself and what it contains of humors.
And the second type is from the places where they occur in the body, because the tumor that occurs in the head is not like the one that occurs in the buttocks, and the tumor that occurs in a fleshy place is not like the one that occurs in a joint, each one has its own ruling regarding the procedure.
And there are some tumors that should not be cut into until the pus inside them has matured and is complete, and there are others that should be cut into while they are still immature, such as tumors that are close to joints.
Because if a tumor occurs near a joint and lasts for a long time until it putrefies around it, it may corrupt the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so it becomes the cause of paralysis of that limb or the tumor is near an important organ.
Because if you delay cutting it until it matures, it may harm that important organ or it is near the buttocks so you cut it into while immature but it is necessary to cut into the immature tumor that is near the buttocks so that it does not rot and penetrate into inside the anus so that it becomes a fistula.
And it becomes in a way that does not heal, and it is necessary for you to know the time of cutting into tumors that have matured completely, which is when the pain of the tumor subsides and the fever disappears and the redness and throbbing decrease and the head of the tumor softens and all other signs.
It is necessary to place the knife at the lower point of the tumor if it is possible, so that it is easier for the fluid to flow downwards, or in the most depressed and protruding place of the tumor, and let the knife be going lengthwise with the body if the tumors are in the hands or feet.
And the places of the muscles and tendons and nerves and arteries, and in general all places that are flat and have no bending, but as for those that bend, let the knife go according to that place. But if the tumor is in fleshy places, it is best to leave it without a knife.
Until it ripens as we have said completely, for if you cut into it before that, the discharge from it would be long and full of pus and filth, and perhaps its lips would become hard and ulcerate. And some tumors may be cut across the body according to necessity or as the limb requires.
It is necessary to use a single knife for small tumors, and for large tumors a wide knife or many incisions according to the size of the tumor. And it may be that some tumors require the skin to be pulled taut and cut if it has become like a sheet.
And it may be that some tumors have died to some extent, like what is seen in many boils and abscesses, and some of them are cut with a three-angled incision, and some of them are cut from them like the shape of an acacia leaf, or the tumor of the Arab.
And some of them use the circular incision and the crescent-shaped incision, and similar incisions, but if it does not have a head like the smooth, flat tumors, it is necessary to cut with a simple knife only. And if the tumor is large and has collected a lot of fluid and you have cut into it, do not rush to remove all the pus at that time.
But remove some of it and then tighten the tumor for another day, and then remove some more pus also, do this repeatedly on a gradual basis until all of it is removed.
Especially if the patient is weak, or a pregnant woman, or a young child, or an old man, for often the animal soul separates with the discharge of pus in a lump and perhaps the patient dies while you are unaware. So beware of this chapter with extreme caution.
After striking these tumors, it is necessary to wipe the wound and look. If the tumor's wound is small or the incision was a simple one, use lint made of cotton or flax. But if the tumor is large and the incisions from striking are many...
...then you should insert a wick into each incision until some reach each other. If the tumor has had some of its skin cut or hardened, it is necessary to stuff it with clean cotton or linen without moisture and tighten it until the third day.
Then remove it and treat it with the appropriate ointments until it heals. If bleeding occurs during your work, use cold water and vinegar after soaking a linen cloth in them and apply it to the site of bleeding several times.
If the bleeding persists, you should use the arrangements, treatment, and remedies that we have described in many places in this book and the classification. If you are in wintertime and the tumor site is full of nerves, it is necessary to moisten the dressings with hot syrup and oil.
And place them on the site. If you are in summer and the sites are hot, it is necessary to carry the dressings soaked with water and oil or syrup and oil, all cold until the third day as we said, then remove the tumor and wipe it.
And use in its treatment what is similar until it heals. This is what you need to know about the treatment of tumors in general. As for the detailed method, I have mentioned each tumor and how to treat it separately, summarized and explained.
Chapter Forty-one.
In the incision for tumors that appear in the skin of the head.
Tumors, small in size, appear on the skin of the head and are of kinds of growths that contain sacs; these have conditions like a hen's gizzard, and their types are manysome fatty, some containing moisture resembling mud.
And some contain moisture resembling broth and soup, and so forth, and some are hardened and solid; all of these pose no danger in incision and removal, unless a vein is encountered upon cutting into them.
And the work in cutting into them is to first probe them with the instrument whose image comes after this one, called the "probe," until you learn what they contain. If what they contain is moisture, cut it open a lengthwise incision, a simple incision of this form: .
And begin the incision from line ~b~ to line ~j~. And if the moisture empties, then remove the sac that contained that moisture and cut it entirely; leave nothing of it whatsoever, for often it returns if anything remains.
Then, dip cotton in the ointment of "sorcery" if it is present; otherwise, in salt water, and fill the wound with it, and leave it until the next day, for it consumes what remains of the sac. Then, repeat the application of the cotton with the "sorcery" a second and third time if need be.
Until you are certain that nothing remains of the sac, then treat the wound with ointments until it heals. If the tumor contains a fatty growth, cut it open in this form: .
A crosswise incision and place the knife blades at the edges of the wound, and remove it from each side, and exert your effort in removing the sac that contains it. And if a vein is encountered, do what I have described before; and likewise do in the tumor if it is hardened upon cutting.
And the treatment with a single incision, as mentioned, and the incision on the hardened tumor is easier because it has little blood and moisture, and some of these tumors in the head of some people have no moisture at all, for when I incised a tumor...
...the head of an elderly woman, I found the tumor like solid rock, coarse white, which could not be broken even if someone threw it, and none of the other tumors that occur in the head were like this except for those that occur in the heads of children.
And at the origins of the ears, cut them all with a simple incision and make their bottom from their lowest points so that it is easy for the matter to flow downwards, then treat them with what suits them from treatment.
Chapter Forty-Two.
In the incision on tumors that appear in the neck, these tumors often appear in the neck and under the armpits and in the groin, and they may appear in all parts of the body.  The one that appears in the neck from it may be one, and it may be many, and some are generated from each other.
And every tumor from them is within a special peritoneum, as in the masses and tumors of the head as we described. And the types of these tumors are many, some hardened, some containing moisture, and some malignant that do not respond to treatment.
So I did not see any of them in good condition to the touch, and its appearance was close to the color of the skin, it moved in every direction, and it was not attached to a nerve in the neck or tendon or artery, nor was it sunken. So it is necessary to cut it with a simple incision from above to the bottom of the body in this shape from line ~a~ to line ~b~:
And peel it from every side and extend the edges of the skin with a suture or two sutures or many sutures if needed, as we said in tumors of the head, and remove it gradually little by little, so that it does not cut a vein or nerve, and let the scalpel be not too sharp.
Lest your hand increase the severing or agitate the sick one, cut what you do not need to cut; if you have severed an artery or vein and it has made your hand useless, put in the wound powdered alum or some fragments that stop the blood.
Close the wound and leave it until the inflammation subsides and the wound relaxes and begins to heal; for when the blood stops then return to your work until you are finished, then examine with your index finger if any remaining small clots remain, cut them and clean them.
If in the root of the clot there is a large artery, it is necessary that you do not cut that clot from its root but bind it with a double strong thread and leave it until it falls of itself without harm; then fill the wound with clean cotton which has been soaked in Egyptian ointment, and treat it.
And if you have cut the clot entirely, it is necessary that you bring together the edges of the wound and sew it from an hour after you have ascertained that there remains no shred; if you see that there remains a shred because of the size of the clot.
It is necessary that you aim for the root and base when cutting it, and use stitching as we have mentioned; and whatever of the clots contains moisture, cover it with a simple pad where you see the place of ripening, and make the pad as below as we have said.
Then use after the pad, the ointment as Egyptian ointment and its likes so that it eats what remains of the corruption until if you see that the wound has healed, treat it with ointments for promoting flesh until it heals.
Chapter Thirty-Four.
In the incision of the larynx about a swelling that occurs inside the throat.
The ancients mentioned this incision in the larynx, and I have not seen anyone in our country perform it; this is the order of their words; as for those who suffer from angina, it is necessary that they avoid the incision in the larynx because they do not benefit from it.
For the purpose of all wounds and lungs to be sound, as for those who have a hot tumor in the mouth or throat or tonsils if there is no cause in the trachea, it is necessary to use a tracheotomy to escape from the damage that comes from suffocation.
When we want to do this, it is necessary to make an incision in the larynx under three circles of the trachea or four small incisions across between two circles as much as the incision in the peritoneum and not in the cartilage, this place is suitable for the incision.
Because it is devoid of flesh and blood vessels are far from it, if the operator is cowardly, it is necessary to extend the skin of the throat with a suture and then cut the skin until when he reaches the trachea beside blood vessels if he sees anything of them.
Then he cuts the peritoneum that we described, and relies on the incision of the trachea from the phlegm that comes out of it with what is crushed and from the interruption of the voice and leaves the wound open for a time, and if the time during which he was afraid of suffocation has passed, gather the edges of the wound from the skin.
And its path alone without the cartilage, then medicinal drugs are used that grow flesh until it heals, said the author of this book, explanation of this passage which we have narrated is if they see the patient has blocked his throat with one of these tumors mentioned.
And the patient, in dire straits on the brink of death, and worried that he would suffocate, they went to tracheotomy so that the patient could breathe at the wound site some air and escape from death, but they ordered the wound to be left open until the end of the disease's verse and its verse for three days or so.
Then, they ordered the wound to be sewn and treated until it healed. And what I saw with my own eyes, a servant took a knife and sent it on her throat, cutting some of her trachea. She was summoned for treatment, and she was found to be rotting like a slaughtered animal, so the wound was revealed.
I found that the blood coming out of the wound was flowing easily, so I knew that she had not severed an artery or vein. Air was coming out of the wound, so I inserted a probe and made a cut in the wound and treated it until he recovered, and nothing else happened to him except for a little noise in his voice, no more.
And after some days she returned to her best condition, so from here we say that a cut in the larynx is not dangerous.
Chapter forty-four.
In the incision on the tumor that appears in the pharynx from outside and is called a pharyngeal vesicle.
This tumor that is called a pharyngeal vesicle is a large tumor on the color of the body and it is common in women, and it comes in two types.
Either it is natural, or it is a secondary growth, the natural one there is no cure for, and the secondary ones come in two types: one similar to fatty tumors, and the other similar to the tumor that arises from the complication of an artery, and its incision is dangerous. So it should not be touched with iron at all except if it was small, if you probe it and explore it with the probe, its nature resembles a fatty tumor and it wasn't attached to any blood vessels, so you cut it as you cut into fatty tumors. And remove it with what it contains from the sac if it is in a sac, otherwise, investigate all of it then treat the area with the appropriate treatment.
Chapter forty-five.
In the incision on types of fatty tumors.
Fatty tumors come in many types, and I have mentioned all their types in the classification, and it is necessary for us to explain here the difference between a fatty tumor and an abscess because it is a problem, so I say that an abscess comes with heat, fever, and frightening pains until the boiling of the phlegm subsides. The pus completes and at that time the fever and pain subside, and there is no heat or fever or aches with it, and it contains itself in a peritoneum sac which has a special covering and is on the color of the body and its beginning is like a lentil and it becomes like a gourd and larger and smaller.
And it is of two kinds, either fatty or that it contains moisture and the colors of the moisture are many as I mentioned in the classification, so if you reach to treat the abscess, dry it and examine it first with the instrument called the 'al-mads' as it comes in its image in the chapter after this one.
Measure the size of the swelling, then bring out the 'al-mads' and look at what comes out in its wake. If a fluid exits, whatever its color, make a small incision as mentioned in all other swellings. And if no moisture comes out after the 'al-mads', know that it is fatty.
Make an incision on it, a crosswise one like I have taught you, and suspend it with the skewers and remove the skin from every side gently and be careful with the sac if you can extract it whole with the abscess.
If the sac ruptures during the work and you were unable to extract it whole, this happens often, then extract it piece by piece until nothing remains of it, because if something remains of it, whether little or much, the abscess will return on most occasions.
If you are overwhelmed and some remains, then widen the wound when you finish with some sharp pointed instruments and suture the wound and put on top of it what calms the hot swelling and treat it with all other treatment until it heals. And if the abscess is large, outline its edge and treat it with what promotes healing.
If a running or non-running vein crosses you and bleeding appears, act quickly, widen the area with powdered alum and leave it tightened for two or three days until the wound becomes septic and the boiling of blood subsides then return to cutting what remains of the abscess.
Chapter Sixty-Four.
On the Images of Instruments.
Of which instruments there are three kinds: large, medium, and small.
Image of a Large Probe:.
Image of a Medium Probe:.
Image of a Small Probe:.
They are made of steel, square-tipped, and well-fitted to quickly enter tumors. And these are the images of probes, called "barde," also three kinds: large, medium, and small. Image of a Large Probe:.
Image of a Medium Probe:.
Image of a Small Probe:.
They are used to search for tumors, incisions, fistulas and abscesses, to see what is inside of them from bone or otherwise. They are made round, polished, and smooth like the tools from copper Spanish or  from bronze or iron or silver, but the best are those made from Spanish brass.
And probes can also be made from black lead, and are used to probe fistulas which have a filling in their depths, to turn it with its flexibility, this turning is also three kinds because some are long, some medium, and some short.
According to the need of each fistula's depth, and its thickness according to the width and tightness of the fistula. Image of a Large Lead Probe:.
Image of a Medium Lead Probe:.
Image of a Small Lead Probe:.
Images of the forceps, which are many kinds because some are simple, meaning those with one prong, and they are three kinds: large, medium, and small, and some are deep forceps also three kinds, and some are forceps with two prongs, also three kinds, and some are curved forceps with two prongs. And they are three kinds, and some are forceps with three prongs also three kinds, and all these kinds each one of them needs in its place. Image of a Large Simple Forceps:. A simple suture in the middle. A simple small suture.
A large blind suture. A medium blind suture.
A small blind suture.
A large suture with two hooks. A medium suture with two hooks. A small suture with two hooks.
A large suture with three hooks.
A medium suture with three hooks. A small suture with three hooks.
And these are pictures of the instruments used to cut and dissect tumors and lumps. There are three types because some are large, some medium, and some small, a picture of a large dissector:
A picture of a medium dissector.
A picture of a small dissector.
Its blades, which it cuts with, are limited, and the other ends are unlimited so that they can be used to dissect the tumor when there is fear of cutting a nerve or blood vessel so that the patient may find comfort and relief from the pain he feels when dissecting the tumor.
And these are pictures of the retractors, which come in three types: large, medium, and small. A picture of a large retractor:
It is made of copper, which is almost malleable and is fitted with a spoon-like blade on one end, consisting of two plates in its head with a hidden scalpel-like blade resembling the tongue of a bird that runs inside and outside as you wish, as you see.
Pictures of scalpels that are placed between the fingers when dissecting tumors so that the patient does not feel them. There are three types: large, medium, and small. A picture of a large scalpel:
Pictures of the hemostats that are used to stop bleeding, and they are three types because some are large, medium, and small, a picture of the large hemostat: .
They are made of brass or tin, rounded to the length a little as you see, and they are flexible, it is necessary that these types of hemostats be with you large and small to cut off blood quickly when necessary and when medicine does not come to your hand.
But do not use them to cut off blood in every place of the body, but they are used in fleshy places such as the thigh muscle, the back of the thigh, the arm muscle, the chest, the abdomen, and the ribs and similar fleshy, moist organs.
And they can be made from them smaller tools that resemble pistachio shells as in this picture: .
They cut off the blood if it bleeds from a place of phlebotomy or when cutting an artery or vein, and they can be made round like this picture: .
The Forty-seventh Chapter.
In the treatment of men's chests.
Whose chest resembles that of a woman, some people's chests may swell when they have a dream until it resembles the breast of a woman, and it remains warm and unsightly, so if he dislikes this, it is necessary to make a crescent-shaped incision on the chest like this shape.
From line ~b~ to line ~j~: . Then peel all the fat, then fill the wound with the ointment and bring the edges of the wound together with stitches and treat it until it heals, if the chest sags down and relaxes its bones as it happens to women.
It is necessary that you make two incisions on its upper edges like the shape of a crescent, and each one connects to the other at its end until the larger line encircles the smaller one in this manner. From line ~b~ to line ~j~, then peel the skin between the incisions and remove the fat, and use what has been mentioned from stitches and sutures and what is needed of treatment until it heals.
But if you are unable to absorb what should be cut because of the patients anxiety or because of bleeding, it is necessary that you pack the wound with cotton soaked in the ointment and leave it until it consumes what remains of the fat, then treat it until it heals.
The Forty-Eighth Chapter.
In the tumors that appear under the arm pit.
These tumors that appear under the arm pit are of the type of pork, solid and contained in a sac, and some contain moisture. As for what contains moisture, it is necessary to make a crescent-shaped incision in this manner.
From line ~b~ to line ~j~. If you have emptied all that is in the tumor of the moisture, then wipe it with clean cotton and leave it until the next day then remove the cotton.
And treat it with the appropriate ointment until it heals. If the tumor is of the type of pork nodules, make an incision on it as we mentioned for the incision on pork, whether or not the wound progresses to the point where pus flows, then use cauterization as mentioned before.
The Forty-Ninth Chapter.
In the incision of the tumor that appears near the artery or vein and is called an aneurysm.
If the artery is injured and the skin above it is sutured, then it often appears as a tumor, and the vein can also be affected by swelling and a tumor.
The signs by which it is known whether the tumor or swelling is from an artery or a vein, if the tumor is from the artery, it will be rectangular and gathered in the depth of the body, and if you press the tumor with your finger, you will feel it as if it has a pulse.
And that which is from the vein, the tumor will be rounded in the outside of the body, and the incision on these tumors is dangerous, especially what was in the armpit, the rib, and the neck, and in many places of the body and was very large, so it is necessary to avoid treating them with iron.
And what was also from them in the limbs or in the head, it is necessary to avoid, and what was from an inflation of the artery,  incision was made on the skin lengthwise, then the incision was opened with tweezers, then the artery was dissected and released from its sac.
Until it is revealed, then a needle is inserted under it and driven through to the other side, and the artery is tightened with a double thread in two places as I have informed you in the tying of the arteries which are in the wrists, then the place between the tendons is cut with a scalpel until all the blood inside comes out.
The tumor then dissolves, and the treatment that produces pus is used until the tendons fall off, then it is treated with ointments suitable for it until it heals.
If the tumor is from a vein incision, it is necessary to hold your hand as much of the tumor with the skin as possible, then insert a needle below the place where you held your hand and drive it through with a double thread until it comes out on the other side. Then tie the tumor firmly with it according to what I have told you in tying the grape from both sides at each end of the thread, if you fear that the threads will slip, insert another needle with another thread under the whole tumor at the intersection of the first needle.
Tighten your threads in four places, then cut the tumor in its middle until what is inside it comes out. Then cut away excess skin and leave what was attached to it. Then place a pad on it that has been soaked in wine and oil. Then use the treatment with wool fat and ointments until it heals.
Chapter Fifty.
In the tumor that appears from nerve twisting.
Just as a tumor appears in an artery or vein, so it also appears in a nerve if it is struck or caused by excessive fatigue or the like, and this is more common in the places of the wrists and heels.
And in every place where the joints move, there is a hard tumor that resembles the color of the rest of the body and is in most cases painless. If it is pressed tightly, the patient feels a sensation like numbness, and the tumor does not gather deep in the body.
Rather, it is under the skin and moves in every direction but does not go forward or backward. So what is found in the joints should not be subjected to iron because it may cause a delay. And what is found on the head or forehead
then cut the skin with a scalpel, if the tumor is small, grasp it with forceps and cut it from its root, and if it is large, cut it with a saw, then tie it off with a thread and remove it, and gather the wound by sewing it, and treat it until it heals.
Chapter Sixty-One.
In cutting the warts that appear on the abdomen.
Many people's bellies and other parts of their bodies may have warts called "fungi" because they resemble fungi. They are originally thin, with a thick head that has become deformed on its edges, and some of them are small and others are very large.
I saw a man with two tumors in his abdomen that resembled the fig, white and thin at their origin, their edges had changed and split, and moisture constantly flowed from them. I cut them out, and the weight of one was about eighteen ounces, and the other about six.
And the work in cutting them is to look, if the patient is wet and the color of the tumor is white, moist, and thin at its origin, then cut it with a broad scalpel, and let the tools be in the fire, for much blood often flows when they are cut.
So hasten if blood overcomes you, and roast them; and if you see the patient cowardly and frightened from being cut with iron, take a thread of tightly-wound lead and tighten it with the tumor that has this description, and leave it for two days then increase in tightening the lead, so do not cease to tighten the lead.
Every time you affect the tumor until it detaches and falls from itself without effort, if the tumor is thick at its origin, in cutting it there is some fear and danger, especially what is in the abdomen, but it can be cut in half or some of it.
Then mold it so that it does not return, and then treat it until the wound heals, and beware of cutting a tumor that is dark in color, little sensation, and coarse in appearance, for it is cancerous, and I will mention cancer after this.
The Twenty-Fifth Chapter
On the Treatment of the Fistula
A fistula is caused by many reasons, either from a tear in the peritoneum on the abdomen that brings out the intestines or bowels as it appears in other fistulas, or from blood emanating from a vein or artery as previously mentioned, or from air trapped within.
And if it is from a tear in the peritoneum and protrusion of the intestines, then its color is similar to the color of the body, and it is soft without pain and appears different positions And if it was before the intestines emerged, then its placement with what we described would be more different. If you press it with your fingers, it disappears then returns and perhaps there is a crackling sound with it and it becomes much larger upon entering the bath and severe exertion. If it was before moisture, then it would be soft.
It does not disappear if you press it with your hand nor does it increase or decrease. If it was before blood, then with these signs the tumor appears to blackness. If it was before newly-grown flesh, then the tumor would be hard and solid and remains at a constant amount.
If it was before air, then touching it would be soft. The action in this is that you look and if the navel protrusion is from before blood of the artery or vein or air then it is necessary to refrain from treating it because there is fear and danger as I informed you in the chapter where I mentioned the tumors that occur from before the artery and vein.
If the navel protrusion is from before the intestines or the  spleen, then it is necessary to order the sick person to hold their breath and stand upright stretched out, then learn by the pencil around the entire navel. Then order him to lie down in front of you on his back, then cut around the navel with a wide scalpel at the place which you learned with the pencil, then extend the center of the tumor upwards with a large string and then tie the place of the incision with strong thread or silk thread tightly.
And the knot of the tie should be a loop, then open the center of the stretched tumor above the tie and insert your index finger and ask for the intestines, if you found that the tie took it, loosen the loop and push the intestines back into the abdomen, and if you find a spleen, extend it with a string.
And cut its excess, if an artery or vein obstructs you, tie it properly and return to your work and take two needles, insert two strong threads into them, and insert the two needles into the incision you made around the tumor as staples which you have driven in, then tighten the tumor in four places on the needles.
And if you wish, remove the stitches and leave the site until the flesh drawn tight rots and falls off by itself or cut it when it softens and rots, then treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals. If the protruding part of the navel is from flesh growing in it.
Or if it is from moisture, it is necessary to cut the swelling as we have said and bring out the blood or moisture that you find in it, then treat it with what mends the place.
The Third and Fifty-First Chapter.
On Treating Cancer.
We have mentioned in the sections the types of cancer and how to treat it with medicine, and warning against treating it with iron so that it does not become raw, and we mentioned the cancer that is generated in the womb, and the warning against treating it.
And the ancients stated that when the cancer is in a place where it can be completely removed, such as cancer in the breast or thigh and similar organs that are easy to remove entirely, especially if it is small and new, but when it has progressed and become large, it is not appropriate to touch it.
For I have not been able to cure anyone from it, and before me, I did not see anyone else who reached that, and the work in it if it is feasible as we said, then proceed so that the patient is freed from the black matter repeatedly, then dissect it if it is in the veins with clear fullness.
Then insert the incision a dressing where it can be treated, then place inside the cancer needles that are suitable for it and then cut it from every side with the skin on until nothing remains of its roots, and leave the blood to flow without quickly stopping it.
But squeeze the areas and let all the thick blood flow with your hand or by any means you have available. If a large bleeding occurs in the course of work from cutting an artery or vein, then stop the bleeding until it stops completely, then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
The Forty-Fifth Chapter
On treating carbuncles.
We have previously explained in the classification the types of hydrops and how water gathers and the signs of each type and its treatment with medicine, and that which is treated with iron is the single type of dropsy, and iron does not come near the type of pleural effusion or the fleshy type at all.
Therefore, that is a fight, if you have treated this type of dropsy with medicine and your treatment was ineffective, look and see if the patient has reached extreme weakness or if he has another illness besides the dropsy such as...
A cough or diarrhea and the like, so beware of treating him with iron because it is harmful. If you see the patient has plenty of strength, he does not have an illness besides the dropsy alone, and he was neither a child nor an old man, then the course of action for him is to make the patient stand upright in front of you. And a servant behind him squeezes his abdomen with his hands and pushes the water down towards the area of the groin, then take a pointed scalpel like this:
Limited at both ends, long and defined at the end like a scalpel, except that it has some bluntness slightly so that it does not slip into the intestines when working, causing harm, then turn if the carbuncle was born from the side of the intestines.
If it is necessary to make a cut, from the navel three fingers down with its edge above the groin, if the carbuncle was born from the side of the liver disease, let your incision be on the left side of the navel by three fingers, if it was born from spleen disease, let the incision be on the right side by three fingers.
Nor should the incision be on the side on which the patient wants to lie down so that the pus does not flow into that weak spot, then pierce the skin with the instrument and then insert the instrument into the incision and raise your hand.
With the knife between the skin and the peritoneum, as if you are peeling it, and the amount you peel is like the size of a fingernail or so, then pierce the peritoneum until the knife reaches an empty space which is the place of water, then bring it out and insert into the hole the instrument whose image is this.
And it is like a tube from a fine reed made of silver or copper or polished smooth spindle, with a small hole at its bottom and three holes on its sides, two from one side and one from the other as you see.
And it may place its tip sharpened like the tip of a pen as in this image:.
At the top of its end is a ring, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it descends from its seat on the instrument, so that it empties out of water at a moderate amount because if you empty more than what is necessary at the time, then perhaps the patient will die by the dissolution of his animal soul.
Or he may be exposed to near death, but empty out of it according to its strength and what indicates to you the state of the patient from the strength of his pulse and the goodness of his complexion, then remove the instrument and stop the water because it is stopped by its seat.
Because of the skin that holds the hole on the peritoneum which you were told to flatten in that manner, then return the instrument another day if you see the patient likely for it.
And also bring out of the water a small amount, do this for days while you are on the neck and be careful of the error so that there remains from the water only a little, if you fear for the patient and leave some water a great deal, treat him by burying him in hot sand.
And the excessive sweating in the bath and the sun, and his endurance of thirst, and treat him with drying medicines until he is healed, and the burning on the stomach and liver and spleen after removing the water as described earlier,.
The Fiftieth Chapter
In the treatment of children who are born and their urination places are not pierced or the opening is narrow or in an improper place.
Some boys may come out of their mother's womb and their urethra is not pierced, so it is necessary to immediately pierce it from the moment he is born.
With a very fine scalpel as in this image:.
Then you put a thin nail of lead into the opening and tie it and hold it for three or four days, when he wants to urinate, move it aside and then return it, and if you do not make use of lead, it is possible that the urine flowing on the site will not leave it closed.
As for those whose opening is narrow, it is treated with lead as we have said for many days until it widens, and those of them whose opening is in the wrong place, that is, some are born and the opening is at the end of the urethra so they cannot urinate forward.
Until he raises the penis with his hand upwards and doesn't give birth to him before that, the semen cannot reach the uterus in a straight line, which is a very ugly cause, and the way to work on it is that he lie down on his back.
Then you stretch his urethra with your left hand firmly and shave the head of the penis with a blade or a sharp scalpel like the tip of a pen, or as if you were carving something so that its middle comes out similar to the urethra, and the opening falls in the middle as it should.
And be careful when you work from bleeding, because this often happens, so counter it with what cuts the blood and treat the wound until it heals.
The Sixty-First Chapter
In the ulcer that occurs in the sheath, urethra, darkness, decay, and adhesion of the sheath to the urethra.
This ulcer frequently occurs in the urethra, it is a hard fleshy tumor and can be malignant or non-malignant; the non-malignant one should be treated with a fine thread suture.
And cut it until you cleanse it all, then place cotton soaked in the Egyptian ointment on top of it, and treat it afterwards with palm ointment until it heals. As for if the ulcer is malignant, dark in color, it is necessary to use cauterization after cutting and scraping it.
If the ulcer is in the foreskin of an uncircumcised person and some of the ulcer is from inside the foreskin and some from outside, it is necessary to remove the ulcer that is inside first until it heals, then treat the one outside.
Because when you treat them together, the foreskin is not safe from being punctured, it can also occur in women and in the foreskin blackness and corruption, so it is necessary to excise everything that has become black and corrupted or already corrupted.
Then, apply honey mixed with crushed pomegranate rind and turmeric on top of it, then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals. If bleeding occurs, use cauterization with a crescent-shaped iron like this: .
Because cauterization is beneficial for both conditions, that is bleeding and the wound if it becomes corrupted. If the cautery becomes too tight and goes completely in a short time, it is necessary to insert a tube of lead into the urethra so urine can flow on it. As for the foreskin sticking to the cautery...
And this adhesion happens to those whose foreskin is healthy and has not been circumcised, or it may occur due to a wound or tumor, so it should be peeled off with a sharp scalpel until the bond dissolves and the cautery is freed from all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish between them upon examination, it is necessary to peel a little from the cautery and the foreskin because the foreskin is delicate, and it may puncture quickly due to its thinness, then separate the foreskin from the cautery with a thin linen cloth soaked in cold water so that it does not stick together either.
Then he treats him with astringent drink until it heals.
The Seventieth Chapter.
In purifying boys and treating what afflicts them from mistakes.
Circumcision is nothing other than the separation of the connection like other surgeries, except that since it is done by our will and its use in boys especially, it behooves us to draw in it the best practice.
And the easiest way leading to safety, so I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because it was not used in their laws but rather what we have acquired.
By experience, that is, because I have found the majority of craftsmen and surgeons using purification with Moses [surgical instrument] and scissors, and they use the forceps and the ligature with thread, and cutting with the fingernail; and I have tried all these methods.
So I did not find better than purification with scissors and ligature with thread because the purification with Moses often leads to the skin being cut since the foreskin is two layers, so perhaps the upper layer of skin is cut while the lower layer remains.
Thus, he is forced to cut again and renewed pain. And purification with forceps does not guarantee the cutting of the edge of the urethra because it may enter its hole. As for purification with the fingernail, perhaps the skin will slip and ruin your work or maybe the boy's foreskin was naturally short....
So they often do not need purification; I have seen that. As for purification with scissors and ligature with thread, experience has revealed its excellence to me because the scissors are proportionate in cutting as the blade from above is like the blade from below.
So when you squeeze your hand with the proportionate blades, you cut in one measure and in one time, so that the string becomes a wall-like barrier for the skin of the urethra from all sides; there is no possibility of any mistake whatsoever. And the face of the work first of all to make the boy think...
And especially if it is from someone who understands little, that you only tie the thread in its incision and leave it until another day then loosen it and soothe him in every way you can from him and what he accepts with his mind, then hold him between your hands standing upright.
And he should not be sitting and hide the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot, so that the boy's eye does not fall upon it at all nor on any of the instruments, then you put your hand into his incision and blow into the skin and pull it up until the head of the penis comes out.
Then cleanse it from what gathers in it of dirt, then tie the mentioned place with a double thread and tie below it slightly a second knot, then hold with your thumb and index finger the place of the lower knot firmly and cut between the knots. Then raise the skin up above quickly and bring out the head of the penis, then leave the blood to flow a little, as it is better and lessens the swelling of the penis, then dry it with a wet cloth, then sprinkle on it some ash of dried pumpkin burned, as it is the best that has been tried, or fine poppyseed meal, which is also good.
Then raise the skin up above quickly and bring out the head of the penis, then leave the blood to flow a little, as it is better and lessens the swelling of the penis, then dry it with a wet cloth, then sprinkle on it some ash of dried pumpkin burned, as it is the best that has been tried, or fine poppyseed meal, which is also good. Then place on the top of it a cloth, egg white boiled in rose water mixed with fresh rose oil, and leave it on him until another day, then treat him with all the rest of the treatment until he heals.
And this is a picture of the scissors suitable for cleansing:
It is a flat cutting, without curvature in it, the screw is straight and the length of both blades is equal to the length of the handles, as for the error that occurs in cleansing, perhaps the inner skin was turned inside out completely or partially at the time of cutting, so you should extend it from your nail before the place swells.
And cut it on a flat plane, if you are not able to hold it with your nail, then pull it with a string and cut it, if three days have passed and what is under the head of the penis remains swollen and hot, leave him until the hot swelling subsides, and bandage him gently.
Cut it as seems fit to you, and beware of the head of the urethra; for if something is cut from the head of the urethra, it does not harm anything. Treat it with that which mends the wound from the points we described in the article on points.
And if it is cut from the skin above the amount and shrinks to above, it does not also harm much, treat it with what we mentioned until it heals.
The Eighty-Fifth Chapter.
In the treatment of urine retention in the bladder.
Urine retention in the bladder is due to its blockage by a stone or clotted blood or pus or growing flesh and the like. If you treat it with what we mentioned, the types of treatment described in the division.
And if the urine has not passed and you see that its retention is due to a stone in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be on his knees bent. Then one person rides on his back and stretches his belly towards his back, and the patient himself holds as much as he can.
Then the neck of the bladder is forced to push the stone backwards, and the urine flows. If it does not flow with what was mentioned, and the matter becomes severe on the patient, then you should use a tool called a catheter, whose image is here:
It is made of silver and is thin and smooth, hollow like a bird's feather tube in length about one and a half spans. It has a gentle funnel at its head, and the face that draws urine with it takes a bent thread and ties good cotton or wool to its end.
And the end of the thread is inserted into the bottom of the catheter and cut with pliers if something of the cotton remains so that it enters the tube, it is plugged like a pearl. Then the catheter is anointed with oil or butter or egg white, and the patient sits on a chair.
And its urethra is unfurled and washed with moist dressings or oil and lukewarm water, then a catheter is gently introduced into the urethra until it reaches the base of the urethra, then the urethra is bent upwards towards the navel, and the catheter is pushed inside it.
Until when the urethra is bent and the catheter is pushed inside until it reaches near the anus, the penis is tilted downwards and the catheter is inside it, then it is pushed until it reaches the bladder and the patient feels that the catheter has reached something empty.
This is done in this order because the passage through which urine flows has a curve, then the thread is pulled with the sponge with slight tension, so that the urine follows the sponge, then it is removed and the urine flows out, and the catheter is returned.
Keep doing this until the bladder empties and the patient feels relief.
Chapter Forty-Nine.
How to inject the bladder with the indigo.
And the instruments that are suitable for this are made of silver or hollow ivory, with a long tube on a flexible reed and a bulb to be filled with water and medicines, which is called "al-zarraqah" - this is its image:
It is made of silver or hollow ivory, with a long tube on a flexible reed and the whole thing is hollow except for the end, which is solid with three holes - two from one side and one from the other as you see.
And the hollow place where the bulb is, it is made to be filled to the point of not allowing more, so that if something is drawn from the moisture it is drawn in, and if it is pushed, it is expelled outwards, like the container used for throwing oil during sea battles.
So, if you want to inject fluids into the bladder, you insert the tip of the indigo into the fluid and pull on the bulb upwards so that the fluid is drawn into the hollow part of the indigo, then you insert its tip into the urethra as we described with the catheters, and then push the fluid with the bulb.
For that moisture reaches the bladder in its place until the patient feels it, and this is a picture of a gentle suppository also injected into the bladder.
It is made from silver or Spanish metal, its upper part resembling a small funnel, and below it there is a groove in which the cord is placed, then take a camel's bladder and put in it the moisture that you want to inject into the bladder, and tie it between the two grooves with a firm knot of a doubled thread.
And warm that moisture a little on the fire, then insert the tip of the syringe into the urethra, and then tighten your hand on the bladder with the moisture tightly until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
If a bladder is not available to you, take a piece of leather and make a circle from it, and pierce it all around, then insert a thick thread into those holes as they turn, and gather the circle as you would gather a plate after putting in it what you want of moisture, ointments, and water.
Then tie it to the instrument and do with it as you did with the bladder, tightening your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
The Sixty-Sixth Chapter.
In Expelling a Stone.
We have mentioned in the division types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and we stated the difference between a stone generated in the kidney and one generated in the bladder and the signs of each, and we mentioned the stone in which work is done by hand and incision.
And it is the stone generated in the bladder especially, and that which grows in the urethra, and I am describing this with a clear explanation and summary.
So I say that the stone generated in the bladder is most exposed to boys, and among its signs is that urine comes out of the bladder like water in its thinness.
It appears in it as sand, and he describes it and deals with it, and often it is hanging down and then it spreads and the anus protrudes in many of them. It is easy for boys to be born from it until they reach fourteen years of age, and it is difficult for the elderly, and as for young men, it is moderate between the two.
And what has a larger stone, its treatment is easier, and the small one is the opposite. Then if we reach the treatment, it is necessary first that the patient be injected with an injection that expels all the feces in his intestines because it may prevent the presence of stones when examined.
Then the patient is taken by his legs and shaken and swayed downwards so that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or he jumps from a high place several times, then you make him sit between your hands standing, and his hands under his thighs so that the bladder becomes completely tilted downwards and then examine it.
And feel it from outside, if you feel the stone in the space, immediately with your time cut into it, if it does not fall under your touch, then it is necessary to wipe the index finger with oil from the left hand if the patient is a boy or the middle finger.
If he is a grown boy, you insert it into his anus and search for the stone until it falls under your finger, then transfer it little by little to the neck of the bladder, then press on it with your finger and push it outwards towards the place where you want to cut.
And order a servant to squeeze the bladder with his hand and order another servant to extend his right hand the women up and with his other hand he extends the skin that is under the women towards the place where the incision will be, then take the scalpel the probe whose picture is:
And cut between the anus and the women not in the middle but to the side of the left thigh, and the incision is on the same stone and your finger in the anus and you press it outwards, making the incision wide from outside and narrow from inside as much as possible to allow the stone to come out.
If it is large, perhaps pressure may be applied with the finger in the seat of the stone when incisions are made so that it comes out without difficulty; and know that there may be stones which have angles and letters, making it difficult for them to come out because of this.
And some are smooth, like the olive, and round, so it is easy for them to come out; and whatever of them has angles and letters, a little more incision should be made; and if it does not come out this way, then it is necessary to maneuver with it, either by grasping it with a clamp that is tight and whose tip is like a scalpel.
So that it may hold onto the stone so that it does not escape, or else a fine instrument with a pointed end can be inserted under it; and if you cannot maneuver it this way, widen the incision a little; if something of blood overpowers you, then cut it off with alum.
And if there are more than one, first push the largest to the mouth of the bladder, then make an incision on it, and then push the smaller ones after that; and do the same if there are more than two; and if it is very large, it is ignorance to make a large incision on it because it exposes the patient to one of two things.
Either that he may die, or that there will always be a dribbling of urine because it does not at all heal together; but try to push it until it comes out, or maneuver in breaking it with forceps until you extract it completely.
And if you have finished your work, wash the wound with vinegar and patience and a soft cloth and tie it up and put over it a piece of cloth moistened with oil and syrup or rose grease and cold water so that the hot swelling subsides; then let the patient lie on his back and do not tighten the bandage until the third day.
And if it dissolves, the place will ooze with water and oil a lot, then treat it with palm ointment and basilica ointment until it heals; and if there is a hot swelling in the wound, an abscess, and so forth, like when blood clots in the bladder and urine becomes obstructed, which is known from the exit of blood with the urine.
Then insert your finger into the wound and bring out that blood for if it remains, it calls for corruption of the bladder and its turning foul, then wash the wound with vinegar and water and salt and treat each kind according to what resembles it from treatment until it heals.
It is necessary during all times of treatment that the thighs be bound and brought together to secure the medicines which are placed on the site, if the stone is small and has become in the urethra and lodged there and urine outflow is prevented then treat it with what I have described before it reaches the fissure.
Therefore often I have dispensed with this treatment by incision, for I have tried it which is that you take a bent piece of steel whose form is:
Triangular tip sharp, inserted in a rod, then take a thread and tie it to the penis below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder then insert the curved iron gently into the urethra until the curve reaches the same stone.
And turn the curve with your hand in the same stone little by little as you strive to pierce it until it passes through from the other side for urine flows out from its hour then close your hand on what remains of the stone from outside the penis and it shatters and comes out with the urine and the ailment heals.
If this treatment does not become prepared for you because of an obstacle that prevents you from it, then tie a thread under the stone and another thread above the stone then make an incision on the stone in the same penis between the two knots and then remove it.
Then the knot is undone and the clotted blood that has become in the wound is cleaned, but it was necessary to tie the thread under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder and the other knot above so that when the thread is untied after the removal of the stone the skin returns to its place and covers the wound.
Therefore, it is necessary for you when tying the upper thread to raise the skin above so that it returns when you are finished and covers the wound as we have said.
Chapter Sixty-One.
On Removing Kidney Stones From Women.
Kidney stones are rarely produced in women; however, if one of them suffers from a kidney stone, it is difficult to treat and there are many reasons for this impediment: one is that the woman may be a virgin, and the second is that you will not find a woman who permits herself to the physician.
If she is a chaste woman or belongs to those who are closely related, and the third is that you will not find a woman skilled in this craft, especially working with her hands, and the fourth is that the location of the incision on the kidney stones of women is far from the location of the stone, so it requires a deep incision.
And in this danger, if necessity demands it, it is necessary to take a skilled female physician, and rarely are they found; if she is lacking, then seek a chaste and virtuous male physician or procure a capable midwife skilled in the affairs of women or a woman who points towards this craft somewhat.
So, procure her and command her to do all that you command her regarding the examination of the kidney stone first of all; that is, to see if the woman is a virgin, it is necessary for her to insert her finger into her vulva and examine the kidney stone; if she finds it, she presses it under her finger.
Then, when she has done this, command her to make the incision upon her; if she is not a virgin but rather one who is married, order the midwife to insert her finger into the vulva of the afflicted woman and examine the kidney stone after placing her left hand on the bladder and pressing it firmly.
If she finds it, it is necessary for her to guide it from the opening of the bladder downwards as far as her power allows until it reaches the root of the groin, and then she should make an incision upon her opposite half of the vulva at the root of the groin from whichever direction she feels the kidney stone in that area.
And the finger must not be removed from under the stone, and let the incision be small at first, then the probe is inserted through that small incision, if she feels the stone, increase in the incision as much as you know that the stone will come out of it, and know that there are many kinds of stones.
Some are small and large, smooth and rough, long and oval, and some with branches, so know their types that you may infer what you want. And if blood overcomes you, throw crushed saffron in the place and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your work.
Until the stone comes out, and do that you count with yourself from the instruments that were mentioned in extracting the stone for men to help you in your work. And if blood overcomes you and you know by the pulse of blood that it is from a severed artery, place gold dust on the place.
And tighten it with the pliers firmly and leave it, and do not touch it, and leave the stone and do not extract it, for perhaps the ailment will perish, then treat the wound, if the sharpness of the blood subsides after days and the place is cleansed, return to your work until the stone comes out.
The Second Sixty-Sixth Chapter.
In the incision on the urinary tract.
The urinary tract is the gathering of moisture in the white peritoneum which is below the skin of the testicle surrounding the egg, and it is called the spermatic cord. And there may be a special membrane prepared by nature in one side of the egg.
So that it seems like another egg, and it is between the skin of the testicle and the white peritoneum which we mentioned, and this does not happen except rarely. And this urinary tract is born from weakness that afflicts women so that this substance settles on it, and it may be exposed due to a blow on women.
This moisture can be of many colors, sometimes yellow, sometimes red like blood, sometimes black like coal dust, and sometimes white like water, and it is most often white, and the signs by which it is known.
Where water gathers, if it is in the white peritoneum that we have mentioned, the swelling becomes slightly oval-shaped like an egg and the testicle does not appear because the moisture surrounds it from all sides.
And if the moisture is in a thin membrane that has it, the swelling becomes oval-shaped on one side like an egg.
Therefore, a person might think it is another egg. And if the moisture is between the scrotum's skin and the white peritoneum, it lies below feeling. But if you want to know the color of the moisture, probe the swelling with the square borer that we have previously depicted its image, and whatever comes out in the wake of the borer, judge it according to what is inside it.
If we resort to treatment with iron, it is necessary to order the patient to bleed if he is able to do so and you see his body full, then he lies on his back on something slightly elevated and place underneath him many rags, then sit you on his left.
And order a servant to sit on his right, extend his penis to one side of the scrotum's skin and towards the side of the abdomen, then take a wide scalpel and cut the scrotum's skin from the middle lengthwise near the pubic area.
And make the cut straight, parallel to the line that divides the scrotum's skin in half until it reaches the white peritoneum containing it, then peel it away and beware of cutting it, and your peeling should be from the side that adheres to the testicle more, and explore the peeling as much as you can.
Then, cover the peritoneum filled with water with a wide spatula and remove all the water, then separate the edges of the cut with bandages and stretch the peritoneum upwards and do not touch the scrotum containing it, and cut the peritoneum as much as you can, either entirely or in pieces.
And especially the delicate side, for if you do not carefully dissect it, water may return; and if the egg emerges outside its skin while you are working, when you finish cutting the peritoneum, replace it then bring the edges of the foreskin together with sutures.
Then treat it as you would treat all other wounds until it heals; and if you find that the egg has rotted from another illness, it is necessary to tie the vessels in the spermatic cord to prevent bleeding, then cut the testicle from the spermatic cord and extract the egg, and treat it as we have mentioned.
And if the accumulated water is in both sides, then know that they are both hernias; dissect the other side as you did with the first one, and if it seems suitable to you for the work to be done once, do so, then wipe away the blood.
And insert into the incisions cotton that has been steeped in oil or rose butter, and from outside place another cotton ball steeped in syrup and oil on top of the testicles, and support the abdomen and put a folded cloth called  "refuah" above it. And tie it from above with a bandage that is six-sided, as shown in this image: .
Then take two pieces of cloth, sew them together and fill them with fluff cotton according to this example, make the ends that are tied from cotton or damp wool, gather them by pulling on the waistband of the trousers, and one end takes  on the seat to the back.
And the second takes toward the groin, and both ends on the thighs from below, and the remaining two ends on the hips, and gather all of it in the waistband of the trousers, and these bandages can also be made with cloth instead of cutting with iron.
And it is to take a gentle blade of the  knife, and dissect with it the foreskin while protected as we have described until the white peritoneum containing the water is revealed; take another blade according to this image: .
It resembles the Greek eye, then it is filled with that peritoneum and it protects it until all the moisture comes out, then the peritoneum is stuffed with splints and the layer containing it is scraped with the cauterizer and cut as much as possible until you completely remove it, and guard from the egg do not touch it with fire.
Know that this work is safer and farther from bleeding than working with the incision, if anything obstructs you in the place of the incision or in the time of cauterization a hot tumor or bleeding or something else, it is necessary to treat whatever occurs to you with the treatment that suits it as previously mentioned.
If the patient is cowardly and does not endure this work because of its pain, let him use the poultice as I have described it, if it proves to be suitable for you according to what has been mentioned before.
Since the abscess is watery, it is necessary to make the patient sit on a high stool and then fill the swelling at its bottom with a wide scalpel, and place the poultice along the body and make the opening wide so that all the water flows out, then place a piece of cloth on the place and tie it.
And leave him to drain the rest of the water, then treat him until the wound heals. If the exit of water is delayed while you are poulticing it, and this happens because the white membrane obstructs in the mouth of the wound preventing the water from coming out.
Then it is necessary to insert a feather of ostrich or the instrument used to extract water from lovesickness, whose image has been mentioned before, or increase the opening of the wound slightly.
Know that the water may return and gather after six months or thereabouts, so if it gathers, poultice it in the same way and defend the patient during those days.
Chapter Thirty-Six.
On Incising a fleshy abscess and its Treatment.
Know that the incision on this hernia is one of the dangers that lead to destruction in most cases, so we see it left alone and safe from it, and I am mentioning its work and types of swelling.
And I say that many swellings can occur in the bodies of women, and this is from many causes, either from an excess of hot phlegm that accumulates to the female, or from a blow. The color of the swelling is on the color of the body and there is no water in it.
And the swelling is hidden, and perhaps the swelling is hardened, its color like mud, and there is no feeling in it. And it may be from a complication of the arteries and their swelling as was mentioned before, or from the swelling of the veins. Whatever is from the swelling of the arteries, this is known by the dissipation of the swelling.
If you press it with your fingers, and it should not be exposed to the blade. But as for what is from the swelling of the veins, nothing dissipates from it when pressed with the fingers. This type can possibly be incised upon, and on all the flesh.
And it is that you incise the skin of the testicle, then extend the testicle upward and bring it out from the white peritoneum, and remove the spermatic cord from the vessels, and tie the vessels, and cut the spermatic cord after removing it from all sides of the testicle. If the testicle has adhered to those nascent flesh tissues.
Then it is necessary to remove and cut the testicle, and if the adhesion is between something of the peritoneum or between the vessels, then it is necessary to remove all of that adhesion and cut it in a circular section.
If the flesh growth is in the place of adhesion that is behind, then it is necessary to cut all of it and remove the testicle as we said.  And if your work is complete, bandage the wound with cloth soaked in rose oil and syrup, and then treat it with all treatment until it heals.
Chapter forty-sixth.
In the treatment of the kidney stone that is with a fistula.
The fistula is a tumor twisted in some twisting, resembling a bunch with relaxation of the anus and it makes it difficult for the patient to move, exercise, or walk. And in the treatment of this ailment, it is similar to what was mentioned before.
But it is necessary to mention the work done in it by those who came before, so I say that it is necessary for the patient to sit on a raised chair, then push the anus towards the bottom, and then hold the scrotum with your fingers along with the vessels which are near the penis.
And a servant holds it and stretches it strongly, then you make a wide sharp incision with a knife, a curved incision following the vessels until the vessels are revealed, then you peel them from every side as I mentioned to you in the dissection of the arteries in the armpits, then insert a needle containing a doubled thread into them.
And you tie it in the first places where the fistula appeared, and also tie it at its end, then make a vertical incision in the middle along the length of the body, and remove what has accumulated in it from the cloudy, putrid fluids.
Then you treat the fistula with the treatment of all other surgeries that you want to heal in a period so that the vessels that feed one of the anus are shed, there is no harm in that, if the fistula appears for all the vessels, then it is necessary to remove one of the anus with the vessels so that the egg does not lack nourishment. From cutting off the vessels, they wither and there is no benefit from them.
Chapter fifty-sixth.
In the treatment of the urinary kidney stone.
The occurrence of this kidney stone is from a tear that appears in the peritoneum stretched on the abdomen near the sides of the abdomen, so the intestines pour out from that hernia into one of the anus.
This hernia may be from a tear in the peritoneum or from its stretching. These two types occur due to many causes, either a blow, a jump, a cry, or lifting something heavy, and so on. Its sign if it is from the stretching of the peritoneum is that it occurs gradually over a long time.
And it does not occur suddenly. It is a swelling level to about the depth before the peritoneum compresses the intestines, and its sign if it is from a tear in the peritoneum is that it occurs from the beginning with great pain at once, and the swelling appears different under the skin nearby.
This is due to the intestines exiting and its path going outside of the peritoneum, and it may exit with the hernia, it is called this type a intestinal and hernial, and it may be with wind, and it may run in the intestines and become stuck there, so it will be accompanied by the death of the patient.
Because it causes severe pain and crackling, especially if compressed. The treatment of these types of illnesses with iron is dangerous, so you must be warned against falling into it.  The recipe for the work is to order the patient to return the intestines with his hand to inside his belly if it comes back.
Then he lies on his back between your hands and raises his legs, then you stretch the skin that follows the rib upwards and cut all of the scrotum's skin lengthwise, then you insert pins into the edges of the incision to the extent needed to open it with them.
And the incision should be as much as an egg can come out from it, then you peel the peritoneum that is under the scrotum until the white and hard peritoneum is revealed on all sides. Then, at that time, insert your index finger into what is next to the egg.
Between the white peritoneum that is under the egg's skin and the second peritoneum, and release it with them the adhesions which are behind the egg, then you bend with your right hand into the scrotum's skin, and with this stretch the white peritoneum upwards with your left hand and raise the egg with the peritoneum towards the incision.
Command the attendant to extend the egg upward and you release the adhesion from behind with complete detachment, and search with your finger so that there is nothing of the twisted intestines in the white, firm peritoneum. If you find anything, push it into the abdomen below.
Then take a needle with a thick thread that has been twisted from ten threads and insert it at the end of the peritoneum which is under the skin of the testicle that follows the incision, then cut the ends of the thread's bend until there are four threads. Then fasten some of them together in a cross shape and tie the peritoneum we mentioned which is under the skin of the testicle with a strong knot on both sides, then also wrap the ends of the threads and tie them tightly so that nothing from the vessels that nourish it can reach it. So that it does not expose a hot tumor, and also make a second knot outside the first one, farther away from it less than two fingers, and after these two knots, leave from the peritoneum under the skin of the testicle as much as the finger's width.
So that it does not expose a hot tumor, and also make a second knot outside the first one, farther away from it less than two fingers, and after these two knots, leave from the peritoneum under the skin of the testicle as much as the finger's width. And cut the rest of it all on a turn and remove it with the egg, then make an incision at the bottom of the testicle's skin, an incision that leaks blood and for the length as we described before, then use cotton soaked in oil and place it in the wound and use the knot we described.
And the white peritoneum we mentioned may be cauterized after cutting it carefully from bleeding, which often exposes it, and leave the knot until it falls off by itself. If its falling is delayed, then let it be released with hot water and hold it until it falls off.
Then treat the wound with all the treatments of wounds until it heals.
Chapter Sixty-Sixth.
In this type of hernia, I have not seen anyone dare to treat it with iron. The ancients mentioned that they should make it as described in the hernia with a pouch, that is, after making an incision on them gently below, tie the vessels.
Then they make a cut in the middle and treat the tumor by opening it until the vessels drop, and treat the wound as mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Seventy-Sixth.
In the hernia that occurs in the groin.
A hernia may appear in the groin as we said, where it protrudes but nothing from the intestines descends into the scrotum, and if it descends, it is easy to return at all times.
But if time passes, the opening in the peritoneum increases until the intestines and the omentum descend into the scrotum, which occurs due to the extension of the peritoneum in the groin as we mentioned before. This is because the peritoneum extends, then relaxes and protrudes the area, and it is treated with a ligature as I have previously described.
And it may be treated with iron in this manner: the patient lies on his back between your hands, then you make an incision in the location of the hernia, a lengthwise cut about three fingers wide, and you push aside the peritoneal layers under the skin.
Until the white peritoneum underneath is revealed, you take a needle thread and place it on the opening from the peritoneum, pushing it into the depth of the abdomen, then stitch the two openings created onto the end of the needle thread from the peritoneum, stitching one to the other.
Then you thread the needle's end without cutting the peritoneum at all, nor touching the testicle or anything else as I have taught you in treating intestinal hernias, and then treat it with the treatment of wounds.
If the threads are cut, you clean them and close the wound until it heals. Then the peritoneum contracts and does not increase the protrusion of the hernia.
Aligning it here is better in this place because it is closer to safety.
The eighth and sixty chapter.
In the relaxation of the scrotum skin.
The skin of the scrotum often relaxes in some people without the flesh inside relaxing, and its appearance is unsightly.  Therefore, whoever desires to treat it should put the patient to sleep on his back.
And he cuts all the skin that has relaxed on the thick skin, then brings the edges together, and if you wish to sew first the excess of relaxed skin with three or four stitches, and make sure of the stitching, then cut what is between the stitches.
Then he treats it with the treatment of all other surgeries until it heals and the sutures fall off.
The ninth and sixty chapter.
In castration.
Castration in our religion is forbidden.
And for this reason, it was necessary for me not to mention it in this book of mine, but I have mentioned it for two reasons: one is that it should be in the physician's knowledge if he is asked about it and that he may know how to treat whoever is afflicted with it, and the other reason is that we often need to castrate some animals for our benefit.
Such as sheep, oxen, cats, and the like of animals.  I say that castration is done in two ways: either by softening or by cutting. The one done by softening is that we put the animal in hot water until its testicles relax and soften and hang down.
Then you soften it with your hand until it dissolves and is not visible to the touch. As for castration by cutting, it is necessary to hold the animal and squeeze its scrotum skin with the left hand, then tie the testicles and make a single incision on each testicle.
Even if the two testicles protrude, cut them after detaching them and leave nothing of the membranes on them except the thin membrane that is on the vessels, and this type of castration is better than the one done by crushing.
Because crushing may leave something from the females, and the animal desires intercourse, then the wound is treated until it heals.
Chapter Seventy.
On Treating Hermaphrodites.
A hermaphrodite in men appears in two types, one of which is that it appears below the space or in the skin of the scrotum between women, shaped like a woman's genitals with hair and sometimes urine flows from what is in the skin of the scrotum.
As for women, there is one type and it appears above the genitals on the pubis like a small male phallus protruding outwards, one of which is like the man's penis and the two are like women's, and treatment of the three types.
The two types from men and the single type from women should have those excess tissues cut until their trace is removed, then treated with the treatment of all surgeries until it heals, as for the second type of men from whom urine comes out of what is in the skin of the scrotum, there is no work to be done nor a need to remove the protrusion.
Chapter Eighty-One.
On Cutting the Clitoris and Flesh Coming from Women's Genitals.
The clitoris may increase in quantity beyond the natural order until it becomes prominent and spoils its appearance, and it may grow large in some women until it spreads like men and becomes suitable for intercourse.
Then it should be grasped, the clitoris, by your hand or with a clamp and cut it without being excessive in the cutting, especially in the depth of its root so as not to expose bleeding.
Then treat it with surgical treatment until it heals, and as for the flesh that grows, it is flesh that grows in the mouth of the womb until it fills it.
And perhaps it emerges to the outside like the tailbone. Therefore, some of the ancients called it the "tailbone disease," and it should be cut like the foreskin, and treat it until it heals.
The Second Seventy Chapter.
In the Treatment of Hernia.
Hernia is when the woman's vagina is not pierced or its opening is small, and it is either natural from birth or acquired. The acquired one comes from a previous illness and is either from excess growing flesh.
Or a thin or thick peritoneum, and it is either deep in the womb or in its sides or above or below it, and it prevents intercourse, the umbilical cord, and childbirth, and perhaps menstruation. And knowing this is by looking from the midwife.
If the blockage is visible and close, then if it's not visible, feel for it with your fingers or a probe. If the blockage is from thin peritoneum and close to the labia, immediately rupture it which is to put on the labia a shape like the handle of a knife then place both thumbs of the hands.
And the woman on her back with legs apart then stretch the labia forcefully until the thin peritoneum is ruptured and the blockage opens, then take a piece of wool, soak it in oil, and put it on the place, and have intercourse with the woman every day so that the place does not close again.
If the peritoneum is thick and dense, it should be cut with a wide scalpel like a leaf of  a reed. If the blockage is from excess growing flesh, hang it with tweezers and cut it off. And let you have with you medicines that quell bleeding without pain such as cardamom, mastic, and frankincense mixed with egg white.
Then you use a wide lead pipe so that the wound does not close quickly, hold it for days and use a piece of dry cotton, then treat it with all the treatment of the consolidation until it heals, and there may be a plant in the womb of other flesh and it is necessary to cut on this method.
Unless it is a cancerous tumor, the cancerous tumor that is in the womb should not be touched with iron at all.
Chapter Seventy-Third.
In the treatment of hemorrhoids and warts and red boils that appear in the genitals of women.
As for hemorrhoids, it is the swelling of the mouths of the veins until a lot of blood constantly flows from them. If hemorrhoids progress, they become warts. I have mentioned in the classification their types and signs, and we mention here.
What is treatable from them and what is not treatable, I say that hemorrhoids and warts if they are in the depths of the womb and do not appear to the touch, there is no treatment with iron and what is from its mouth at the entrance of the womb that feels it, she is the one who is treated.
Then it is necessary for the woman to enter a cold house, and then spread the warts with a scraper or a rough piece of wood and cut them off from their roots, then put some of the one who cuts the blood from one of the bleeding points on her without cauterizing.
Like frankincense, the resin, and myrrh, etc., then raise her legs against the wall for an hour, then lower them into cold water. If bleeding continues, make her sit in a decoction of tamarind seeds and pomegranate peel and hawthorn, etc. Then take barley flour and knead it with honey and vinegar.
And smear it on her back, if the bleeding stops. Otherwise, fasten the breast and the armpits without condition, then take a swab and dip it in the juice of wormwood or the juice of lamb's tongue or the juice of hawthorn branches with a syrup of hawthorn and apply the place.
If the swelling subsides, treat the area with an ointment until it heals. As for the red scab, it resembles the heads of lice, rough in appearance, so what appears of it should be cut as I mentioned previously regarding warts and treat it until it heals.
Chapter Forty-Seventh.
In the abscess that occurs in the uterus.
Many types of tumors may appear in the uterus, such as cancer, hardened tumor, ulcers, polyps, carbuncles, and fissures, as well as hemorrhoids, anal fissures, warts, and hot tumors.  I have mentioned all these diseases and their types and symptoms in the classification.
It is necessary to mention in this article the hot tumor that appears in the uterus if it is one of the tumors that collect for a period how its  becomes by iron, so it is necessary to look if the pain of the tumor at its beginning is severe with throbbing, inflammation, and fever.
And if you see it red when touched, do not rush to treat it and cure it with what helps ripening until when these symptoms subside, then it is necessary for the woman to sit on a stool with two seats and lean on her back.
And gather her legs to the side of the lower abdomen and make her hips apart, and her arms become under her knees, and they are tied together with a rope that is suitable.
Therefore, then the midwife sits on the right side and uses the instrument that opens the mouth of the womb, whose image comes later, and it is necessary if you want to use this instrument to estimate the depth of the woman's uterus so that what enters from the instrument is no more than the depth of the uterus.
It hurts the uterus if the instrument is more than the depth, so it is necessary to place a support on the edge of the cervix to prevent the entire instrument from entering the depth of the uterus, and the spiral that runs in the instrument should be from the upper side.
While you hold the instrument and a servant turns the drill until it opens the cervix, when the fistula appears and is felt by hand and is soft and yielding, it is necessary to cut it at its base with a wide scalpel. And when the whole time has elapsed.
It is necessary that in the wound a soft wick soaked in rose grease or green oil containing some turpentine be placed, and the wick be brought out from the cut in the cervix, and on the outside of the uterus and vulva clean wool soaked in water that has been boiled with bakers yeast be applied.
Then it is treated after two days with the ointment that is suitable for it until it heals.
And the uterus and wound may be washed by injecting water and honey, then with water that has been boiled with the root of asafoetida or long licorice root, and then return to the ointment, if the fistula is hidden inside the uterus.
If it is necessary that treatment with iron be avoided, but treated as mentioned in this section.
The Fifth Seventy Chapter.
In teaching about the caul, how they are treated if live infants come out in an unnatural way.
It is necessary for the midwife to know first the shape of a natural birth, and from its signs if you see the woman tense downwards and yearn to smell the air and find it easy upon her what she has of labor.
And the delivery of the fetus is quick, know that this birth is natural and its exit is on its head with the placenta with it or hanging from its cord, so if you see these signs, it is necessary to massage her abdomen so that the fetus may be delivered quickly.
For if it descends on its head, the placenta descends with it and is cleansed from those impurities with a good cleansing, and anything other than this birth is unnatural and condemned because the fetus may exit on its feet and its hands may exit before its head and feet.
A hand alone or a leg alone, or he emerges with his head and hand, or emerges bent, and perhaps turns on his back and such contemptible forms, so the midwife must be skillful and gentle with all these things and beware of mistakes and errors.
And I make known each shape of it and how the maneuver is in it that you may deduce from it and stand upon it, if the fetus emerges with its head, the natural exit, and intensifies upon the woman and makes her labor difficult, and you see that her strength has weakened, so you seat her on a stool and order women to control her.
And you fill her womb with cooked lentils and wet poultices, then the midwife enters between her fingers a small scalpel and incisions the placenta with it or tears it with her fingernail until what is in it of moisture spills out and she squeezes the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, it is necessary that you inject the woman with licorice saliva mixed with shea butter, then order her after the injection to strain and make her sneeze with a handkerchief and hold her mouth and nose because the fetus will emerge within an hour. If the hand of the fetus emerges first, it is necessary that you return it gently little by little.
If it does not come to enter, place the woman on a platform and raise her legs above then shake the platform on the ground and the woman holds so as not to fall when shaking. If the hands do not enter and the fetus dies, cut them off and pull out the rest of the fetus.
Or tie his hands with a rope and pull them moderately because it will come out. The exit of the fetus on its legs, if the fetus emerges on its legs, it is necessary that you push them up then turn the fetus little by little until you smooth it out and then take one of its legs and extend it little by little.
If they came out to the thighs, order that they be washed and lubricated with a kind of ointment, for it will come out. If it does not come out as described, then return the fetus slightly little by little until you make it into its natural shape, for it will then come out smoothly. If it resists all of what has been described.
Take from the saliva of the  catmint, the saliva of the cumin, the fat of sheep's wool and a mixture of wax and pound all together in a mortar with a good pounding, then apply it to the woman's genitals and lower abdomen and then make her sit in lukewarm water until she reaches the navel.
If you see that it has loosened below her, make for her a pad of wool and she should bear it. If she holds the pad for an hour then make her sit on the chair, then lubricate her and close her mouth and nose, and squeeze her lower abdomen gently. The fetus will come out in an hour's time, coming out on its knees and hands.
If it comes out in this manner, hold back the introduction of its hands little by little, then make the woman lie on her back and lower her legs while she is lying down on a bed and she clasps her hands together, then squeeze gently on her abdomen little by little. Then take out what is under her legs from the cushions until she is positioned downwards. If the fetus does not come out, take both of her legs and move them with a strong motion then squeeze gently above the navel until the fetus ascends upwards, then the midwife inserts her hand and smooths out the fetus little by little.
And order the woman to wash herself until the fetus comes out, coming out with one hand extended. Hold back its hand if you are able to return it. If you cannot return it, make the woman stand and walk. If she cannot walk, then lay her down.
She lay down and her leg was shaken violently then the lactuce (instrument) which I have described from the  instruments was used. If she took hold of it, she was seated on a stool and treatment was given to return the hand and set the fetus in its natural form. The woman was made to cough and ordered to strain until it came out.
The fetus comes out on its back, extending its hands and with its face toward the mother's back. It is necessary for the midwife to grasp the child's hand and turn it gradually and gently until it is straightened, then apply the fat and instruments that I have described to the head.
Then order her to move a little, and when she has done so, seat her on the stool and order her to lean to the right side then order her to strain and have her cough with the (instrument) kends for it comes out. The fetus comes out standing on its side.
If it descends to the mouth of the womb in this manner with the placenta, then split the placenta with your fingernail until it is free from moisture. If it clings to the face of the fetus and its neck, cut it from the navel so that it will not suffocate and die, then push the fetus back inside until it is placed as it should be.
And order the woman to strain several times for it comes out easily. As for twins or many fetuses, know that twins often are born, and sometimes three or four, but this is rare. As for five, it is something outside of nature, they do not live at all.
And they are surrounded by one placenta, and they are separated by a partition between them, attached to the navel of each one of them. They may come out as easily as a single fetus, or they may come out in a difficult manner as we have described.
If the delivery of some of them is difficult and it becomes as we have said, in unnatural forms, then treat it as we have described. Let the midwife be gentle and do what she does with care and patience and contrive for every shape what appears to her from the means leading to safety.
Mentioning what is imagined in the womb of fetuses that are expelled, it may be imagined in the womb one and two and three and four and five and six and seven and more than ten. It has been proven to me that a woman miscarried seven and another fifteen, all of them imagined thus.
By the estimation of the wise and knowing, all of this ought to be in the knowledge of the midwife because perhaps something like this will happen to her one day, so she may meet it with what is appropriate,.
The sixth and seventy chapter.
In extracting the dead fetus.
If you treated the dead fetus with what I mentioned in the division of treatment and it did not come out, and forced you to work with your hand, then it is necessary for you to look. If the woman is healthy in strength and there is nothing from the symptoms that one fears harming her, then it is necessary for the woman to lie on a bed on her back.
And her head be tilted downwards and her legs elevated, and a servant controls her from both sides or ties her to the bed so that her body does not be pulled when extracting the fetus.
Then he lubricates the mouth of her womb with moist ointments, along with honey and thyme and flaxseed. Then the midwife smears her hand with these ointments and saliva then she inserts it into the womb gently, then seeks a place for her to insert forceps from the fetus, and the appropriate places for that.
Look, if the fetus is coming down so that it descends on its head, then insert the forceps into its eyes or cheekbone or mouth or under the chin or throat or in the places near the ribs or below the breasts.
And as for if its descent is on its legs, then in the groin and the middle ribs, it is necessary to hold the forceps with the right hand and make its curve between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand gently and insert a forceps into some of those places that we mentioned.
Until you reach an empty space, then insert another or a third probe in front of it if you need the pull to be equal and not lean in one direction, then stretch it out to a level length and do not make the stretching only straight but move it in all directions.
To make it easier to come out as is done with the molar when extracting it, and it is necessary in this process to loosen the tension. If something gets stuck, then it is necessary to lubricate some of the fingers of the midwife with oil and insert them from one side to guide what is stuck. If part of the fetus comes out, then the probes are moved to other positions.
It is slightly raised, doing this until the whole fetus comes out. If a hand comes out before the others and cannot be returned due to its compression, it is necessary to wrap a cloth around it then pull it until it all comes out, then cut it.
As for the wrist or elbow, and so on, it is necessary to do the same with the other hand and feet. If the head of the fetus is large and there is pressure on its exit, or if there is accumulated water in its head, it is necessary to insert a sharp knife between the fingers.
And split it with it, the head comes out of the water or you make a hole in it with the instrument called the "mashakh" whose image comes with the images of all other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
Similarly, do this if the fetus is large-headed by nature, of course, it is necessary to split the skull or smooth it with the mashakh as we said, then extract the bones with tweezers. If the head comes out and compresses at the collarbone, then split it until the moisture in the chest drains.
Because the chest then joins, if the chest does not join and it doesn't come out, cut as much as you can. If the lower abdomen is a tumor or has a boil, it is necessary to crush it until the moisture comes out of it.
If the fetus is on its legs, then pulling it out is easy and straightening it to the mouth of the womb is simple. But if it is compressed in the abdomen or chest, it is necessary to pull it with a rope that you have wrapped around your hand and cut open the abdomen or chest until what is in them flows out.
If all the organs have been removed and the head remains and is held back, let the midwife insert her left hand. If the mouth of the womb is open, she inserts her hand into the neck of the womb and grasps the head with her fingers, pulling it to the mouth of the womb, then she inserts a rope or two ropes and pulls it with them.
If the mouth of the womb has closed due to a hot swelling, it should not be forced. Rather, at that time it is necessary to use applications of wet, fatty things and use compresses and sit in waters that soften and moisten.
As for if the fetus is on its side, if it is possible to straighten it, then use what was mentioned for a living fetus. If it is not possible, then cut it and remove it. It is necessary that nothing of the placenta be left inside at all. When you have finished treatment, use what was mentioned from treatment for hot swellings that appear in the wombs.
If bleeding occurs, then go down into binding waters and use all the treatment. And I have seen a woman who was pregnant, the fetus died in her womb, then she became pregnant with it again.
Then the other fetus also died. After a long time, a swelling appeared in her groin and it swelled until it opened and began to discharge pus. I was called to treat her and treated her for a long time but the wound did not close. So I placed some strong ointments on it.
Then a bone came out from the place, and she continued for some days, and another bone came out. I was amazed by this because the abdomen is not a place for bones. I estimated that it was from the bones of the dead fetus. So I searched the wound and extracted many bones from the skull of the fetus.
And I did not stop until I removed many bones from it and the woman was in the best of health. And she lived for a time, pus coming out from the place slowly, but that is why I bring this rare case here.
Because it contains knowledge and aid to what the physician who creates with his hand tries to do in treatment.
Chapter Seventy-Seven.
There are images of the instruments that he needs to remove the fetus.
Image of a screw with which he opens the mouth of the womb:
This is the tool that is used in the books, whether it has two screws at both ends of the wooden pieces except this screw should be gentler than the tool and must be either from ebony or boxwood and the width of each piece should be the thickness of two fingers.
And their curvature towards a finger and their length an inch and a half, and in the middle of the two pieces, there are two grooves made from the same kind of wood that have been tightly fastened into them, their length is half an inch or slightly more, and their width is about two fingers or slightly more, and these two grooves.
Are the ones that enter into the mouth of the womb to open it when you operate with the screws, an image of another tool like this gentler and lighter.
It is made of ebony or boxwood in the shape of a calamus except that it has two grooves at its end as you see, the length of each groove is about an inch and their width is two fingers, so if you want to open the womb with it.
So you seat the woman on a reclining bed with her legs spread apart between her thighs, then insert these two grooves pressed together into the mouth of the womb while you hold the end of the tool below between her hip bones, and then open your hand with the tool as you do with a calamus, either to the extent that you want to open the womb. Until you make what the midwife desires, a representation of another spiral mentioned by the ancients:  .
A picture of the mortar used to expel the fetus: .
A picture of the forceps used to extract the head of the fetus: .
It is like scissors with teeth at the end as you see, and it can be made rectangular like a pair of pliers as you see, with teeth like those of a saw to cut and trim.
A picture of a mortar also:
A picture of forceps: .
This forceps has a slight thickness so that it does not break when extracting the fetus with it,  A picture of a pair of forceps: .
A picture of two wide scalpels for cutting the fetus: .
All these instruments, the more types there are and the better prepared they are by the craftsman, the faster his work will be and the higher he will be regarded by people for his skill. Therefore, do not despise any tool that is prepared at your disposal, as there will inevitably be a need for it, .
Chapter Eighty-Seven.
In the Extraction of the Placenta.
If the placenta is retained after childbirth, it is necessary to order the midwife to hold herself and then she should sneeze with a handkerchief and pull your hand on her mouth and nostrils. If it comes out this way, otherwise take a container.
And pierce a hole in the lid and place inside it herbs that open the mouth of the uterus, such as fennel, hyssop, dill, chamomile, wormwood, sage,  centaury and all these medicines or some of them, immerse them in water and put them on the fire. Then place a silver tube on the hole of the lid and the other end in the mouth of the uterus.
And hold it until the steam reaches the bottom of the uterus, then sneeze as we have mentioned, for the placenta will come out quickly. If it remains after this treatment and does not come out, order the midwife to dip her left hand in bear fat or  the saliva of a wild dog.
Then you insert it into the vulva and search with it for the placenta. If you find it, grasp it and pull it out little by little until it emerges. If it is attached deep in the uterus, insert your hand as we have described. When you find the placenta, pull it out little by little on the side of the womb.
Lest the uterus fall out due to strong pulling, it is necessary that you move it gently to the sides, right and left. Then increase the amount of pulling; then it responds and gets rid of its adhesion. If the opening of the womb is closed up, we have described the treatment by cauterization and treating the condition with herbs.
If it does not come out with all that we have described, do not resort to violence in re-pulling it. But rather tie what has come out of it to the opening of the womb to the womans thigh, then inject it with the fourfold ointment; for it softens her after days.
And it dissolves and comes out, except that if it becomes rotten, a bad smell rises from it to the stomach and head, which is harmful to the patient. Therefore, you should use the appropriate barley gruel.
Therefore, because some of the early practitioners experimented with fumigation with incense and dried figs, in the manner of the instrument that a woman uses for fumigating when she has menstrual obstruction or placenta retention, etc.
It is made of lead resembling a funnel, or it is made of copper, with the narrow end placed in the vulva and the wide end on the fire and incense made on embers. Hold it until that incense goes away and replace it with more.
Chapter Seventy-Seven
On the Treatment of a Non-Pierced Anus
A great number of boys are born with non-pierced anuses,  blocked by a thin membrane. It is necessary for the midwife to pierce that membrane with her finger, or else she should cut it with a sharp scalpel and be careful not to touch the sphincter muscle.
Then you place a cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, and then treat it with ointments until it heals. If you fear that it will be blocked, put a lead pipe into the opening for many days and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
And it may happen that the anus is obstructed also from a wound or tumor, so it is necessary to cut through that swelling and treat it with what we have mentioned of treatment and poultices.
The Eighty-Eighth Chapter.
In the Treatment of Fistulas That Occur Below.
Fistulas that occur below are a complication and thickening that occurs near the anus from outside or in the space from one of the sides, and the fistula is one or more.
And if that thickening opens and a whitish watery fluid or thin pus flows from it, and some of these fistulas may penetrate into the intestines and the peritoneum, and they may be non-penetrating. The penetrating ones can be identified by what comes out of them of feces and wind when using the bedpan.
And perhaps worms come out of it, and it may be fistulas if they are in the space penetrating into the bladder and the urethra, and it may be penetrating into the hip joint and the coccyx, and what is known as a fistula penetrating into the anus is also considered non-penetrating.
That you insert your index finger into the anus and insert a thin probe of copper or iron into the fistula from inside, if there is no projection in the fistula, if there is a projection then insert a fine lead probe or a hair from horse hairs.
Until you feel the probe or the hair in your finger, if you don't feel it at all and nothing comes out of the opening, such as feces or wind or worms as we have mentioned, then know that it is non-penetrating, so proceed to the treatment.
If the abscess is flowing into the bladder or the urethra, its sign is the urine coming out of it and preventing it from adhering to the place with medicines. But if it is flowing into the hip joint or the coccyx, its sign is the probe reaching there.
If it does not have protrusion to the bone and pain in the direction of it, and pus is always coming out of it, and there is no benefit from treatment or adherence with ointment, then all these discharging abscesses are never completely cured.
And its treatment is a futile effort for whoever suffers from it among ignorant physicians. But as for the one that is not discharging and not chronic, one hopes for its cure with iron as I describe and what has been tried, which is to lie the patient down in front of you on his back.
And the legs are moved up and the thighs are tilted toward his belly, then a probe of copper or lead is inserted if there is protrusion in the abscess until you know where it ends. If the patient feels it near the anus, then it is necessary to insert your index finger into the anus.
If you feel with your finger that the probe has entered itself exposed without feeling between your finger and it any bone or flesh, then at that time know for certain that it is discharging, so do not tire yourself in it, for there is no cure from it as we said.
And they said that it is cured in some people rarely, and from the treatment that one hopes for benefit, a thin iron is heated according to the size of the abscess as mentioned before, and it is inserted with a cover into the abscess until it reaches near the anus, then it is returned twice or three times.
Until you know that all those excess tissues that are intertwined have been burned, which resemble a feather tube, then treat it with a cloth soaked in butter until those burned tissues are extracted, then treat it with medicinal ointments if it is cured.
Otherwise, it does not heal without it from treatment ever. And if you introduce the probe and it does not reach your finger that is in the seat, and there was between it and the probe a thick veil of flesh or peritoneum, and you saw the nail on what is below the skin's surface, then cut the skin at the beginning of the nail. And you pass through the incision with the probe while it is in the nail until you reach where the tip of the probe ends and the probe comes loose and falls, then you clean those congealed meats that resemble a bird's feather tube, and nothing remains of it.
Then you treat it with the cohesive ointments until it heals, if blood overwhelms you and stands between you and doing your work to cut those meats, then the best thing you do and the fastest benefit is to cauterize it with fire or a sharp medicine because cauterizing with fire brings together two beneficial conditions: burning those excessive meats.
And cutting the blood and drying the humidity, then you treat it with the cloth moistened in butter or sulfur powder mixed with oil until the place forms pus and those burnt meats come out in pus, then treat the wound at that time with cohesive ointments for hardening the flesh.
And these are the medicines that have constriction and drying, so if it dries out, then it heals and there is no return of the ailment, if the nail has reached deep into the seat and away from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the seat and search with it.
If you feel the probe and between you and it a veil of peritoneum or flesh, and it was close to penetration, then there is no work done in it except by way of hoping and wishing that you use one of three ways: either you mold it as we have said...
or you cut it until you reach its bottom so that you can insert the cloth and treat from near, and do not overdo the incision lest you cut the muscle surrounding the seat, causing a condition where the patient experiences involuntary stooling, then treat it with what has been mentioned, and perhaps it heals as we have said.
And if you perforate that veil and pierce it after having split it near the anus as we have said, either with a probe or with another sharp instrument; then cleanse all the congealed flesh in the fissure to the extent you are able.
Then fill the wound entirely, together with the fissure and the upper opening until it is sealed and the opening remains open inside the anus so that it is easier for the patient, and the opening may be sewn in this way.
And if you insert the probe into the opening and it is on one side of the anus near the surface of the body with the skin and the ring of the anus, then take a probe with a perforated tip like a needle for sewing in this way:
And insert a loose thread of five threads or so into it, then insert the probe with the thread into the opening until it reaches its bottom; if it is inflated at the edge of the anus from inside near.
Then bring the thread out of that hole by inserting your finger into the anus and bringing out one end of the thread, and gather both ends together and tighten them, and leave it for a day or two; as long as the thread cuts in the flesh, tighten it well until those tissues between the ends of the threads cut off and fall away, then treat the wound until it heals and becomes sound.
And if the opening of the anus is not inflated, then open it as much as you can unless it is very deep; in this case, do not do so for the sake of the muscle lest you cut it; then make it as we have mentioned until it heals.
An image of the pointed scalpel used to split the anus, its edge is very sharp and the other side is not sharp lest it cut what is not needed as you see.
Chapter Eighty-One.
On hemorrhoids that bleed and their cutting and the treatment of fissures.
Hemorrhoids appear in two forms: either inside the anus, resembling red swellings or like grapes, and they may be small or large, with blood constantly flowing from them.
They may be singular or multiple, and they may appear outside the anus at its edges; however, those located outside the anus are usually less moist, with a constant flow of yellowish water or a small amount of thin blood, and they have the color of the body.
The treatment for those inside the anus is to instruct the patient to defecate and wash until the anus is exposed, revealing the hemorrhoids. Then, quickly grasp them with tweezers or your fingertip and cut them off at their base. If tweezers cannot be grasped due to moisture and relaxation.
Scrape it with a rough cloth or a piece of tanned bread, or pull it with your fingers then cut it and after cutting, place some sharp thorns on it so that they replace cautery, or apply cautery as previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization.
Then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals. If the anus does not yield to come out, inject the patient with a syringe containing a small amount of anesthetic to wash what is inside the anus and facilitate its coming out quickly when the patient defecates. As for external hemorrhoids, treating them is easy and simple.
This is done by grasping it with your finger or using tweezers to cut it, then treat it as mentioned above until it heals. As for those who dislike cutting with iron, one should use a needle of this type: take a loose thread and insert it into a needle.
Then, pull the hemorrhoid upwards and pierce it with the needle at its base from the other side. Twist the ends of the thread below the needle, which is crossing, and tighten the hemorrhoid tightly, then tie the thread and withdraw the needle. Repeat this for all the hemorrhoids and leave one untied.
Then, to cause the blood to drain from it, and place a cloth soaked in rose grease or sesame oil on the affected area, place it on the affected area and instruct the patient to remain still then leave him until it falls off.  If it has fallen off, treat the wound with ointments and all other treatments until it heals.
As for the treatment of a fissure, it often occurs from the dryness of the stool and obstruction of natural flow. If it persists despite treatment, it is necessary to detach it with a scalpel or your fingernail until it becomes moist and the outer layer that prevents it from healing is removed.
Then treat it until it heals properly. If it does not heal, cut it more deeply than before until it bleeds well and peels, then treat it as it will heal.
The Eighty-Second Chapter.
In the treatment of ingrown nails, both reversed and non-reversed, as well as dry calluses and blisters.
A nail is a rounded knot on the color of the body, resembling the head of a nail, and it can be found in all parts of the body, especially the soles of the feet and fingers. It causes pain when walking.
It is necessary to cut around the nail and grasp it with pliers or a wire and remove it from its root, then treat it. If you wish, cauterize it according to what has been mentioned in its chapter. As for dry calluses, one of them is a small, rough, rounded elevation above the surface of the body.
And it often occurs in the hands of young boys. Its treatment is to stretch the callus and cut it or remove it with a silk thread or hair until it falls off. If you wish, cauterize it as mentioned earlier with fire or a sharp medicine.
And ingrown and non-ingrown nails can be removed with the instrument mentioned in the treatment of a blister. As for a blister, it is also a small, rounded elevation, thick on the surface of the body, going deep. If it is affected by cold, you will feel a sensation similar to that of an ant bite.
It is in the whole body, and most of it is in the hands. Its treatment is to take a tube from an ostrich feather or a strong eagle feather and make that tube over the ant hill until the circle of the tube surrounds it from all sides, then turn your hand with the tube until you break what surrounds the ant hill.
And insert it into the depth of the flesh and remove the ant from its root, and if you wish, do this with a copper or iron tube in this manner.
The top of the tube to the wrist is solid and open so that it is easy for the fingers to grasp and open it, and if you wish, kill the ant as described before in the chapter on killing  the warts in the chapter on killing.
Chapter Thirty-Eight.
In pictures of the instruments used for injections in diseases of the buttocks, diarrhea, and colic.
The syringe may be made of silver or porcelain or copper, hollowed out or hammered, and it can be made from this instrument small and large according to those who use it. And so the one used to treat small children, whose buttocks are narrow or painful, their syringes are very delicate. Picture of a large syringe:
The upper part that connects the tube is wide in this manner, it has a barrier where the tube is connected as you see, and its lower end which enters the buttocks is solid and very smooth to the wrist on one side, two holes, and on the other side, one hole.
The width of the hole is on the thickness of the needle or a little thicker, and the tube that puts the medicines in it is made from the bladder of an animal or from the tail of a sheep, shaped like a small tray, its diameter being an inch.
And it is pierced with many holes as it rotates, and the space between each hole is the thickness of a finger, then a thick thread from doubled yarn of ten threads or so is inserted into those holes and the tube is gathered together like a tray. When you have placed the medicine inside, hold tightly the head of the syringe between the stones with a firm and tight grip, then inject it. And this is an image of the circle of the incision and the hole.
And the way of inflation with it is that you fill the bladder or rectum with medicine while it is heated on a low fire, as much as possible for the patient's condition, and be careful not to make it too hot or too cold, then the patient lies on his back and raises his legs.
And a mat or sheet is placed under him, then the tip of the syringe is anointed with oil or egg white or linseed mucilage or the like, then it is gently inserted into the anus, then the assistant to the surgeon takes it in both hands and squeezes it forcefully until all that is in the syringe is emptied into the intestines.
Then the syringe is removed and the patient's legs are raised against the wall. If the medicine urges him to go, let him hold it as much as he can, and if he sleeps with it all night, it is more effective for constipation. If it was injected into diarrhea cases and its exit was hastened, then stop the injection until the diarrhea stops.
If there are hemorrhoids or painful tumors in the anus, let the syringe be very gentle and smoother than the syringes used for boys. And this is an image of a gentle syringe with its skin stretched over it.
Chapter Eighty-Four.
In the Treatment of Surgeries.
I mentioned in the division the treatment of things similar to burns, and I am here mentioning their treatment by hand and medicine fully. So I say that surgeries differ according to the thing being operated on and according to the location where the wound is.
The things that surgeries are performed on are many, such as a stone wound or a sword cut or knife wound or spear thrust or stick or arrow and similar to these are many things.
As for incisions according to the locations in the body, such as a wound that occurs on the head or neck or chest or abdomen or liver and similar organs.
And I describe the treatment of some incisions to make them a standard and law for all incisions, and I begin with simple head incisions, especially because the complex ones will be mentioned in the beginning of the third chapter of this book.
So I say that when a simple wound occurs in the head and there was no bone fracture, if it is from a stone or the like and only the skin was split and the wound was large and I feared for the patient the occurrence of hot swelling, then immediately  it should be drained using a cauterizer on the spot. And do not delay that and bring out from the blood according to its strength if nothing prevents bleeding, especially if the blood coming out of the wound is easy, let the draining be from the opposite side of the wounded area.
And warn the patient against fullness, drinking, and heavy foods, if something prevents bleeding, then he should reduce his food and avoid meat or drinks, and apply to the wound if there is a hot swelling cotton soaked in rose oil alone or with the drink that contains it in moderation.
And if the hot swelling is gone, apply to the wound if it is soft with its blood and has not been changed by the fresh air that I will describe to you shortly after, but if it has been changed by the air, then apply some ointments to it.
Until the pus is discharged and then treat it until it heals, if the wound is large and from a sword cut or the like and its edges have not come together with the surrounding tissue, collect them with stitching as I describe in stitching abdominal incisions.
If the skin was exposed to bone and adhered, but its hold was only in a slight place, then cut it off and then treat the wound with medicines that firm up its fleshy parts as a substitute for skin, and order the patient to eat foods containing strength like heads, tails, and the like.
If there is rot in the skin and it has not adhered to the bone, cut out all of the rotten flesh and throw it away then treat the wound. If in these wounds a vein or artery bleeds blood and the bleeding does not stop with medicines, then search for the vein.
If you hit it and it does not stop bleeding, cut it off with a scalpel and tie it up. And if necessity demands and what has been mentioned does not help, cauterize it until the bleeding stops. If these wounds are small, they are easy to manage; it is enough to treat them by putting this powder on them in their blood.
Before the air changes it, the recipe for the powder is to take from frankincense a part, and from mastic two parts, and from slaked or unslaked lime three parts.  All of these are crushed and sifted and stuffed into the wound and tightened well so that it adheres firmly with a good seal.
And it clots with blood, then you tighten it from above with bandages and leave it alone, do not remove it as long as it does not swell. For the medicine does not come off of it until it heals.  The lime itself can do this if you do not have frankincense and mastic.
And it can also do this with boiled rice flour in many large wounds if you are skilled at placing it on them and tightening them, and the wounds are fresh with blood as long as the air has not changed it. But if the air has changed it some, especially if it is in the summer time...
So there is no meaning in treating it with what has been mentioned by placing some prepared ointments on it, or placing a porridge made from barley flour with water and honey on it so that it draws out the pus, then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
But if a fracture in the bone occurs with the wound and it is slight, draw it together with a splint. And I have mentioned the treatment of skull fractures in what comes after, in the surgery of the neck. If the wound is in the neck, there is no difference in treatment between it and a head wound if it is simple.
As for if a nerve from the neck or an artery has been cut, if it is a nerve, there is no remedy except to avoid treating it with anything that constricts tightly like the ginger root and saffron and similar things because they injure the nerve and tighten it.
And nothing cold should be placed on the wound at all because the essence of the nerve is cold and its connection to the brain which is the most noble of organs, and what you treat it with from medications should be soft like rose petals washed with fresh water several times moistened with oil or rose ointment and the mulberry.
If you also washed with fresh water and all minerals on this manner and the moist ointments, and as for if the wound is large, use stitching or closing its edges with bandages then treat it until it heals.
If the wound has a hollow and there is a hidden collection of pus at its bottom, drain it in the lowest place in it. If an artery has been cut in the wound and you have reached its bleeding blood, amputate it or tie it or cauterize it if necessity demands it.
If the wound has cut some or all of the pharyngeal pearls and the passages are intact, gather the edges of the skin with stitching on the windpipe and do not touch the windpipe but smooth it and return it to its natural shape then tighten it tightly and leave it for days.
Then treat it with ointments that have constriction and drying until it heals. If the wound has affected the bone, open it up. If there are bone shards in it, extract all of them or as many as possible, and if you cannot remove them all, leave it until the wound softens and heals, making it easier to remove.
If the wound is fresh, apply the powdered herbs we described. If the bone in the wound becomes infected and festering, treat it with what will be mentioned in its chapter on surgery of the chest and between the shoulder blades.
If a wound has been made by a spear or knife and you see that there is an opening, examine it; if air comes out when the patient breathes, then know that it is a battle wound. If there is no opening and it is oozing blood, do not put any cauteries in it at first and do not tighten it lest the blood be trapped in its depths.
It may travel to the heart and kill the patient, but make a poultice of attractive honey and apply it twice during the day. If no ointment is available to you, put cotton wool in the mouth of the wound to absorb what comes out of it; and lay the patient down with their sleep on the wound.
Let it drain; if three days or more have passed and the patient shows no shivering, no rapid heartbeat, nor shortness of breath, and you see that all his other conditions are good, then know that the wound is sound; treat him with a bandage and all other remedies until it heals.
If it is difficult to see and the pus continues constantly, know that it has become festering; treat it accordingly. The patient should lie on their wound so that any liquid drains away; if the wound is in the chest or back, treat it as described above with stitching.
If it is large or cauterized, if it is small; if it has affected the bone and fragments of it are broken off, then search the wound and immediately remove those fragments. If they are clean, if not leave them.
Wash the wound because it will make it easier to remove them, but for all other wounds that occur in other parts of the body, their treatment is governed by what we have mentioned.
Chapter Fifty-Eight.
On Wounds in the Abdomen and the Protrusion and Suturing of Intestines.
The tear that occurs in the abdomen can be large, small, or medium; a large one can cause intestines to protrude, and their insertion and suturing are more difficult and challenging.
A small rupture may also be difficult to repair from another direction, so it is necessary that its return be more difficult. The intestines if not quickly inserted into their place after an hour will swell and thicken, making it difficult to insert them. For this reason, the middle-sized rupture is better because it does not make the return of the intestines as difficult as these two types.
Know that stitching the abdomen on four sides, the two common stitches are suitable for stitching the abdomen and all other surgeries of the body, and the other two specialized stitches are used for all surgeries, except that they are more specific to stitching the abdomen.
And I am describing them to you one by one with explanation and description, so I say that if the wound is small and something from the intestines has come out and it is difficult to return it, this is due to one of two reasons: either because of the smallness of the rupture as we said, or because the intestines have been affected by swelling from the cold air.
If that is the case, then it is necessary to warm it by dipping a sponge or cloth moistened in lukewarm water alone or perhaps cooked with cinnamon, saffron and ginger, and gently use it to treat the intestines until the swelling subsides.
And perhaps the drink containing ginger is better than water alone in dissolving the swelling, so when you see the swelling has dissolved, then lubricate the intestines with water that has been cooked with aniseed or cumin, because it makes it enter more easily.
If it becomes difficult to return after this treatment, then make a small incision in the rupture with the tool used for cutting pipes, and the first treatment if successful is better than the incision, but it is forced to be incised only when necessary and other methods fail. And here is a picture of the instrument:.
One side is concave and the other is not, and the thin end is not sharp like a scalpel but rather slightly blunt, it is a tool similar to a small olive as you see. If the wound widens and the intestines enter, then its return should be to its natural shape.
Its special location, if you can manage it, is best. But if the rupture is wide and in the lower abdomen, it is necessary for the patient to lie on his back and make his legs higher than his head. And if it is in the upper abdomen, then his head and chest should be higher than his lower body.
And also, if the rupture is on one of the sides of the abdomen, always make your intention and purpose directed towards the side where the surgery is, higher than the other side. Thus it should be used in large surgeries and in medium-sized ones.
But in small surgeries, place it as you are able. Then prepare a close assistant who holds the entire rupture with his hands and gathers its edges together, then reveals little by little to the one responsible for suturing.
And this is the characteristic of the general one stitch, which is to take a needle or several needles according to the size of the wound, then leave from the edge of the rupture the thickness of the thumb and insert one needle without putting thread in the edges of the skin. Along with the edges of the peritoneum which is under the skin from inside until it passes through that side, and you have gathered the edges of the skin and the edges of the peritoneum together becoming four strands, then tighten with a doubled thread around the needle from both sides all together until the edges of the wound come together tightly.
Then leave the thickness of a finger as well, and insert another needle, then knot it with the thread as you did with the first needle, and keep doing that as much as you need with needles until you have filled all the wound. Let the needles be medium between thick and thin.
Because needles that are too thin easily cut through flesh, and those that are too thick are difficult to enter the skin, therefore it is necessary for them to be medium in thinness and thickness, and it should not be inserted into the edge of the skin very close.
So that the flesh will not be severed by a suture and the wound will not open before it has healed, nor shall it be drawn apart by stitching so that the wound may not unite, then the ends of the needles are cut so as not to harm the patient when he is sleeping and a support of rough linen is made on each side to hold the ends of the needles.
And it is left until you know that the wound has healed, and this type of stitching with needles is thus suitable for small wounds because it may suffice to stitch them with one or two needles or thereabouts.
Or the manner of stitching for a second time, commonly known, is that it gathers together with the stitching the four edges, meaning the edges of the skin and the edges of the peritoneum, in one go with a needle containing thread, moderately fine and not thick, then when this needle has finished passing through these four edges, it is returned from the side where it began itself.
So that the thread lies interwoven from above the wound, so that the stitching is like that of a sack which binds its contents and a thickness equal to the breadth of the little finger is made between each stitch and this stitching is known to all people.
And with this stitching, a wound that had been inflicted upon a man in his abdomen by a knife was sutured; the incision had been more than an inch and part of the intestines, about two inches from the middle intestine, had protruded; the rupture was in the middle of the abdomen.
He was placed after his intestines were kept outside the wound for twenty-four hours; the wound healed in about fifteen days and he was treated until he recovered and lived many years after that, carrying on with all of his affairs, and the physicians had declared him incurable.
And it is strange that I did not treat him with ointment because I was in a place where there were no medicines; so I would put cotton on the wound twice a day and pledge to wash it with honey water until he healed.
As for one type of special stitching, I mention it according to Galen's statement: It starts with stitching the skin and inserting the needle from outside to inside. And when the needle has reached into the skin and the muscle going in a straight line across the entire length of the abdomen...
I left the edge of the peritoneum on the side where I inserted the needle, and I inserted the needle into its other edge from inside to outside in the other margin. And when it reached that one, I inserted it again into this same margin from the outside to the inside.
And I left the edge of the peritoneum on this side, and inserted the needle into its other edge from inside to outside, and when inserting it in the peritoneum, I also inserted it into the margin of the muscle that is on its side until it reaches all the way through.
Then I also started from this side itself and lined it with the edge of the peritoneum on the other side, and I brought the needle out of the skin near it, then returned it into that skin and lined the edge of the peritoneum on the other side with this margin of the muscle.
And I brought it out of the skin on its side, and I did that one more time and again and again until I stitched the entire wound according to this pattern. The whole description of this stitch is that it stitches like a fur seam.
That it stitches the peritoneum once from one side with the edge of the skin and leaves it once from the other side until it is finished. As for the second type of special stitching that Galen also mentioned, this is his statement verbatim.
That it stitches it according to the example of those who treat illnesses, as they collect each part to its counterpart, naturally; so they join the edge of the peritoneum to its other edge and the margin of the muscle to its other edge, and that is what I describe to you.
It is necessary to insert the needle into the margin of the omentum near you from outside and penetrate it into it alone, leaving the two margins of the peritoneum, then withdraw the needle and penetrate it from outside to inside in both margins of the peritoneum, then withdraw it again.
And penetrate it from inside to outside in the margin of the other omentum on the opposite side, and this type of suture is better than the common simple suture, which has been mentioned before, for this is the statement of Galen verbatim, and some have said that a suture can be straightened with two needles. This means that you insert a single thread into them and begin by inserting the needle from your side and penetrating it to the other side, then insert the other needle from the opposite side so that it penetrates from your side according to the suture of the seams.
And know that if the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, its suture is more difficult than in other places of the abdomen. As for the treatment of the wound, its ruling in its treatment is the same as that of all other wounds, that is, if you grasp the wound fresh with its blood before the air changes it and retract the intestines, stitch them up, and secure them, then place a compress of hot dough on top of it.
If the wound has been changed by the air, then apply some of the ointments that you prepare until it scabs and the threads fall off and the peritoneum and omentum heal together, and then treat it like the treatment of all other wounds until it heals.
If you do not have medicines prepared, then apply clean cotton to it since it starts to scab and change it twice a day as I have taught you until it heals. In most cases, you do not need any other treatment if the wounds are simple, but if you fear that the wound will involve the vital organs in pain.
Then it is necessary to soak soft wool in lukewarm oil or rose butter and place it around the areas between the rib and armpit, if he feels pain or a foul smell in his intestines, which often happens, then inject him with a black, tepid astringent syrup.
And especially if the putrefaction has reached the intestines and become a penetrating wound to its cavity, know that what was from the intestines thick is easier to heal, and what was from them thin is harder to heal.
But as for the intestine known as the fasting one, it does not accept healing from a surgery that happens to it at all because of the multitude of vessels in it and their thickness, and the softness of its body and its proximity to the nature of the nerve, but if what emerged from the wound is the entrails and reached it fresh, return it according to your straightening of the intestine.
If a period has passed and it has turned green or black, then it is necessary to tie it with a thread above the place that darkened from it so that it does not expose bleeding, because there are vessels and arteries in the entrails, then cut what is below that bond.
And make the ends of the thread hanging from below the surgery outside it so that it is easy for you to pull it and remove it when the entrails fall and cauterize the wound,  mentioned the wound that occurs in the intestines, but if a tear occurred in the intestine and was small.
it can be healed in some people because I saw a man who had been stabbed in his abdomen with a spear and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, so I stitched the wound and it became a fistula that feces and air came out from it, so I treated him as I did not aspire to his healing. So I continued to treat him until he healed and the place united, when I saw that the place had united, I feared for the patient that something bad might happen to him in his belly, so he did not experience any misfortune at all and remained in the best of health. Truly he eats and drinks and has intercourse and goes to the bathhouse and takes care of himself, and some people who have experience have mentioned that when a wound occurs in the intestines and it is small, it should be sutured in this manner.
It is that the large ants' heads are taken and then the lips of the wound are brought together and an ant, with its mouth open, is placed on the lips of the wound. And when it seizes it and tightens its mouth, its head is cut off, and it sticks and does not separate, then another ant is placed near the first.
And this is continued with several ants according to the size of the wound, then it is returned and the wound is sewn, for these heads remain stuck in the intestine until the intestine heals and is cured and no harm whatsoever occurs to the patient, and it is also possible to sew the intestine with fine thread.
The thing which is pulled from the two points of the animal that sticks to it after it enters into a needle is that the end of this thread from the two points is taken and is pulled well, then a fine linen thread is tied at its end, and that thread is entered into the needle. And in it the thread of the two points is used to sew the intestine, and then it is returned to the abdomen, and this type of sewing with ants and two points is only by way of hope and desire.
As for if the rupture was large and wide, especially if it was in one of the thin intestines, there is no remedy and there is absolutely no cure for it.
The Sixth and Eighty Chapter.
In the Treatment of Colds and Nasal Discharges.
Know that every wound or tumor if it has aged and progressed and become an ulcer and did not heal and was constantly discharging pus, it is called in general, in any organ it was, a discharge and we call it a cold, and the discharge.
It is in truth a complicated, whitish, solid clot with no pain accompanying it, and it has a cavity like the hollow of a bird's feather.
And therefore, some called it a feather, and it is sometimes wet, constantly discharging pus, and perhaps the moisture stops at times, and this moisture may be much, or little, thick, or thin.
When speaking of wounds in the classification, I have stated that every sore which does not heal and in which flesh does not grow is due to one of nine causes: either from little blood in the body, or from its bad quality, or because there is firm flesh inside it and on its edges which prevents the growth of good flesh. Or because it is full of dirt and filth, or because the wound itself is foul and the material that supplies it is of bad quality, or because the medicine is not suitable for its treatment, or because there has been corruption in the region due to a pestilence, or because there is something special about the region.
Or because it is full of dirt and filth, or because the wound itself is foul and the material that supplies it is of bad quality, or because the medicine is not suitable for its treatment, or because there has been corruption in the region due to a pestilence, or because there is something special about the region. As in the city of Saragossa, where it is difficult for diseases to mature and tumors to heal, by nature, or because there is one bone or several bones there, and all these causes and their signs and treatments with medicines have been explained in the classification.
It is here necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of abscesses and colds which occur by way of manual work, know that abscesses can occur in all parts of the body, some of them ending at large bones, veins or nerves.
Or to the peritoneum or intestines or bladder or rib from the ribs or vertebra from the vertebrae of the back or joint from the joints that are constructed in large numbers like the hand and foot, and some of them lead near a main organ and so on.
If any of these fistulas are of this description, they are from the difficult diseases to heal and that do not accept treatment and working on them is effort and ignorance.  But if there are fistulas that have not reached these places mentioned and I have hoped and desired to treat them.
And I wanted you to reach that knowledge, so take a probe from copper or iron if the fistula passes on straightness, then probe it with it. If there is a winding in the fistula, probe it with a probe of thin lead because lead softens its body.
When entering it bends toward the winding, and if the fistula has many mouths that you cannot ascertain them with the probe, then inject one of its mouths with a syringe, because the moisture you inject into it flows towards the other mouths and seeps out.
Then inquire and examine in every way you can to know if there is bone or nerve, or was the fistula's opening far away or near, or was it a single fistula with many mouths, and stop at all of this with your ability from understanding the patient and his condition and the pain when you press on the place.
And like that from the signs and causes happening to the tumor, then if you stand on all of this with certainty, then at that time proceed to treatment with confidence and see if it is
The fistula is outwardly near or in a healthy place far from a joint or nerve or artery or vein or one of the places I mentioned to you, then cut open the fistula as previously described and remove what is in it of the pus and rotten flesh and excess meat.
And whatever grows in his mouth from flesh or a tumor and the like, treat it until it heals. If the abscess is deep and straight, then it is necessary to cut it deeply as much as you can and then cleanse it of all its rotten flesh.
Then use the softened cautery on the sharp medicines and insert it into the bottom of the abscess as far as you can reach with the iron, do this several times until that sharp medicine eats away all that remains in the bottom of the abscess from the rot.
Then close it with ointments that grow healthy flesh until it heals. If it does not heal by this,  then follow what was previously described. If the cause of the abscess is bone and you find this to be the case, then cut into it and split it as I have told you, unless something prevents you.
Sweat or nerve or a main organ as we said, if the bone was revealed to you and it had some rot and blackness, then clear it until its decay goes away, then treat it with what heals flesh until it heals. If it does not heal and the pus continues as it was.
Know that you have not reached all of the removal of the decay, so uncover all that is on it again and investigate its clearing and purification with the utmost effort then close it. If it heals, otherwise know that this decay is in a deep place from the decay, so uncover all that is on it again.
And investigate its clearing and purification with the utmost effort. If the decayed bone was a small bone and you were able to pull it out, then pull it out with the soft forceps that are suitable for this.
If there were many bones, investigate pulling them all out and do not leave any of them,  give your best effort. If something from the ligaments obstructed you below them and cutting them was not dangerous, then cut those ligaments and flesh if there was any and free the bones.
If you are unable to remove the bone at the time, place a covering over the wound and leave it for days until the flesh and ligaments around the bone rot. Keep the wound open so that the incision you made does not close.
But if you fear this, place upon it cotton soaked in powdered sulfur with oil or cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment or one of the green ointments. For when these ligaments rot and the bones become loose, it will be easy to remove them and pull them out.
If it is a single large bone, such as the femur or tibia, and only its surface is affected, then remove it with a blunt instrument until the blackness and corruption disappear, then close the wound. If a large part of it is affected and the corruption has reached the marrow, then there is no choice but to expose it.
And cut it all the way until the corruption ends. Then treat it until it heals, and I tell you of a case that happened to a man in his leg to make it an example and aid for your treatment. This man was young.
Around thirty years of age, he was afflicted with pain in his leg due to a movement within his body until the materials reached his leg and caused a large swelling. There was no external cause, and then time passed along with the mistakes of physicians until the swelling burst open.
And much pus flowed from him, and he was badly treated until the leg became gangrenous and many wounds appeared, all of them oozing pus and bodily fluids.  A group of physicians treated him for about two years, but none of them were skilled in surgery.
Until they came to me, and I saw his leg, with pus flowing from those wounds in a large stream, and the man had grown weak and his complexion had turned yellow. So I inserted a probe into one of those wounds, and the probe reached the bone, then I cleaned all the wounds.
I found it to be  flowing into itself from all sides of the leg, so I cut and split on one of those openings until some of the bone was exposed, and I found it rotten, eaten away, black, putrid, and perforated until the hole went through to the brain. I then revealed what I had uncovered.
And I removed the rotten bone, and I think that there was no other corruption in the bone except for what I cut and revealed, and that I had removed it. Then I closed the wound with medicinal plasters for a longer period, but it did not heal together.  Then I returned and uncovered the bone again above the first uncovering.
I found the corruption connected to the bone, so I revealed what appeared to me also of that corruption. Then I removed my plastering and it did not close nor heal together. Then I uncovered it again and I kept cutting away parts of the bone until finally it healed, up to about a span of the bone being cut.
And I removed it with its brain, then I closed it with medicine and it healed quickly and was cured.  But this repetition in his work and splitting was due to the weakness of the patient and his inability to tolerate it, and my fear for him dying because he would always experience excessive vomiting and poor condition. He eventually recovered completely.
And flesh grew in the place of the bone, firm and solid, and his condition improved in his body, and his strength returned, and he acted normally in his affairs, and nothing hindered him while walking at all. If a bone had broken in a place in the body.
Then it should be exposed in this manner: taking a bandage and tightening it at the end of the broken bone, ordering him who stretches it upwards, then making another bandage from wool thicker than the first bandage.
Then it is tied onto the flesh underneath the bone, stretching its end so that the flesh is pulled downwards, and you uncover the flesh at the place you want to expose so that the saw does not harm the flesh, and you put a piece of wood or a plank under the bone from below tightly.
For if you do this, the saw will not refrain from cutting through the rotten bone, and it is necessary that the saw be placed slightly above the place of decay so that there may be no putrefaction within the cavity of the bone, so that it does not appear on its surface for the sense, then you would be compelled to widen it once more.
If the bone is rotten and not detached but some parts of it are connected to each other and the decay is in the middle or part of it, then expose the flesh from all sides of it completely, then place the wood from below, then saw it from the first side where the decay is.
And if you are finished with sawing, saw it from the other side, and let the sawing be a little distance from the decay as we have said. If the decay is in a joint, cut the decayed joint itself and saw the bone where it connects from the other side.
If the decay is in the connection of two joints, there is no cure except for amputation. If the decay is in the palm of the hand or the foot, the matter of treating it is very difficult, but you must peel away the decay as it appears to you and remove it and clean it as much as you can.
And by what means can you straighten it when it does not obstruct you with a vein or nerve, and know that the saws and knives for cutting these bones are many according to the position of the bones and their direction, thickness, flexibility and hardness, as well as their size, smallness, and whether they are brittle. Therefore, it is necessary to prepare for each type of work a tool suitable for that work.
And know that the works themselves may guide you to the type of tool you need if you have a long experience and knowledge of the arts of this craft, because knowing the nature of the craft and seeing cases of diseases is one of the skills of the craft. So he may deduce for himself what tools correspond to each disease, and I have depicted for you in the end of this chapter several tools.
Make of them examples to follow and a measure by which you may measure others, if God wills, an image of a saw:
Another image of a saw:
An image of a small saw:
An image of a large saw:
The head of this tool shall be in the shape of a screw's head and engraved like the engraving of the eskalafag. But it is suitable to use it to shave the joints if they are damaged or a large, wide bone, another image of a small simple tool:
An image of a broad simple tool:
Its upper bow and blade are made of iron and its handle from a strong, conical wood shaft, an image of a simple tool with a cavity:
Another image of a delicate simple tool:
Another image of a simple tool with a bent end:
An image of a small simple tool resembling a probe:
Another image of a small section:
And its end like a rod, it is used in many places to remove the marrow from bones, an image of a simple tool suitable for removing marrow from bone holes:
Its end is a sharp triangular shape made of Indian iron, and all that has been mentioned of the simple tools and sections should be made like this, an image of a simple tool:
The seventy-eighth chapter.
In cutting limbs and separating bones.
The limbs may rot either due to an external cause or an internal one. If you treated that corruption with the treatment of medicines and it was not effective, and you see the corruption spreading in the limb and nothing stops it.
Then it is necessary to cut off that limb to where the corruption has reached so that the sick person may be saved from death or a great affliction which is greater than losing the limb, and a sign of one who has this is that the limb turns black until you think that fire has burned it.
If it decays after blackening until that decay spreads to what follows that limb and takes hold of the rest of the body, then act quickly by cutting it off, as well as if the cause of corruption is from the sting of some creatures like a sea scorpion or a snake or a viper and the like.
If the corruption or sting is in the tip of the finger, cut off the finger and do not delay for the corruption to spread to the hand, and if it has taken hold of the hand, cut it off from the base of the wrist and do not delay for the corruption to spread until it takes hold of the forearm.
And if it takes hold of the arm, cut off the arm at the elbow joint itself. If the corruption progresses and you see it taking hold toward the shoulder, do not cut off the shoulder at all, for in that there is the death of the patient, and use other treatment to the best of your ability.
And do likewise with the leg if the corruption takes hold in the toe, cut off the toe at one of the joints, and if it takes hold in the foot, cut off the whole leg. If it rises to the knee, cut off the leg at the knee joint.
And if the corruption has reached above the knee, there is no remedy but to leave it and consign the patient to death.  The method for cutting off a limb or severing it is to tie a ligature below the place you want to cut, and tie another ligature above the place.
And the servant extends one ligature down and another servant extends the upper ligature up, and you strip the flesh between the ligatures with a wide scalpel until all the flesh is exposed, then it is cut or severed, and it is necessary to place linen cloth from all sides.
So that the saw does not touch the correct place and expose the patient to added pain and a hot swelling, if bleeding occurs during your work, stop the bleeding quickly or place some pointed pieces of wood on it to stop the blood, then return to your treatment until you are finished.
Then you tie the injured limb with a bandage that heals and mends it until it heals, and I tell you an example of a case of a man in his leg this very condition that I describe to you, namely, that a blackness occurred in his leg with burning like fire.
And this rot was the first to happen in his finger until it took hold of the whole leg, so the man immediately severed his leg from himself when he saw the rot spreading in the limb with the intense pain and burning, cutting it off at the joint, and he healed.
And when a long time had passed, that same rot appeared to him in his right index finger, so he came to me. I treated it with the remedies that I brought for his hand after cleaning his body. But the rot did not recede and kept spreading in the other finger.
Until the rot took hold of his hand, he called me to cut off his hand. I refused him out of hope that the rot would recede, and I also feared for him at the cutting off of his hand, death because the strength of the man was on the verge of collapse. When he despaired of me, he left for his country.
And news reached me about him that he severed his whole hand and healed. But I narrated this story so that it would be a help for what happens of this kind of disease and to be a guide by which one can deduce and act upon it.
The Eighth-Eighth Chapter.
On the Treatment of Abscesses and How to Inject Them with Remedies.
If a swelling occurs in some of the fleshy organs and its duration prolongs until it gathers for a period and then bursts or ruptures, expelling all that was inside it from the pus, and the place remains empty like a vessel.
And the skin on it, like a sheet, has become slack and was not severe in its corruption that it affected bone or nerve or ligament. And from here it deserves to be called an abscess, and it is not called a carbuncle except if its duration prolongs until the corruption affects any of these organs.
When this is called a fistula or a suppurating ulcer, its treatment is to cut all of that skin as it rotates and especially if it has become flaccid and like parchment and you are certain that it does not adhere to the site due to its corruption.
If you hope that the skin will adhere and it has not reached that degree of corruption and there is a thickness of flesh in the skin, its treatment is with the injection, which is to look at the hiding place; if it is large and the pus that extends from it is foul-smelling, inject it with the Egyptian medicine.
Which is honey and oil and wax and ginger, equal parts gathered in a vessel and cooked on the fire until the medicine thickens and comes to the thickness of honey, then take from it what you need and soften it with water and honey and inject it into the hiding place and tighten its mouth and leave the medicine in it for about two hours.
Then you remove it in the afternoon and do that for days until the hiding place is cleansed and the stench goes away, and he may inject with ash water if this medicine is not prepared for him, which is to take the ash of acacia wood or oak wood and pour water on it.
Then filter it and inject with it until you are certain that the hiding place has been rinsed, if there is no possibility for the patient on the Egyptian medicine or ash water, then inject him with water and honey mixed with something of ground ginger.
Or inject him with honey and syrup mixed because it is the nature of honey to cleanse and rinse, and the syrup adheres to the hiding place, especially if the syrup has a good amount of firmness and dryness; if you do this several times and are certain that the corruption of the hiding place has gone, then inject it with what promotes the growth of flesh in it.
Such as taking from the palm ointment and dissolving it with rose oil and astringent syrup, or injecting him with some of the medicines and ointments that we have proven their qualities in the treatise on ointments; if the mouth of the hiding place is narrow and does not contain the syringe tube.
Slightly widen it with iron or place a tightly woven cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment or the ointment of serpent root until it widens. And if the mouth is also wide, stitch its lips together and leave an opening that allows for the insertion of the syringe without excess.
And if the mouth from which pus flows is raised upwards, cut it in its lowest place so that the pus flows downwards because if the pus is retained in the depths of the hidden place, it prevents the flesh from growing there.
But if you cannot cut the hidden place downwards as you desire, then form a protrusion of the member from which pus flows easily according to what seems appropriate to you and make sure nothing of the pus is retained at all.
As for the ointments that are applied to the hidden place from the outside and how they are placed on it, take one of the suitable ointments matching what you desire and spread it on a linen cloth and let the cloth be the size that covers the entire hidden place. Then cut a hole slightly wider than the mouth of the hidden place with scissors and spread some soft ointment on another cloth, the size of the hole, and place it on top, keeping a distance from the mouth of the hidden place so that the pus can easily exit from it and do not remove the large cloth until after.
For several days, and as for the one on the mouth of the hidden place, it is the one that you remove at every time so that what has accumulated there of pus exits and to know what flows from it of pus whether it is much or little, ripe or unripe,.
And with this also, inspect the location of the hidden place itself whether the owner feels pain there or not and whether it has a swelling or not. If you continue treatment like this and see the material that exits as light on the mouth of the hidden place.
Know that if the hidden place has adhered or is close to adhering, then treat it after a day or on the third day.  And when you have treated the wound, replace the opening with another and renew the ointment. And if pus flows from the hidden place after a long time, thin in texture, do not despair of healing.
Then heal it is close because some people delay the growth of flesh in their wounds and others are the opposite, and if pus flows from the hidden place after many days unripe, know that the hidden place has not adhered,  and if the adherence of the hidden place is delayed.
And if it is prolonged, increase in the drying of the medicines and let them be medicines that are in their texture moist and in their power dry like the palm ointment if it has been increased with an excess of the addition of the calamint. And one of the most effective things to treat it is to take the palm ointment.
And it is treated with rose oil and sprinkled with old syrup of moderate strength, then it is covered with it and used. And he may do this if the palm ointment is not available to him. Honey when it is cooked until it is thick and used or take from saffron and patience and musk and grind them all together and sprinkle them on honey while it is on fire. Then spread it on a cloth and tie it to the hidden place or spread it with honey that has been cooked until it thickens and sprinkle the medicines on it and place the cloth on top of it and tie it.
And it may be used in this case the long turmeric and the root of the asphodel, and the powdered caraway, and chamomile singly or together ground and sifted and sprinkled on the honey that was described and used. If the hidden place is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, know that there is corruption in its depths.
And it has been effective in bones or in all other hard tissues or ligaments, the treatment of the poultice as previously mentioned.
Chapter Ninety-Eight
On the treatment of ingrown toenails and diseased nails, and on amputating an extra finger and separating fused fingers.
An ingrown toenail is fleshy tissue that grows under the nail of the thumb or foot, and it may grow in all fingers; if left untreated for a long time, it swells and becomes hot and suppurating.
or it may rot and fester until it eats the nail's root, and perhaps ruins the entire nail, and possibly the decay reaches the bone, causing a foul smell, and making the fingertip wide and its color becoming like that of pus. If you treat it with what we mentioned in this division, but your treatment does not work.
Then it is necessary to cut with a knife all the excess tissue that grows from under the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterward, for cauterization in this case is very beneficial. But if the bone is healthy and the nail is also healthy.
And if the corner of the nail has driven flesh inwards, causing it to be pierced and harmed, then you should place a thin reed under the corner of the nail that is piercing the flesh and raise it upwards, and cut that flesh gently.
And put on the remaining flesh of the cauterizing medications until all of it goes away, then treat it with ointments until it heals. But if the decay has affected the bone, then you should cut that bone and remove it because it does not heal as long as there is decayed bone at all.
If you see the decay and infection moving in the finger, then cut it at one of the joints as mentioned above, then treat it until it heals. If the nail is struck or bruised and causes severe pain, it is necessary to first cauterize the wound.
Then you split the nail with a sharp scalpel, an oblique incision from top to bottom, and be careful not to reach with the incision to the flesh under the nail because doing so will cause severe pain to the wound and be the cause for excess tissue growth in that place, then treat the place with what relieves pain.
As for the extra finger that is born in some people's hands, it may be all flesh and may have bone in some parts and there may be a nail, and its growth may be from the base of one of the fingers joints.
Or its growth may be from some of the finger joints, and those that grow in some joints of the fingers do not move, and those that grow at the joint of the finger may move, so if it is only flesh, it is easy to cut it off, by cutting it off at its base with a broad scalpel.
As for the one whose growth is at the base of the joint, its treatment is difficult, so it is better to avoid cutting it. As for the one that grows in the finger at one of the joints, it should first be cut off, flesh being cut circularly to the bone, then the bone is spread with one of those saws suitable for it.
Then it is treated until it heals. As for the adhesion that occurs to some fingers, this often occurs and may be what a person is born with or due to the closing of a wound or a burn, etc., so it is necessary to cut open that adhesion.
Until the fingers return to their natural shape, then a piece of felt or cloth soaked in rose oil is placed between them so that they do not quickly adhere again and are separated from each other, or a thin lead sheet is placed between them until the place heals properly.
And similarly, if adhesion occurs to some fingers on the hand, that adhesion is cut open according to what appears appropriate and repairs the shape of the limb.
Chapter Ninety.
On Cutting the Ligaments.
Ligaments are twisted, thick veins filled with dark-colored sludge, and they occur in most parts of the body and more commonly in the legs, especially in the buttock, thighs, and those who carry heavy loads. It is necessary first to use a poultice from black cumin, strong multiple times.
Then the surgeon will open the abscess, and as for its treatment with iron, there are two kinds: one is to make an incision and remove the black blood, and the other is to drain the sweat and remove it entirely.  As for making an incision, this is how the leg is treated first with hot water, yes indeed.
Until the thick, dark blood dissolves, then the leg of the patient is bandaged from above his hip to below his knee with a cloth, and then the sweat is incised in one place or two places or three wide incisions.
Then you drain the black blood with your hand from below the leg to above and from above to below until it comes out in a quantity that you deem sufficient or less than the strength of the patient's resistance, then tie it off and order him to avoid foods that produce black bile, and this is repeated, the evacuation and incision.
When the veins are full and that harms the patient, as for draining it, it is done in this way: the leg of the patient is shaved if there is much hair on it, then he is made to bathe and his leg is treated with hot water until it reddens and sweats or feels a strong exercise.
If he does not have access to a bath so that the limb is warmed, then the skin is incised opposite the sweat duct, an incision lengthwise either at its end at the knee or below it at the heel, and then the skin is opened with tweezers and the sweat is peeled away from all sides until it becomes palpable.
And when it appears, you see it red and glistening; and when it is completely freed from the skin, you also see it as if it were a tendon. Then, something (is inserted) under it until it rises and comes out of the skin, and it is suspended with a blind, smooth pin, then another incision is made near that incision, about three finger widths.
Then the skin is peeled away from the sweat duct until it appears, then it is raised with the instrument as you did before and suspended with another pin as you did first, then another incision is made or several incisions if you need that.
Then pull it and cut it at the end of the incision near the heel, then pull it and cut it until it comes out of the second incision, then pull it to the incision above it and do this until you pull it from the third incision, the highest of all incisions, until when it all comes out, cut it.
If it does not respond to pulling and cutting, insert a needle with a strong doubled thread and tie it, then pull it, and insert the instrument under it and feel with your hand in every direction until it comes out, and be careful that it does not break. If it breaks, it will be very difficult for you to pull it.
And it is inserted into the patient from this [incision], so if you have pulled out all of it, place on the location of the incisions wool soaked in syrup and rose oil or ointment, and treat it until it heals. If the appendix is swollen with folds and twists in directions.
And if it was not straight as we mentioned, then it is necessary to cut it on each side of its folds and places of twisting, then tie it with sutures until you pull it all out, and be careful when cutting it that you do not cut the vein or injure it because it will be difficult for you to pull it, so be cautious in your effort.
Image of the instrument used to make an incision into the appendix:
Image of the blind suture:
It does not have a point like the other sutures, and it is not sharp at the tip so that it will not injure the vein, and it is thick in its bending and smooth because if it was thin, it would cut the vein with its sharpness. It should rather be as thick as we mentioned.
Chapter Eighty-Nine.
On removing the hernia of the inguinal canal:
This hernia is produced in the legs in hot countries like Hijaz and Arabian lands, and in hot regions with little cultivation, and it may also be produced in other places on the body besides the legs, and its production is due to a swelling that occurs under the skin.
As for the worms within living bodies and maggots, it is necessary to treat them; those that are born between the skin and flesh, and the sign of their beginning is when inflammation occurs in the leg, then the place becomes blistered and then pus begins to flow from that place.
As if it were the root of a plant or animal, and when its tip appears, it is necessary to wrap it around a small piece of lead whose weight is from one dirham to two dirhams, bind it and leave the lead hanging from the leg.
And every time something emerges from it to the outside, wrap it in lead and bind it; and if it becomes long, cut some of it and wrap the rest, and do not cut it from its root before all of it comes out, because if you cut it, it will contract and enter into the flesh, causing a suppurating boil and fistula in the place, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore, it is necessary to manage and draw it slowly until it comes out from the end and nothing remains of it in the body; and this discharge may emerge from some people with a length of five cubits or ten.
And it has reached me that it emerged from a man for twenty cubits, and if it were to be cut off while treating him, insert a probe into its hole and pack it with a long bandage together with the body until everything in it is emptied, and try to heal the place with medicine for days.
Then treat him with the treatment of tumors; and this discharge can be multi-branched, especially if it appears in the joint of the leg or in the leg itself, causing many openings and emerging from each opening a branch; its treatment is as mentioned in the division and what has come before.
The Twenty-ninth Chapter.
In the wound on the maggot born under the skin and is called the cattle disease.
This disease is called in some countries, among us, cattle disease because it often affects cattle; it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh and burrows throughout the body, ascending and descending.
It becomes evident to the touch when it is moved from one part of the body to another until it breaks through where it has broken through the skin and exits, forming a kind of pus from some of the humors as seen in worms and lice and the love of gourd within the abdomen.
And what is expected from those who are harmed by it, if it travels in the body and rises to the head and reaches the eye, perhaps it will open there and exit, blinding the eye, and this happens often. So if you want to treat it and remove it, then that is done when it is touched and felt.
It is necessary to tie above and below it with a strong bandage, then make an incision on it and remove it. If it sinks into the flesh and you don't find it, apply heat to the area with fire until it burns. The greatest thing that is expected is its damage to the eye as we mentioned.
If you see it has become in the head near the eye, tie tightly under it on the forehead, then make an incision and remove it. It is necessary for the patient to be treated with medications that cleanse the body of bad humors and avoid foods that produce pus.
Chapter Thirty-Nine.
On the Incision for the Disease Known as Nafrah.
This disease which is called Nafrah in our country is a pain that occurs in some organs and then moves from one organ to another, and I have seen it as I describe to you.
I was called to a sick woman in some of the desert, and she showed me a slight swelling in the armpit of her arm. After an hour, I saw that swelling moving with the tendon as a worm moves, rising towards her shoulder at the fastest speed possible, like mercury.
As it moved from place to place, the pain disappeared from that spot and settled in her shoulder. Then I sat for an hour and it flowed through her entire body until it was in her other arm, and she told me that it circled her whole body as I had seen.
I was amazed by the speed of its transition from one member to another, and I had not before seen this disease with my own eyes in this way. Except that I saw a group who found pain moving from member to member, but I did not see it with my own eyes as I saw it in this woman.
I did not appreciate this except that the woman was from the desert dwellers, dry-bodied and with exposed veins, so from here the sense appeared of the wind moving, and it is necessary that it does not appear on this measure in people of affluence and soft bodies with hidden veins.
So if you want to treat it and the sufferer feels pain, and it appears before you as we mentioned, then pull above it and below it with haste and cut on it until that trapped wind exits and the place is emptied.
If you do not see it with your own eyes, treat it by dusting the body and what expels wind and spreads it like the love of mint and the love of spearmint and similar medicines.
Chapter forty-nine.
On extracting arrows.
Arrows differ according to their types and according to the places where they are located in the body. As for their difference according to types, some are large and some are small, some are hollow glass and some are solid glass, and some have three angles and some have four angles.
And some have tongues and some have fragments. As for those that are according to the organs where they are located, they are of two types: either the organs are from main cavities like the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and the like. So when an arrow is located in one of these organs and the signs of death that I describe to you appear, then it is necessary to avoid extracting that arrow from it, for death will befall its owner in most cases. And when these bad signs do not appear to you and the arrow is not hidden deep in the organ, then extract it and treat the wound. And from the signs of the brain if an arrow strikes it and pierces the bone and wounds the membrane on the brain, then it exposes severe headache, dizziness, and vertigo.
And when these bad signs do not appear to you and the arrow is not hidden deep in the organ, then extract it and treat the wound. And from the signs of the brain if an arrow strikes it and pierces the bone and wounds the membrane on the brain, then it exposes severe headache, dizziness, and vertigo. Redness in the eyes, redness of the tongue, thirst, confusion, and a feeling as if something is being thrown within the head. And perhaps blood comes from the nostrils or ears, and perhaps speech ceases and the voice disappears.  From the wounds location white fluid similar to porridge flows, like that of meat juice.
If these signs appear to you, refrain from treating the patient and removing the arrow if it has not yet been extracted. But as for the signs of an arrow that has struck the heart, and was near the left breast, and he feels as if it is lodged in a solid thing, not a hollow one.
And perhaps the arrow has a movement similar to the pulse, and black blood flows from the wound, followed by coldness of the extremities, cold sweat, and pallor. Know then that death is inevitable. And the sign of an arrow if it has wounded the lung is the exit of frothy blood from the wound.
And the vessels that follow the neck swell and the color of the patient changes, and he breathes a high breath and requests to inhale cold air. If the arrow has struck the diaphragm in the chest, it is near the small ribs and breathing is great with severe pain.
And he coughs and all the organs of his groin move. If the arrow has struck the liver, severe pain follows, and blood similar to the liver in its redness exits from the wound. And if the arrow has struck the stomach, perhaps something undigested exits from the wound.
And it is clear if the arrow has struck the abdomen and it has swollen, and something of feces exits from the wound or the intestines or a ruptured bowel, there is no hope for treatment or extracting the arrow. If the arrow has struck the bladder and urine exits.
And a part has protruded from it and the pain intensifies on the patient, know that he is doomed. But as for the rest of the organs like the face, eye, throat, shoulder, arm, lower back, clavicle, thigh, and leg and similar organs, most likely they will be unharmed.
When an arrow does not strike a vein or nerve and is not poisoned, and I tell you some of what I have seen of the matter of these arrows so that you may infer from it your treatment, namely an arrow which had fallen upon a man in his eye socket at the root of the nose.
And I extracted it for him from the other side under the lobe of the ear and he was cured and nothing ill befell his eye, and I extracted another arrow for a Jew who had fallen upon the lobe of his eye under the lower eyelid and the arrow had been hidden and I did not inflict on him except its small tip which adheres to the wood.
And it was a large arrow from the arrows of the Qas'i, composed and square of iron, smooth, which had no ears, so the Jew was cured and nothing ill befell his eye, and I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian and the arrow was Arabic.
Which one has ears, it split on him between the tonsils and had gone deep into his throat so I labored with it until I extracted it and the Christian was safe and cured, and I extracted another arrow for a man who had fallen upon his belly and we estimated that he would die from it.
For when he remained for thirty days or so and nothing changed in his condition, I split on the arrow and worked on it until I extracted it and he was cured and nothing ill befell him, and I saw a man who had fallen an arrow in his back so that the wound closed over it.
For when he was after seven years, the arrow came out in the root of his hip, and I saw a woman who had fallen upon her belly an arrow and the wound closed over it and the arrow remained and nothing changed in her condition, nothing did she find harm from him in anything of her natural activities,.
And I saw another man who had fallen an arrow in his face and the wound closed over it and he remained finding no much pain from it, and like this many, and I extracted an arrow for a man from the Sultan's cavalry who had fallen upon the middle of his nose and it leaned to the right side slightly.
The arrow was entirely missing and I was summoned to treat it after the arrow had entered for three days. I found the wound from the arrow to be very narrow, so I explored it with a fine probe and did not feel anything. However, he felt tingling and pain behind his ear from the right incision.
I suspected that the tingling was from the tip of the arrow, so I covered the area with a strong adhesive bandage and it ripened. I hoped that the area would swell and show a sign of the arrow, so I cut into it, but nothing happened in the area to indicate that the arrow had reached it.
So I continued with the bandage on him for many days, and nothing happened. It closed up in that time, and the patient remained unable to get it out until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and told me.  I then placed a strong pungent medicine on the wound for many days.
Until it opened up and I probed it, and I felt the tip of the thin arrow sticking in the wood. Then I increased the opening of the wound with that strong medicine until we saw the tip of the arrow with our own eyes. It took me about four months with him.
Then when the wound widened and I was able to enter the forceps into it, I pulled and moved it, but it didn't respond to coming out. So I kept soothing him and working on him with various tools until one day I grasped it with firm forceps, as you see its image at the end of the book.
And the doctors ruled that the cartilage in his nose couldn't be sutured, so I closed it and the wound healed and the patient recovered completely, not being bothered by anything at all. And I tell you how I removed some arrows to make this a measure and a guide for what I haven't mentioned.
Because the parts of this craft and its details are not grasped by description nor encompassed by a book, but rather the skillful artisan measures the little against the much and from what has been present to what is absent and derives a new work and a new tool in the case of strange occurrences.
If you descend from this craft, I say that the arrows exit from the organs in which they have lodged in two types: either by drawing from the place where they entered or from the opposite side, and those that exit from where they entered.
Or that the arrow is prominent in a place of inflammation, so it is drawn and removed. If it does not yield to you for exit from its time of entry, then it is necessary for you to leave it for days until the flesh around it decays so that it is easier to draw and remove it. Similarly, if lodged in bone.
And if it does not yield to you for exit, leave it also for days and repeat drawing and movement each day because it will exit.  If it does not yield to you for exit after days, then it is necessary that you drill around the arrow in the same bone from every side with a fine drill until it widens for the arrow, then draw and remove it.
If the arrow is lodged in a bone of the head and has penetrated into one of the cavities of the brain and some of those symptoms that I have mentioned to you have appeared from the patient, then hold back from drawing the arrow and leave it until his condition clarifies after days.
Then proceed in drawing the arrow and removing it. If it is deeply lodged and does not yield to you for drawing, then use the drills around the arrow as I have described to you, then treat the place until it heals. But if the arrow has been hidden in a place of the body And if it is not felt, then search for it with the probe; and if you feel it, draw it out with some instrument suitable for drawing it out; but if you are unable to do so because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow's entry, and there was no bone or nerve or vessel there.
Then make an incision over it until the wound is widened and you are able to grasp the arrow so as to withdraw it; if it has barbs, grasp them and free the flesh adhering to them from every side with all the skill you can; if you are unable to free the flesh in the grip of the barbs, then cut through them and open them until you are freed.
And if you try to withdraw the arrow from any place, use your hand with gentle motions in all directions until you free it; and be as gentle as possible so that the arrow does not break and make it difficult for you to draw it out; and if you are unable to do so within a reasonable time.
Leave it for days until the flesh around it decays, then attempt again; for it will be easier then; and if you are faced with bleeding, use what was mentioned in its chapter; and take care not to cut any vessel or nerve or tendon, and use your skill.
In every way you can free the arrow, and let it be done gently and carefully, and stabilize as described to you; and it is fitting for you that when you draw out the arrow, the patient should be in the position he was in at the time of the arrow's impact, for this is more suitable.
If you are unable to do so, use whatever shapes you can; as for the arrow that exits from the opposite side, either something may have protruded from it externally, or you will feel the tip of the arrow with your hand near the top of the skin, and see that it is emerging.
Then make an incision over it, and let the incision be as wide as your fingers can reach; then draw it out; for it will be easy to exit; if it is stuck in bone, then use your hand with turning motions until the arrow impinges on the bone and widens itself, then draw it.
Otherwise, leave it for days until it comes out, if the shaft of the arrow is in it, push it out with it. If the shaft has fallen out and you want to use pushing, insert the grooved tool into it so that its cavity enters the wound of the arrow then push it with it.
If the arrow is hollow, push it out with a tool that enters that cavity, for the arrow will come out easily thereby. If the arrow is poisoned, it is necessary that you excise all the flesh which has become poisoned by it if you are able to do so then treat it with what is suitable for it.
If the arrow is in the chest or the abdomen or the bladder or the flank and was close to what can be felt with the probe and you were able to make a cut on it, make a cut and be careful not to cut a vein or nerve and take it out.
Then suture the wound if it needs suturing then treat it until it heals, image of the callipers used to attract the arrows:
Its ends are like the beak of a bird, made as if it were a cold iron when it grasps an arrow or something, and she does not let it go.  And they can make kinds of them large and small and medium each according to the size of the arrow, its smallness, the wideness of the wound and its narrowness.
Image of the grooved pusher:
Image of the solid pusher:
This one is solid at the end like a cold iron so that it easily enters the hollow arrow and pushes it.
Chapter Fifty-Nine.
On Phlebotomy
The veins which it is customary to bleed in the body are thirty veins, of them six in the head, the two pulsating veins behind the ears known as the  "hissers," and the two veins in the temples that appear on the outside, and the two veins in the sockets of the eyes known as "the seers."
And the sweat that stands upright in the middle of the forehead and the sweat that is in the tip of the nose and the glands that are in the neck and the two sweat glands that are on the upper lip of the mouth and the two sweat glands that are on the lower lip, and these veins known as the jeharak and the two veins under the tongue.
As for the veins that are cut in the arm and hand, there are five veins: one is the qifal, which is on the outer side, and it is called by the common people the vein of the head, and the akhal, which is the middle vein, and it is composed of a branch of the baslik and a branch of the qifal, and it is called by the common people the vein of the body.
And the baslik, which is located on the inner side, and it is also called the armpit, and it is called by the common people the vein of the abdomen, and the cord of the arm, which is located on the forearm, and this is where it attaches to, and this is what appears above the thumb clearly, and the asilim.
And this is the vein between the ring finger and the little finger, it has two branches, and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one under the kneecap on the outer side, the second is the safen, and its location is at the heel on the inner side, and the vein of the gluteus maximus, and its location is at the back of the heel on the outer side.
And in the other leg there are three veins like it, as for the two veins behind the ears, their benefit is cutting them for chronic colds, migraine, and wind, and bad chronic head sores, and how to cut them as I describe.
And this is by shaving the head of the sick person and scraping his back in the place of the two veins with a rough rag, then strangle the neck of the sick person with a headscarf until the two veins appear and their place behind the ears in the low places of the head, so you will feel them with your finger and where you felt their pulse under your finger, there mark it with the pen.
Then take a sharp scalpel, which is known as the "nishl," and insert it under the armpit into the skin until the scalpel reaches the bone. Then raise your hand with the armpit and skin upwards and cut the artery with the skin in a clean cut, and the length of the cut should be like two closed fingers.
Or so, and send from the blood as much as you desire, then tie them with sutures and leave them until they heal.  Previously in the beginning of the book, I have mentioned cutting and cauterizing them. As for the two arteries that are in the temples, their usefulness is to cut them for chronic headache, difficult headache, constant ophthalmia and acute discharge that flows sharply toward the eyes.
And how to cut them as I describe to you, the patient ties his neck with a turban until the arteries appear to the touch clearly and their pulse is felt under your finger. Then, learn by the pencil mark, and raise the skin from above the artery upward with your index finger.
And insert the "nishl" scalpel from below and raise the artery upwards, cutting it as you did with the other arteries, and send from the blood as much as needed, then release the patient's neck constriction and place your finger on the artery for an hour.
Then place cotton and sutures on it, and tighten them firmly above, leaving him until he heals.  Previously I have mentioned their cutting and cauterization in the beginning of the book. As for severing the artery of the forehead, its benefit is after severing the cephalic artery for chronic ailments of the face such as erysipelas, ulcers, and severe redness.
And how to cut it as I describe to you, the patient ties his neck with a turban until the artery appears. Then take the instrument called the "fasa," and this is its image:
Place the spike that is at the head of the "fasa" on the same artery and strike from above with a comb or something similar to it, and leave the blood to flow as much as you desire. Then release the patient's neck constriction and tighten it until he heals.
It may be opened with a wide scalpel, but it should not be sharp-pointed like other scalpels; rather, its tip should be slightly blunt and its edge sharpened on the curved side because the bone is near, so perhaps the scalpel would break if it were thin.
But as for the two veins in the hollows of the eyes, their use is for the ailments of the eye from scabies, redness, and itchiness, and diseases of the face. As for how to cut them, it is that the sick person holds his neck tight with a turban, then they are cut while you stand on his head and let the incision be slightly curved to length using a small scalpel that is slightly wide.
For the place has no flesh in it, so if the scalpel is thin-tipped, it may break. Then a cloth is placed on them and bound for one night after sending off the blood, then they are removed. As for phlebotomy from the nose vein, it is beneficial for acute fever.
And for severe headaches and diseases of the face such as redness that appears in the nose, especially if it is chronic. As for how to cut it, let the sick person hold his neck tight and then you grasp his nose with your left hand and take a thin, long scalpel.
And insert it in the middle of the nostril itself between the nostrils straight because the vein does not appear to the touch there, so the blood will come out from its hour. It is necessary that you concentrate your hand with the scalpel a little and send off the blood as much as needed then tie it for one night because it clots quickly.
As for the jugulars, their benefit is that they are cut for shortness of breath and the beginning of leprosy and black diseases that appear on the surface of the skin such as  black leprosy, herpes, bad sores, and carbuncles. As for how to cut them, let the sick person tighten them under his neck with a bandage and the practitioner stand on the head of the sick person.
The patient is seated on a stool, then the vein of the armpit is opened to a moderate length with a broad incision, and a moderate amount of blood is let out or according to what you see as necessary, then this is done similarly for the other vein and then the ligament is tied.
And the two veins are tightened moderately so as not to suffocate the patient and he is left until the next day because the wound heals, and as for the veins of the armpit, it is beneficial to open them after opening the jugular vein because it benefits from sores in the mouth, gum decay, bad ulcers, cracked lips, and bad ulcers.
Which are in the nose and around it, and how to open them is that you make the patient sit in front of you and tighten his neck with a turban then turn his lips and look at the two veins which you see one on the right side of the lip and the other on its left and distinguish them by their blackness.
And also that around them there are thin, black veins so you cut them with a single cut, and if it is difficult for you and you do not know what they are, then aim to cut the largest and most obvious one, and do the same for the two veins in the lower lip.
And as for the two veins under the tongue, it is beneficial to open them after opening the jugular vein for the nodules that are in the throat from the disease of the palate and diseases of the mouth, and how to open them is that you make the patient sit between your hands at the level of the sun and raise his tongue and look under his tongue on one side a vein and on the other side a vein and their color is black.
So you open them and be careful not to overdo cutting them because there are arteries underneath them, and perhaps a bleeding from those arteries will occur, and as for the three veins that are opened in the elbow, they are the ones that have become customary to open them in all people, and opening them is done in two ways.
Either a cut with a wide or olive-shaped scalpel into the throat, or a cut with a thin scalpel, which is called trepanning (and this is its image), an image of the wide, rehani scalpel.
It will be wide as you see, so that it is suitable for opening the swollen, prominent, visible veins which contain thick blood like tar, and this is an image of the olive-shaped scalpel.
And this scalpel is narrower and has a thinner tip, suitable for letting blood from fine veins containing thin, yellowish blood, and this is an image of the trepanning scalpel.
This trepan, which is suitable for cutting and has types of wide and narrow ones according to the width and narrowness of the veins, and this can be deduced from it, and among artisans it is famous.
As for the basilic vein, which is one of these three veins, its benefit when it is let is that it attracts blood from illnesses that are under the throat and neck to what follows the chest and abdomen, and it is necessary for the phlebotomist when he lets blood to be careful and be on the neck of it because beneath it there is an artery, so if he makes a mistake and increases in cutting with the scalpel, he will cut that artery.
For this reason, it is necessary that his letting of blood not be with a cutting scalpel but rather be with a trepan, and if the basilic vein does not appear clearly, then it is necessary to avoid it and turn to another or request some of its branches.
Or let blood in its place, the brachial cord, because it is clear and you cut it with the trepan as we mentioned, and if you want to let blood from it, then before pulling on the arm, feel the place until you recognize the pulse location, then mark it with ink.
Then you tie the arm and cut the artery with a deflected cut using the trepan as we mentioned, and take care that the blow falls away from the location of the artery, and when you see, upon pulling the bandage, swelling in the place you marked with ink, then that swelling is the swelling of the artery, so avoid it.
If you see the blood when you bleed, gushing up like the urine of a boy and the blood is thin and red, know that it is from the artery. Then quickly put your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger. If the blood stops, most often it will stop, so tighten the arm.
Leave it, and warn the sick person from neglecting it, and let him be on his neck and not move it for days until it heals. If the blood does not stop and you are overpowered and no medicine is brought to you at that time, then amputate the artery if it appears to you because its ends contract and the blood stops.
Or take the husk of a date palm and split it, taking one half and tightening it on the place of the artery tightly with a bandage and splints until another day. If the blood stops, otherwise treat him with what has been mentioned before from placing the blunt tips to stop bleeding, and stopping his blood is not difficult in most cases.
For a small wound and the bandage in the arm, inform him. As for the jugular vein, its benefit in being cut is that it draws blood from the top of the head and the bottom of the body because it is composed of a branch of the basilar artery and a branch of the cephalic artery as we have said.
It is necessary for the one being bled to have a bandage from his bleed because if it's under a nerve, and you increase in incision with the scalpel and hit the nerve, there will be numbness that makes seeing difficult and perhaps it won't heal at all. This nerve is often felt by touch.
If it is hidden in some people and is thin, and not clearly visible, then it is necessary to make your bleed a cut with the scalpel and avoid the nerve as much as you can. If the artery is between two nerves, cut the artery lengthwise. As for the cephalic artery, its benefit in being cut is that it draws blood from the head.
It is useful for eye diseases and especially in this vein if you wish to dissect it, a cut with the olive blade or the broad reed blade because it is safer for all veins as there is no artery or nerve under it.
But when you phlebotomize, it is necessary to avoid the head of the muscle only with the blade and request a soft location. It does not harm if it is not hit by the first blow that it be repeated phlebotomized several times, except that it may swell in some people if it is not phlebotomized on the first blow.
But that swelling does not harm it at all. As for the method of phlebotomy and its effects, and what should be taken into consideration in its repair, first of all it is necessary to know that phlebotomy is either used only for maintaining health.
Or it is used for diseases, and the one that is used to maintain health and prevent disease should be phlebotomized in one of the three veins in the arm, namely the cephalic, basilic, and brachial, and it should be phlebotomized at the beginning of spring when signs of fullness appear.
And phlebotomy should be done on Sunday or Tuesday after three hours have passed since sunrise. As for the phlebotomy that is used for diseases, it does not have a limited time, but whenever need and urgency call for it from night or day.
And in every hour and every time, and it is not necessary to phlebotomize boys until they reach fourteen years of age, nor old men who have passed sixty years of age. If anyone intends to phlebotomize for any reason...
it is necessary to cleanse his intestines before phlebotomy with a gentle enema if he has a lot of retained feces so that it does not be attracted to the veins during phlebotomy from the intestines an excess of putrefaction which harms the main organs, and do not phlebotomize the intoxicated, drunkard or one who is under the influence of drugs until that passes from them.
One should also be cautious with venesection after diarrhea, vomiting, and childbirth, as well as excessive intercourse, fatigue, exercise, wakefulness, fasting, and anything that weakens the body, whether physically or mentally. Then examine the thinning of the humors before that, if the blood is thick.
And he should eat and drink and use medicine if possible, then enter the bath if it does not prevent him, or engage in some exercise so that the blood flows and makes its venesection in the middle of the day as we mentioned, and he aims to empty his chest that day of all bad psychological conditions.
Like worries, anger, fear, and all physical conditions such as excessive fatigue, strain, intercourse, and the like, and prepare his meeting with things that have become customary among people to use from types of perfume, incense, entertainment, and the like, each person according to what he is able.
Then he makes the venesection on a pillow that is higher than the pillow on which the one being bled sits, then he extends his arm and rubs it with his hand two or three times, then he tightens the band with the tourniquet and winds it two or three times, and let the tightening be moderate.
Because tightening, when it is not moderate, either by excessive tightening prevents the flow of blood, or if it is too loose it also prevents the flow of blood, then after tightening it is necessary that the one being bled rubs his hands together both with each other and lightly.
Until the veins swell and become clear to the touch, then he wipes the scalpel with a little of old oil, especially, then places his index finger of his left hand on the same vein under the place where he wants to make the venesection slightly so that the vein does not recede and avoid the strike. Because some of the veins are found like cords that recede during venesection and some of them are full of air, so when the scalpel is placed on it, it goes down under the scalpel and deceives the venesector and does not open the vein, or if he opens it, then its opening will be narrow.
Therefore, it is necessary that the incisions be firm and careful in all these matters, then the scalpel descends if the opening of the vein from its place (is) passed, otherwise he aids it another time below that place a little or above it quickly if the place does not swell.
If it swells or the patient is agitated, leave him a day or two and do not tighten the bandage because it may bring on hot phlegm and he does not enter the bath, then he resumes the incision if he wishes, if the scalpel was inserted and the opening was small and the blood flowed thin.
And I fear that the blood will not exit in the quantity you want, so return the scalpel to the same hole gently on a straight line and increase the opening slightly and do this quickly before the place swells because many people may swell at the small incision.
If you see that it has swollen, do not add anything to it because it will not help you. Place on it something of the oil of  a black color because it facilitates the flow of blood and it is better in this place than the oil itself and all other ointments as well.
So use the oil of a black color in all your phlebotomies when the flow of blood is difficult and this remedy, the Farooq's elixir and shakhznaya if one of them is placed on the place because the blood will thin and dissolve if it is thick.
If a large swelling occurs at the site of the incision, which happens often especially to those who have not been bled before or whose opening of the vein was small, act quickly and place on the swelling a sponge soaked in warm water and salt and tighten it for an hour because it will dissolve.
It is necessary to do this after the blood has exited from the vein itself in its entirety or from another vein, if something of black or green remains in the place after days, it does not harm, if you wish, load on it something of patience and bitter solvent.
Put nothing from the juice of al-fudnagh and the like on it, for a swelling and tumor often occurs when bloodletting is performed in the bassilyca. Place your hand upon it; if you find it throbbing when you press on it, that is an evil tumor, so beware that you place nothing of what has been mentioned on it.
For it may be that blood flows from a vein, but clot it with what is in it so that it hardens the place, and then treat it with all other treatment until it heals. It is proper to draw out of each person's blood according to his strength and the color that appears to prevail on the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it be drawn out until it becomes red, and likewise if you see it thick, send it until it becomes thin, and likewise if it is sharp until its sharpness goes away. It is proper for one who is full of strength and needs to have his blood drawn all at once.
That he widen the bloodletting of the armpit and that the lancet be wide, and for one who is weak, the opposite of this. It is proper to draw it out in several times and that the hole be narrow. The best thing to use in bloodletting of the armpit is that it be twisted, boiled, a slit and not a piercing.
And this kind of bloodletting is safe from bleeding and cutting a nerve, and it is better and safer than bloodletting by breadth and length, and for one who is accustomed at bloodletting to the covering over the area, it is proper to feed him before bloodletting something of bread soaked in pomegranate water or vinegar.
If he is feverish and blood has been drawn from him three or four times, if he is cold-natured, let him take before bloodletting bread soaked in the drink of honey, or a drink of honey flavored with hawthorn berries, or the fragrant thyme drink.
If a covering over the area occurs during bloodletting and its cause is the outflow of much blood, it is proper that he be given watered meat broth and the thin fragrant thyme drink and use anointing with  ghalee'a, and rub his chest with it and use all that has been mentioned in the section on covering.
That which is due to bleeding, and as for one who desires to comfort his arm and relax his blood a second time, it befits him who had a cut to bleed little by little according to strength over consecutive days.
And as for one who desires to comfort his arm and relax his blood a second time and was strong in body, let him do so at seven hours or nine from his first cut, and as for one who desires to draw the blood from his body to the opposite side of where it leaned, it befits that he is relieved on the second or third day.
And as for one who had in his body blood much, that heated and intensified and caused fever, it befits that blood is drawn from him in one rush and a large quantity is removed and the incision is widened until the white coat appears after ensuring all conditions of venesection have been met. And that you place your hand on his pulse while the blood is flowing lest death occur in place of the white coat, for this often happens if the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligence occurs, and it befits not if you desire to solve the arm and relax the blood a second time.
And if the sweat pore is closed and difficult for blood to exit, do not press hard upon it or twist with force, for this is very bad; rather, either leave it until you make a second incision or use the point of the scalpel to break up the clotted blood in the sweat pore.
Or place upon it something of salt dissolved in water or something of the Faruq elixir or the sharping ointment, and press gently until blood exits; if the sweat pore has swollen, leave it be.
Do not touch it until the swelling subsides; if necessity demands to relax the blood a second time, then either make an incision above that location or in the other arm or sweat pore.
As for the incision of the brachial artery, a substitute is made from akhal and basliq if they are not found or hidden because it is composed of them, and the way to cut it is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the tendon turns red and sweat appears clearly, then a ligature is tied above it slightly with moderate tension.
Then the vein is cut with a slight twist, neither in width nor length, let the opening be wide and the incision made above the wrist joint slightly, if blood does not flow easily, return the hand to the bowl of hot water and let the blood run into the water.
Until it reaches your need, if you are in the summer months, you may dispense with returning the hand to hot water, and what makes blood flow most in hot water is in winter time, and cutting this vein is safer than all veins. Because there is no throbbing vein or nerve beneath it, as for the incision of the vessel from the right hand, it is beneficial for diseases of the liver, and the way to cut it is to tie the wrist of the hand with a ligature or your hand after you put it in hot water until the vein swells.
Because there is no throbbing vein or nerve beneath it, as for the incision of the vessel from the right hand, it is beneficial for diseases of the liver, and the way to cut it is to tie the wrist of the hand with a ligature or your hand after you put it in hot water until the vein swells. And it becomes very clear to the touch then cut it with a slight twist, and even if you cut off the entire length, it does not harm him at all, be careful not to overdo your hand with the scalpel because there is a nerve beneath it, and the place is exposed from the flesh, then return the hand to hot water.
And leave it to let the blood flow in it, because if you do not return it to hot water, the blood will clot in the mouth of the vein and prevent its flow, so when you remove the blood as needed, put ointment and salt on the vein so that it does not stick together quickly.
And so you should do with every narrow branch, as for the benefit of cutting it from the left hand, it is beneficial for diseases of the spleen, and you do the same in its incision as you did in the second one, as for the incision of the saphenous vein, its benefits are for diseases in the lower body such as diseases of the uterus.
The retention of urine and diseases of the kidneys, chronic ulcers of the thighs and legs, and similar ailments, and how to treat them: By immersing his leg in hot water and massaging it until the veins are filled with blood, then binding above the joint of the leg with a linen bandage and placing a sweat cloth, its position being at the heel towards the thumb.
And it branches out on the leg's face in many branches, so treat it at the widest branch or at the heel where they meet; this is best and safest. If you treat it on the face of the leg, beware of the nerves beneath on the face of the leg.
And make your incision for him with a twist as if you want to amputate it, and let the scalpel be sharp. If blood is difficult to exit, let him return his leg into hot water and leave the blood to flow until it empties. If the phlebotomist makes a mistake in the first time by cutting the vein badly during incision.
Let him return to the incision a little higher. The location is safe and there is no fear of complications if you are careful of the nerve as we mentioned. Do the same with the saphenous vein from the other leg, as well. As for the sciatic vein, its location is as we said at the heel from the back side.
And the benefit of its incision for pain in the hip if it is from hot blood, and how to treat it:  The patient should enter the bath, and have his leg tightened from below the hip to above the heel with four fingers by a thin long bandage. Because this does not appear otherwise.
If it appears, then treat it in any way you like; either by twisting it, which is best, or by amputating it or cutting it open with a slash. Because its location is safe, and it is very hidden in most people. If you don't find it.
And if it did not appear at all, treat some of its branches which appear on the back of the foot towards the index and middle fingers, and be careful of the nerves, and send out the amount of blood you desire.
Then the tightness is resolved and cotton is placed on the site of venesection and the place is tightened, for it quickly heals.
Chapter Sixty-Nine.
On cupping and how to use it.
Cupping instruments can be made of horn, wood, copper, and glass. Cupping is done in two ways: one with a condition involving the drawing of blood, and the other without a condition.
And this cupping that is without a condition is done in two ways.
And cupping the sides of the neck, which are both sides of the neck altogether, and cupping the chin, which is below the lower jaw from the mouth, and cupping the shoulders, and cupping the lower back on the coccyx, and cupping the forearms, which are in the middle of the arms, and cupping the legs, and cupping the ankles.
Cupping draws blood from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for that reason, it does not draw strength as venesection does, and cupping should not be used with fire or without fire in any of the diseases that are from fullness until the body expels everything.
If need requires cupping from illness or by habit, we use it at any time in the beginning of the month and at its end and in the middle of it and in any time it was.
That is because some people, if their blood increases greatly to the point where they need to remove it by cupping, find heaviness and headache in their head. And some of them feel fullness and redness in their face and head and neck, and some feel itching on their face and cheek and darkness and swelling in their eyes, and some feel an itch in the place where they were cupped.
Some laugh a great deal, and some find the taste of blood in their mouths, and their gums bleed, and they spit blood. And some sleep a lot, and some see in their dreams blood, redness, wounds, and surgeries, and things like that. So when we see any of these things
And especially if it is in the middle third of the month, we order cupping after two or three hours have passed from noon. As for the benefit of cupping the nape, it benefits from heaviness in the head and water that flows into the eyes.
But it should be after the body has emptied its contents, and this cupping may be a substitute for cephalic venesection. It is cautioned against using it by those who are cold-headed or have a cold, as it will harm them greatly.
Therefore, it should not be used by the elderly or those with cold-headed illnesses, and whoever habitually uses it develops forgetfulness.
Therefore, it is necessary to order the cupper to lower his hand with the cup slightly downwards, for fear of forgetfulness being produced. As for cupping the shoulder, it is a substitute for phlebotomy at the armpit and bloodletting at the brachial vein.
Therefore, it benefits from asthma, shortness of breath, constriction of the respiratory apparatus, cough, and fullness. It is necessary to raise cupping of the shoulder slightly because if it is lowered downwards, it produces weakness in the heart and stomach.
As for cupping the nape of the neck, it benefits from pains occurring in the head, ophthalmia, migraine, angina pectoris, and pain at the roots of the teeth. It is a substitute for bloodletting at the brachial vein, and it is necessary to order the cupper not to deepen his hand with the cup so that he does not cut a vessel and cause bleeding.
As for cupping under the chin, it benefits from sores in the mouth, gum disease, and similar diseases in the mouth. It may replace phlebotomy at the jowls. As for cupping the shoulders, it benefits from palpitations that occur due to fullness and heat.
As for cupping the abdomen of the groin, it is beneficial in what it benefits by obstructing the three veins: the basilik, akhal, and qifal, because it draws blood from all those fine veins in the flesh and draws those fine veins from other thicker veins until the drawing reaches the three thick veins.
The cupper should be ordered not to be excessive in the application, because the place is exposed of flesh and under it are nerves and arteries.  As for the single cupping that is applied on the coccyx, it benefits from hemorrhoids of the seat and sores of the lower part.
It is necessary to order the cupper that the cupping be large and made of brass because the place needs a strong suction and perhaps a glass cupping might break and it requires many conditions, as for the cupping of the legs it diminishes fullness noticeably.
Because it draws blood from the entire body and benefits from chronic pains in the kidneys, uterus, and bladder, it induces menstruation and benefits from boils and carbuncles and performs the function of obstructing the saphenous and femoral veins, except that it depletes the body greatly and causes giddiness in most people. Cupping of the femoral veins benefits similarly to cupping of the legs.
The method of placing the cupping is that the cupping is placed first empty and it sucks a moderate suction, but you do not prolong the placement of the cupping but place it quickly and remove it quickly to accept the fluids into the place steadily and continue to repeat that until you see the place has reddened and opened.
And when redness of blood appeared, then it is stipulated and suction is resumed gradually, and then the state of the bodies is looked at. From those people whose flesh was soft and porous with holes, it is necessary to stipulate one cupping only so that the place does not become chafed.
The surgeon must widen the incision and deepen it slightly and adjust the tissue gently with care and movement. If there is thick blood, it is necessary to make an incision twice. In the first incision, he should open a way for the flow of blood and its fluids. And in the second incision, it is for thoroughly removing the thick blood.
If the blood is very thick, he repeats the incision a third time to achieve the goal. In general, if we want to remove a small amount of blood, we are content with one incision. If we want to remove a large amount of blood, we make more incisions. And if we consider the blood to be thick.
It is necessary to make a deep incision and the moderate depth of the incision is only the depth of the skin. It is not necessary to use ointments when placing ligatures and what the surgeon warns against. As for those whose skin is thick, firm, coarse, and with narrow pores.
It is necessary to lubricate the places of ligatures with softening, melting, and dissolving ointments.  But if it is summer time, such as the ointment of khari, violet ointment, almond sweet oil, or pumpkin seed oil.
And if it is winter, such as daffodil ointment, lily ointment, chamomile ointment, or hyacinth and the like. If the fat is thick and cold, let the ointment be marjoram ointment, fig ointment, banana oil, or sandalwood oil and so on.
If the surgeon has wide pores and thick flesh, it is necessary to abstain from ointment. These people should wash their ligatures after cupping with rose water or cold water or grape vine water or pumpkin water or  watering of men and so on. And as for those whose blood is very moist.
They wash their ligatures with vinegar or  water of ash and mastic and so on. And as for those whose fat is thick, they wash their ligatures with old syrup or marjoram water or sandalwood broth or chamomile and so on. It is necessary to avoid cupping in the bath and after the bath.
It is not necessary to use it after coming out of the bath for an hour or two, and it is not permissible for anyone to sleep after cupping, what should be taken care of by the physician and the patient before cupping and after it.
It is necessary to first look if the cupper or the patient is jaundiced and the majority of his blood is on the edge and inflammation, then it is necessary for him to take cooling things like pomegranates and dandelion with vinegar, lettuce, chicory, and molasses and so on, and he should make his food quail, lamb skewers, and hare meat and so on.
And if his temperament is cold, it is necessary for him to drink honey syrup, miwa syrup, or molasses, and he should take the aromatic wine that is between old and new, and he should be ordered to eat little food, and he should make his food quail, partridge, sparrows, and pigeon chicks, skewers, and it is necessary for the drink on the day of cupping and venesection to be more than food.
And it may be necessary to give some people, at times,  of the Farouk elixir or musk medicine or shieltha before cupping and venesection or after it to strengthen the main organs and thin the blood, and it is not permissible to give it to those who are feverish.
As for the cupping that is without condition, it is the cupping that is placed on the liver, spleen, breasts, abdomen, navel, kidney location, and hip because these organs do not tolerate conditions upon them, but rather it is intended to draw blood from one organ to another.
Such as placing cupping on the breasts in case of hemorrhoids, or we use it to dissolve the cold air that has lodged in the organ, such as placing cupping on the abdomen and navel, because it loosens the organ, warms it, and removes the pain to dissolve it.
And it may be placed on the kidneys if there is a blockage or stone in them, with strong pulling it may open the blockage or remove the stone from its place, and it also does this if placed on the liver and spleen when wind is disturbed in them, and these instruments may be used empty with only pressing.
And it may be used with fire and it may be used filled with lukewarm water in the case of  sores, as it is filled and made large with hot water alone or with water that has been cooked with some herbs suitable for this purpose.
Then it is placed filled on the place and held and removed and repeated as needed, and this is an image of the instrument used with fire:
Its mouth opening is two fingers wide as we have pictured it and its depth is half a cubit, and there is a small hole on the side of it, about halfway through, the size that a needle can enter, made from Chinese copper or yellow brass with a thick rim.
Flat and smooth, so as not to harm the limb when placed upon it, and there is a crossbar in its center made of copper or iron where the candle with fire is placed, and this instrument may be made large larger than what we have described and small according to the diseases.
And the instrument used is that instruments for boys and the slender are not instruments for men and strong bodies, and as for how this instrument is placed with fire on the limb, it is brought to a flame with tightly woven cotton or a small candle from wax, and it is placed on the middle of the erected penis which is in the middle of the instrument.
So that the fire rises upward toward the bottom of the instrument so that it does not burn the body of the sick person, then it is placed on the limb and the finger on the hole we mentioned until when we hold the instrument as much as needed we remove the finger.
And steam comes out through that hole and the instrument dissolves on the place, then the candle is brought to a flame in the same way and it is repeated if needed, as for the instrument used in sores with water, there is no erected penis or hole.
It is used by filling it with water and placing it on the member only, and this is its shape: .
And this vessel, whenever it is large enough to hold a lot of water, is better,.
Chapter Seventy-Seven.
On the Removal of A foreign Body.
A foreign body is used in most cases for the organs where it's impossible to use vessels either because they are small like the lip and gums, or because the organ is exposed of flesh like a finger and nose, etc..
And the way to use it is by choosing a foreign body that is in clean freshwater, free from impurities, then leaving it for a day and night in clean water until it starves and nothing remains inside its cavity. Then the body is evacuated first by venesection or cupping, then the diseased organ is wiped.
Until it reddens, then it is placed on it and if it fills up, it falls off. If it is possible to suck the place with a vessel, it is more effective in benefit; otherwise, wash the place with vinegar then with much water and massage and squeeze it. If bleeding continues after the removal of the foreign body and was a discharge, then soak a cotton cloth in cold water.
And place it on top until the discharge stops. If the bleeding is excessive, sprinkle powdered saffron or a similar astringent powder on it until the bleeding stops, or half of the peeled bulbils are placed on the affected area.
And leave it until the bulbils stick to the area, then the bleeding stops. It is necessary that if reapplication of the foreign body is needed, do not use the same foreign body if another is possible; if the foreign body refuses to adhere, wipe the area with fresh blood.
Or insert a needle into the area until something of blood comes out, then place it; if it feels anything of blood, it will stick to the place. If you want to remove it, sprinkle some frankincense or salt or ash on it and it will fall off from its place.
The Third Chapter.
On Fractures.
This chapter also belongs to the knowledge necessary in the craft of medicine, namely the setting of fractures and dislocations that occur in the bones.
Know, O sons of men, that this chapter may be claimed by the ignorant among physicians and laymen and those who have never browsed even a single book on it from antiquity or read even a letter from it.
And because of this reason, this art has become commonplace in our land as a matter of science, and indeed I have never encountered anyone skilled in it at all. And what I have derived from it is due to my long reading of the books of antiquity and my diligence in understanding them until I extracted the knowledge of it from them, and then I adhered to practice and experience throughout my life.
And I have drawn for you in this chapter all that encompasses my knowledge of it. And my experience has passed after I have brought it closer to you and condensed it from the prolixity of  length and shortened it to the utmost brevity, and explained it to the greatest extent of clarity, and depicted for you many images of the instruments used in it.
Since it is an increase in clarification, as I have done in the preceding chapters, and there is no power except with Allah, the Most High, the Great.
The First Section.
In it are the beauty and summaries of the matter of fractures of bones, and it is necessary to present them before we begin to mention the broken and dislocated members one by one, it is fitting that in the beginning of this chapter, we mention a summary of the saying and sections. It is necessary for you first to understand them and stand on their reality, you and anyone who is eager to learn this noble craft, other than yourselves.
So I say that when a fracture, dislocation, or sprain or fall occurs to someone, it is necessary first to hasten to its separation or loosening or both of them. If nothing prevents it, such as weakness of strength or if the one afflicted by it is a child or an old man, whether it be during extreme heat or extreme cold.
Then he should restrict his food to cold legumes, poultry and hare meat, and abstain from drink, heavy meats, overeating, and all food that fills the veins with blood until the swelling subsides and there is no expectation of fluid seeping into the area.
Then, when this happens, let the sick person return to his usual way of life. But if the broken bone is in a process of setting, it is necessary for the sick person to eat foods that are rich and thick and have a lot of fat, like rice, barley, heads, roots, and veal marrow. And eggs, fatty fish and thick drinks, as these foods hasten and improve the setting of the fracture.  Know that if a bone is broken in robust men or old men, it will never completely heal to its original state.
Because their bones are dry and stiff, and although it may heal, it will not be like the very soft bones of young children. However nature grows a substance on all sides of the broken bone that resembles glue. It thickens and binds it until the pieces adhere to one another.
And it binds the pieces together until it becomes as strong and firm as it was originally, so that nothing hinders his actions.
For this reason, it is necessary to give the sick person food that contains strength, fat and thickness as we have mentioned. Know that fractures can vary in types depending on the different bones because a broken leg bone is different from a broken skull bone, and a broken rib bone is different from a broken spine bone.
And so with all the other bones, each is different from the others. And we will discuss each type of fracture in its own chapter, in detail and separately from the others.  And a type of bone fracture can also vary within itself.
For it may be a fracture that is a clean break without fragments, and it may be a fracture along the length of the bone and have fragments and protrusions, both attached and detached. And the fracture may be accompanied by a wound and tearing in the skin, and the fracture may be a slight fissure.
And for each type there is a special method of healing it, as will be mentioned in detail in its place. And what distinguishes a broken bone is its bending and deviation and its appearance to the touch and its creaking when you move it with your hand.
But when there is no visible bending or creaking or feeling of disturbance when you touch the bone, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no fracture, but it can be a sprain or a slight fracture or a slight fissure, so it should not be moved by stretching or probing at all.
But apply to it the medicines that will be mentioned later, which are appropriate for the location, and then gently bandage it. And know that if a bone is broken and shattered into two parts without fragments, except that each part has moved from its place.
Then you must hasten from that time to straighten and set it before a hot swelling occurs, for if a hot swelling occurs, leave it for days until the hot swelling subsides, then straighten it in any way you can with gentleness and ingenuity.
And know that its healing and straightening is easier than the bone that has fragments. Then it is bound as will be mentioned later, but if the bone has fragments, then there is a necessity to stretch the broken limb from both sides, whether it be an arm or a leg.
Either with your hands if the limb is small, or with two ropes, or with a rope and hand, and let the position of the limb be on a level surface according to its natural shape until when the broken part of the bone has stretched, then at that time you return those protrusions to their places in every way you can with skill and gentleness.
Strive with all your effort that you do not inflict pain or suffering on the sick by your action, nor grief. Strive that you set one bone next to its fellow in the best form. And it is necessary at that time to touch them and feel them with your hand. If you see something amiss there, correct and smooth it as much as your strength allows.
Beware of excessive force and strong pulling as many ignorant people do, and often boast about doing so, causing a hot or cold sensation in the member, as I have repeatedly seen them do.
Then after setting and perfecting, and tightening that member, impose stillness and repose on it, and warn the sick person not to move it during his waking or sleeping time, or when he is shifting or agitated, or when he strains himself in all his movements as far as possible, and that he should take care for the position of the member to be a position with which he feels safe from pain.
For when he feels pain or discomfort in that position, he should move it to a different position until he feels no pain, and take care that that position be level and straight.
Lest there be a deformity in the member if it is forced, and as for how to tighten the broken member, it is what I describe to you. Know that broken members differ in their smallness and largeness and forms; those which are small like the arm, finger, and hand, etc.
Those which are small like the arm, finger, and hand, etc., should be bound with bandages of thin soft cloth, but those that are large like the thigh, back, and chest, should be bound with firmer, sturdier bandages because a wide bandage is necessary for the larger member and binds it from all sides with an equal tension without any defect.
Then after you have finished setting, begin to carry the appropriate plaster. Over the site of the fracture, then begin to wrap the bandage around the site of the fracture itself, three or four times, depending on what the member deserves. Pull your hand slightly with the bandage, then move it upward from the site of the fracture.
Pull with less force than you would for the fractured location, then twist it away from the fracture site slightly and gradually relax the tension until you take a piece of good tissue from the correct position, then take another bandage and wrap it also around the broken area.
Wrap it, then take the wrapping to the lower side of the fracture and let your action in tightening and loosening the wrap be as we mentioned in the first upper wrap, then place between the wraps a soft fabric or linen that is equal to leveling the curvature of the fracture.
If there is a curvature, otherwise do not put anything in it, then wrap another bandage on it and then smooth on these wraps the firm splint from your watch if there is no swelling or hot tumor in the limb.
If there is swelling or a hot tumor, put on it what soothes that tumor and removes the swelling and leave it for some days, then tighten the splint on it then and let the splints be from halves of carved reeds prepared skillfully or let the splints be from acacia wood.
Which are made from cedar or palm leaves or flax or hawthorn and the like, of what is available of that, and let the width of each splint be on this form and this shape exactly.
Unless the splint that is placed on the fracture itself be a little thicker and wider than the other splints, but as for the length of the splint, it is made according to what suits the fractured limb from its size, image of the splint:.
Then you tighten the splints with another bandage according to your first tightening, and then tie it from above with firm threads according to what we mentioned about the tension, which is that your tightening on the fracture site be more. And every time you move away from the fracture, the tension is less.
And the threads should be medium in thickness and softness, and they should be made of damp cotton, especially because if the threads are thick, as you see from the actions of ignorants who make their threads from frayed cotton strips, which is a great mistake.
Because the tension with it is excessive and the fine threads are not suitable because you do not reach what you want by tightening with them, and it should not be less than a finger between the bandage and the bandage.
If the patient is harmed by the edges of the bandages after tightening in the correct places, make under them from soft padding or fluffy wool so that it does not harm him from that anything, and as for if the fracture is with a wound and there is a rupture in the skin, we will come to it separately.
And know that not every broken member should be tightened with bandages from the first day, because if the limb is large, it should not be bandaged until after five days or seven or more according to your safety from the occurrence of hot swelling.
And this is the description of the bandages that were used to bandage the early fractures, dislocations, and sprains, a general bandage that shortens the fracture and is suitable for most temperaments, especially children and women because it does not overcome heat or cold.
And that is to take from the flour dust, which is the fine powder that clings to the walls of the mill when the millstone moves, and you knead it as it is without mixing it with egg white, and make its dough neither thick nor thin, then you cover it.
Description of another bandage that bandages the fracture, dislocation, and sprain, take from the mastic, lead, acacia, resin, marshmallow, and saffron from each ten drachmas, and frankincense and myrrh from each five drachmas, and from the wool twenty drachmas, and from the Armenian or Roman clay twenty drachmas. Pound everything and mix with wool water or egg white if the patient's temperament is hot, then this bandage is used because it is good in composition, binds broken bones quickly, and is suitable for most people because of its moderation.
A plaster which is also beneficial for fractures and dislocations, is taken of wool ten drachmas, linen ten drachmas, white lead ten drachmas, resin five drachmas, frankincense six drachmas, yellow earth twenty drachmas. All are finely ground and sifted and kneaded with water or egg white and used.
A plaster for joints and bones that have gone astray from their places, and quiets the pain accompanying them, and also for fractured bone and broken bones, is taken.  Woven wool is immersed in vinegar and cooked oil and placed on the site. This plaster has no binding force.
But it is excellent in quieting the hot swelling and relieving pain, especially. A plaster for binding a fractured bone is taken.  Dried fig leaves and dried poppy leaves are finely ground and applied with them moist. A brief plaster used when binding a broken bone.
And if you want to analyze the remaining swelling, take from each part of lead white, chamomile, violets, and powdered saffron, grind all together fine and knead with paint. If the limb is not stiff then knead with water or coriander water and use it.
A stronger plaster for dissolving this one is used when a solid swelling occurs when binding a bone. Take from each part of lead white, cottonseed, fenugreek, crown imperial, wormwood, violets, and chamomile.
Grind everything together and knead with  diluted vinegar or fresh water or paint, all according to the heat of the limb and its stillness. But Hippocrates did not mention in his book that it is placed on the broken limb when binding it.
Except the cerate made of wax and oil only, and he described it to be medium between thick and thin. But Galen saw that on the broken limb when binding it, things containing resins with something from heat like resin, frankincense, and similar to what we mentioned.
A plaster that is beneficial for weakness and pain, take barley, lentils, human hair or bird feathers,  a small amount of flaxseed meal and salt in equal parts, grind finely, sift and knead together and apply it as a plaster. As for the measure that should remain tied.
Then it should be loosened, and if the patient does not experience pain, itching or movement of the broken bone from its place, do not loosen it for many days. If severe itching, disturbing pain or swelling occurs in the location then
then act quickly and loosen it at once and do not delay that at all, and remove the plaster from him, then take a soft cloth or sponge of seawater, moistened in warm water, and wash the place with it until the itching subsides and the pain ceases, then leave the limb to rest for an hour.
Then cover it with soft wool soaked in vinegar and oil or rose butter, and bind it on him for a night until the hot swelling is prevented, and the swelling of the limb subsides and its pain goes away, then return it to mild tightness and light plaster and do not tighten it as you did at first.
And treat it until it heals, if you see that the swelling, redness, pain and puffiness and all symptoms have disappeared entirely and he needs plaster and tightness, then redo it as you did at first, whether it is in equal amounts, if nothing of what has been mentioned happens in the limb.
then do not loosen it except after three or four or five or seven days, and he may leave it for twenty days, all of that according to what appears to you from the condition of the limb as we have said until when the fracture is necessary and the flesh near healing.
Then also, at that time, increase the tightness more than your first tightening, and also increase the thickness of the patient's food as mentioned before, if you see that the fracture site has dried up and loosened more than necessary, know that food is prevented from reaching it.
So let him bathe it in lukewarm water at every time he attends to it and let that be every three days, and slacken the bandage a little for with this act nourishment flows to the member and it heals quickly, as for what ignoramuses do of those who force (the broken) member again.
For if it is not set properly at first and then forced into a crooked shape, that is an error from them and a great evil. And even if it were correct, the ancients would have mentioned it in their books and practiced it, but I have not seen any trace of that from any of them at all. And the right thing is to not do it.
Chapter Two.
In fractures that occur in the head.
The types of fractures that occur in the head are many and their shapes are diverse and their causes are varied, for some fracture is from a sword blow and it may be that the bone breaks completely until it reaches the peritoneum which is under the bone. Just as the carpenter does in wood.
And for this reason this type of fracture is called 'carpenter-like', and it may be that the sword cuts some of the bone and breaks its surface only and does not penetrate to the end of it, and this type of fracture is called a 'loose fracture', and the wound of these two fractures is either large or small.
And from fractures some are crushing or bruises and their cause is a blow with a stone or a fall on a stone or something similar, and this fracture may be penetrating having nearly reached the membrane under the bone, or it may be in the surface of the bone.
And the wound of these two fractures is also either large or small, and from fractures some are hidden in the bone to a thinness like hair which is a slight crack.
And for this reason this type of fracture is called 'hair-like', and from it, there is a fracture that occurs from a fall or the throw of a stone and similar things that enter the page of the bone inside and make the place concave like what happens to a piece of copper if it is hit by a blow and part of it enters inside.
Most of these fractures occur in the soft skull bones, such as those of infants. All these types of fracture may have clean and un-clean fragments. And I will mention their treatment in its place, and we recognize all these types of fractures by examining them.
And examining them with probes and extracting any rotten flesh from them. As for the hairline fracture, it is known that by exposing the bone and wiping it and then rubbing black lead on it, the fracture appears black.  As for the treatment of a fracture, one must first look at the symptoms of the patient.
If you see from his symptoms what clearly indicates fear, such as vomiting bile and expansion and loss of mind and cessation of voice and fainting and severe fever and protrusion and redness of the eyes and similar symptoms, do not approach the sick person nor treat him, for death is inevitable to him in most cases with these symptoms.
But if you see symptoms that do not frighten you and you hope for his recovery, then take him in hand to treat him, because if the injured person comes to you at the very beginning of his injury and that was during winter.
then it is necessary to exert yourself in removing the bone before the fourteenth day, at all events. And if it was during summer, it is necessary to hasten in removing the bone before the seventh day, before what is under the bone of the membrane spoils and exposes those symptoms that we described.
If the fracture of the bone reached the membrane covering the brain and was accompanied by crushing and bruising, then it is necessary to cut off the crushed part as I describe it to you, which is to shave the head of the wounded patient.
And expose the bone in any way you are able, according to the shape of the wound and what is hidden from the patient, if when examining the bone you find bleeding or a warm swelling, then respond to that as necessary.
This is done by stuffing the site with a piece of linen soaked in syrup and rose oil, and cleaning the wound until the swelling subsides and bleeding stops, then taking to setting the bone and removing it which is done in two ways.
As for one way, it is to cut the bone with a sharp blade of fine width and its image is: .
Then you use another cutting tool after this one, wider than it slightly, and its image is:
Then you also use another cutting tool, wider than the second one, and it is necessary for you to have several different cutters, some wider than others and some shorter than others, and their edges should be extremely sharp, and they should be made of Indian steel or good steel.
And use the handle to strike on the cutter so that it does not shake the head and harm it, and if the bone is strong and solid, then it is necessary to drill around it before using the cutters with holes called non-closed holes, rather than closed ones.
Because they do not exceed the limit of the skull bone to what is beyond it, because the drill has a circular shape below its sharp head similar to a collar or small circle that prevents it from diving and exceeding the thickness of the bone.
And it is necessary for you to take several of these holes, each suitable for the thickness of that bone, until it prepares for every skull a sharpened tip in length and shortness according to the thickness of that skull, and this is an image of three types. Of the drills large, medium, and small:
And as for the way to drill around the broken bone, it is to place the drill on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you feel that the bone has been penetrated, then move the drill to another location and make a distance between each hole equal to the thickness of a thread or similar.
Then cut between each pair of holes with the utmost care as we have said until you remove the bone either with your hand or with something else from among the instruments you have prepared for this purpose.
Like the awl and the blunt probes, and it is necessary that you exercise all caution that the hole or cut does not touch anything of the peritoneum. And if the bone is strengthened and separated from the peritoneum if it was stuck to it, and you have removed it, then it is necessary that you strip it.
And make smooth the roughness that remains in the bone with another instrument similar to the cutter except that it should be more delicate and gentler than all the other cutters, and if anything of the small bones and fragments remain take them gently with what you have of instruments.
Then treat the wound after that with the poultices and ointments mentioned, and as for the other face of the work it is a face easy to understand, far from ambiguity, which Galen mentioned and praised highly, this is his saying. It is necessary for you first to begin by exposing the part of the bone from the location where the fracture is most severe and well-known until, when you have exposed that part, you place the tip of this cutting tool under it and this is its image:
The blunt part of it is smooth, not cutting anything and the sharp part of it on its sides going in length as you see so that the blunt part rests against the peritoneum and the face of the sharp part on the bone, then strike the cutter from one side.
With a small mallet until you cut all the bone gently as it rotates and while you are safe from the membrane, no frightening incident occurs at all even if the surgeon is the most ignorant and coward of people, yes even if he was asleep.
If anything of the membrane is left attached to the bone in some locations of the bone, scrape it off with the blunt end of the cutter itself and remove it gently for it comes off without harm or fear.
As for a fracture of the bone that has not penetrated the membrane and the portion that was severed from the bone is its surface, and there remains roughness and fragments, it is necessary to remove that roughness and pull out those fragments with tweezers made of different sizes so you can use them in every place appropriately and best according to what guides you.
And for the same broken bone and its shape, it is necessary that in removing its roughness you first use the broadest tweezers, then after that one finer than it, and continue doing so until you reach using the finest and most delicate of them all.
As for the rest of the small cracks, fine fissures, and slight fractures, it is necessary to use a treatment for each one according to what leads to its healing. This is something that is not hidden from anyone who has even the slightest skill in this craft and who has paid attention to what we have written and explained about major fractures.
If the membrane remains exposed when you remove the bone, it is necessary to take a cotton swab equal in size to the wound and immerse it in rose oil and place it on the mouth of the wound, then take another folded or tripled cotton swab. And immerse it in syrup and rose oil and place it on the first swab, and do this as lightly as you can so as not to burden the peritoneum, then apply a wide bandage over it and do not tighten it except to the extent that it only holds the wound.
And let it remain with this treatment for one or two days until you are certain of the hot swelling, then remove the bandage and use after that the medicines that come with it such as dried lilies, ground caraway seeds, finely ground coriander, and saffron, and the like - which is to make a plaster from these medicines.
And apply to the wound a dry plaster made with them, and in general, use a medicine that is cleansing and not irritating.  Be careful when treating the wound that it is clean, free of grease, dirt, and do not allow pus to accumulate in it at all.
For if pus collects on the membrane of the brain, it will damage and corrupt it; this will cause great harm to the sick person, and it may occur in the cavity of the skull when the bone is exposed, especially if treatment is neglected.
If you look at the surface and see blackness, if it presents the symptoms we mentioned, know that he is inevitably doomed. If the blackness happened because of a medicine applied to it, and that medicine was potent enough to cause that blackness.
It is necessary to take from the honey a part and from rose oil three parts, beat them well together, and smear with it a cloth and then place it on the cavity of the skull and treat him with all kinds of treatment until he heals.
Chapter Three.
In setting a broken nose.
Know that the nose does not break except the upper part of it, all or one of them, because they are bone; as for the lower part of it, it is cartilaginous and does not break but it may be injured, bent and broken.
If one of the parts breaks, it is necessary to insert your little finger into the nostril and straighten that fracture from inside with your index finger and thumb from outside until you return the nose to its natural shape. Let this be done gently by you and take care that what you do does not cause pain to the sick person.
If the fracture is at the top of the nose and the finger cannot reach it, it must be straightened with a blunt instrument wrapped in a cloth; if the fracture is on both sides, do the same thing. He should hasten to set it on the first day of the fracture.
If it is possible, otherwise after the seventh or tenth day when the hot swelling subsides, then insert a wick of cotton thread into the nostril if the fracture is on one side, or two wicks if the fracture is on both sides.
Let the size of the plug be as thick as that which fills the nasal hole, and some of the early proctors said that the plug should be moistened with butter and changed every day, but I do not see this, rather it is appropriate to moisten the plug in egg white mixed with ground barley dust.
Then the plug is left until the bone sets and the cartilage hardens, and a tube of goose feathers may be inserted into the nasal passage after it is wrapped in a fine linen cloth, so that the retention of the broken nose becomes stronger and lest the patient be unable to breathe.
And this is not something necessary, if you wish to make it and if you wish to make the plugs, if a warm swelling appears in the nose during your work, apply cold to the nose with quince or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil or something from the Diacylon ointment.
If no warm swelling appears, it is necessary to apply a compress from the outside with semolina and crushed coriander seeds, mixed with egg white, then put a soft bandage on it and do not tie the nose to anything at all, if the nasal bones are broken in a small fracture.
Or if it is fragmented, it is necessary to cut into it and remove it with the instrument suitable for it, then sew up the incision and treat it with ointments that promote healing and closure, if a wound occurs inside the nose, it must be treated with a plug and use lead pipes. Until it heals.
Chapter Four.
In setting a broken jaw.
If the lower jaw is broken and it is not broken with a wound, if its fracture is from the outside only and it does not break in two and protrudes inward, then knowing it is easy.
Then, if the fracture is in the right section, it is necessary to insert the index finger of the left hand into the mouth of the patient and likewise if the fracture is in the left section, insert the index finger of the right hand and raise the bump of the fracture from inside gently outward.
Your other hand, from outside the bone, governs its straightening. If the fracture of the jaw has split into two, it is necessary to use a splint on both sides until it can be straightened. If there has been growth in the teeth.
Or if it has separated, tighten what you desired from it to remain with gold or silver thread or a bristle, then place on the fractured jawbone a splint, and put on top of the splint a folded cloth, and put on top of the cloth a large tight bandage or a piece of leather sole equal in length to the jaw. Then tie it from above according to what seems fit for you to tie it and agrees with its joining so that it does not break, and order the patient to rest and silence, and make his food smooth porridge. If you think that something has changed in the shape in any way, then take care of it on the third day.
Then tie it from above according to what seems fit for you to tie it and agrees with its joining so that it does not break, and order the patient to rest and silence, and make his food smooth porridge. If you think that something has changed in the shape in any way, then take care of it on the third day. Then repair what he has compressed with mill dust and egg white or semolina flour after removing the splint from him, and put on the bandage a soft pad. As long as that bandage adheres to it and the bone has not changed its state, leave it.
Do not remove it until it heals and the fracture strengthens, for often this fracture strengthens in three weeks. If a hot swelling appears during that time, use what we have mentioned repeatedly to soothe it until the swelling goes away.
As for if the fracture is with a wound that you have seen, if a piece of bone or pieces have been exposed, be gentle in removing those splinters according to what is suitable for you to remove them with the instrument. If the mouth of the wound is narrow, widen it with the scalpel to the extent you need.
Then, after removing those splinters and nothing remains of them, mark the mouth of the wound if it is wide, otherwise, apply one of the ointments that are suitable for it. Cover the wound until it heals.
The fifth chapter.
In setting a broken collarbone.
The collarbone is most often broken from the front at the end of the shoulder, and it breaks in one of three ways: either it breaks and shatters into two pieces without splintering, which is the easiest to set.
Or that splinters are formed in the fracture, which is more difficult to set, or that the fracture occurs with a wound.  If the fracture is without a wound, then two assistants should be brought: one to hold the arm following the broken collarbone and the other to stretch the neck towards the opposite side.
Then set the fracture with your fingers until it takes on the proper shape and has no bumps or irregularities. If you need to extend it more, then place a ball of cloth or wool under the armpit of the afflicted person.
It should be positioned according to your need, extending and lifting the collarbone, and pressing the ball with your hand until the fracture is set properly. If you cannot pull the end of the collarbone outwards because it has sunk deep, then the afflicted person should lie on their back.
A medium pillow should be placed under their shoulder and an assistant should press down on their shoulder until the deeply embedded portion of the collarbone rises upwards. Then, correct the fracture and set it with your fingers.
If you feel that a splinter of the collarbone has broken off and is moving, then it should be incised and that splinter should be gently removed. If the splinter is lodged in the bone, try to cut it out with one of the instruments prepared for this purpose. After the instrument reaches below the collarbone, the instrument which preserves the peritoneum appears; it is an instrument of wood or iron and this is its shape.
It resembles a spoon without any carving and its width is according to what you need from the size of the bone, large or small. As for its length, it is also according to what you can do for work, and let it be two-sided as you see, one side wider and the other narrower.
If the wound which you made when extracting a piece of bone is wide and the hot tumor has been secured, bring together the edges of the wound with sutures. And if the opening is slight or you fear the hot tumor, close the wound with the rent and the rough materials according to the size of the cut.
If a hot tumor is present, moisten the rent with rosewater and vinegar or drink and put it on. As for tightening the bone if it is without a wound or cut, apply a compress made from flour dust mixed with egg white on the bone. And put the soft bandage on it, then put a ball under his armpit if necessary, then take a long turban whose width is an inch or so, then place a folded strip of cloth on the bandage and the compress, then take a splint from thin board. Its width is three fingers and so is its length, then insert it into a cloth bag, then insert that cloth bag with the splint into the place in the turban which is located on the site of the fracture, then tighten the turban on the fracture as you go around. And wrap it around his neck and under his healthy armpit and under the patient's armpit and turn it back and forth on each side, as you saw that the tightening holds the fracture tightly, which is not hidden from you.
And the whole point is that the splint does not come off the broken bone. Therefore, it is necessary to check the patient every day, and whenever you see the bandage relax and the splint has shifted, fix it and tighten the bandage. Then, make the patient sleep on his back and place a small pillow under his armpit when he sleeps at night.
So that his shoulder may be raised from his side and the fracture of the collarbone rise with the elevation of the shoulder, or bind his arm to his neck, and do not remove the bandage unless an accident occurs in the place of a boil or tumor for twelve days.
Then renew the dressing if you see reason for it. It returns to its state of tension and leave it until the fracture of the collarbone is set and becomes united, and intensifies and strengthens more during twenty-eight days. And perhaps in some people, it may be less than that.
The Sixth Chapter.
In setting a fracture of the shoulder.  It rarely breaks in the wide place, but rather its parts break. And when it breaks either from a position or in the middle, and this is known by touch. Then according to the shape of the fracture, set it.
Make it straight and return it to its natural shape as much as you can, then place on the place a powder of flour mixed with egg white and fine linen, put over it a piece of folded cloth, and place on top a wide bandage from wood.
Thin to the extent of the whole shoulder or slightly wider, and if there is a swelling under the bandage in one of the places of the shoulder, then straighten that swelling with fine linen until the bandage lies flat, then tie over it a long turban.
Tighten firmly and make sure of the bandage so that it does not move from its place, and inspect the bandage every day, for whenever the bandage relaxes, tighten it and straighten the bandage if it moves from its place, let the patient lie on his right side, and the shoulder will be set in twenty.
Days or twenty-five days, and if this count is completed, remove the bandage, and you are safe because it is one of the bones that does not fear its breaking or displacement, If a piece of bone protruded and was embedded under the skin, then cut it and remove it. Make what has been mentioned in the fracture of the collarbone for the treatment of the hot swelling, if anything of that happens.
Chapter Seven.
In setting a broken rib cage.
The chest may break in its middle, and this rarely occurs, but its edges are more likely to fracture and be shattered. As for its symptoms if it breaks in the middle, it leans downwards and is exposed to severe pain and shortness of breath and coughing.
And perhaps blood comes out, and the depression in the broken bone becomes apparent, not hidden to the touch. And its treatment is that the patient lies on his back and a cushion is placed between his shoulders, then his arms are pressed together and the ribs are gathered with the hands from both sides, and care is taken to straighten it on every side as much as possible.
And he continues until the bone returns to its proper shape, then a bandage is placed on it and a splint is put over it from a thin board of poplar or cypress or the like in light weight after wrapping it in cloth. And care is taken to tie it tightly on the broken bone so that it does not move, and the bandage is passed over to the back several times and tightened firmly, then the bandage is inspected at all times, and whenever it relaxes, it is tightened.
And if necessity demands to loosen it when a swelling appears in the place or pain or a tumor, then hasten to loosen it and remove the bandage and correct what has appeared from that by its treatment, then return the bandage if you see fit for that. And face and keep it tied until it heals.
Chapter Eight.
In setting a broken rib, know that the fracture occurs in the ribs in the thick places that follow the back and their edges from the front are exposed to harm because they are cartilaginous, and this is not hidden to the touch when examined with the fingers.
He sets it by bringing the fracture together with his fingers on the best-arranged side until the shape is equal to what is right and then he bandaged it and tightens the broken bone with a splint if need be. If the rib is fractured at an angle towards the inside, it causes the patient intense pain.
And a broken rib, as with the one exposed by a wound, because the bone pierces the diaphragm and also causes him difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood, this is hard to treat, and the ancients have devised many tricks for it.
Some of them said that it is necessary to make the food of the sick person what produces wind and air so that the belly inflates and expands and the fracture is driven outwards. We hate this lest it be a cause for the occurrence of inflammation if it has not occurred, and if it has occurred, then it increases in it and confirms it.
And some of them said that a poultice is placed on the place and then it is sucked forcefully, which is most like the method except that he fears that the poultice will be drawn excessively to the place due to its weakness, and some of them said it is necessary to cover the place with wool soaked in hot oil.
And it is made a cushion between the ribs until it fills, so that the band is flat if it is wrapped on a turn, and then the patient is treated with the treatment of the wound from food and medicine, if the patients condition is severe and unbearable. And the bone piercing the diaphragm was a painful breach, and we feared for the patient, so it is necessary to cut on the place and expose the broken rib, then we make under it the instrument that preserves the peritoneum which I have described before, and we cut the bone gently and remove it.
Then we gather the edges of the wound if it is large by stitching and treat it with ointments until it heals, if a hot tumor appears during that time, then hurry up and apply a poultice in rose butter on the place, and treat the patient with what soothes the tumor from inside also.
And he lies on his side which is lighter to him until he heals.
The Ninth Chapter.
In the setting of a fracture of the spine and neck.
But as for the bones of the neck if they are broken, which rarely happens to them and most often it is a contusion, and also the vertebrae of the back, also, if this happens to one of them and you want to know whether it heals or not. Look, then, and if you see that his hands have become stretched out and numbed and died, and he is not able to move them or stretch them or grasp them, and if you prick them or touch them with a needle, he does not feel it, nor does he find pain in them, know that it does not heal in most cases, for it is gone.
And if he moves them and feels them when pricked or touched, know that the marrow of the bone is safe, and that the patient will heal with treatment. If the fracture of the back occurs like this, and you want to learn whether it heals also or not.
Look at his legs, and if you see that they have become stretched out and what happened in the hands has happened to them, then if he lies on his back, air and feces come out without will, and if he lies on his stomach, urine comes out without will. And if he lies on his back and wants to urinate, he cannot do so, know that he is gone, and do not bother with his treatment. If none of this happens to him, the matter is less severe, and the treatment for what happened is to try to soothe the hot swelling.
By putting on the affected vertebra rose oil alone, or with roasted egg yolks, place it three times a day until the hot swelling subsides, then apply one of the strong, absorbent bandages to the spot and tighten it with a bandage, and order him to rest and be still.
He shall not sleep except on the side which does not cause him pain until he is healed. If a splinter or something else which has been broken off from the bone occurred at the time of injury, it is necessary to cut the skin and extract that bone. Then the edges of the wound are stitched together if it is large, and then treated with ointments until healed. If the last bone of the coccyx, which is the tailbone, is broken, it is necessary to insert the thumb of the left hand into the cavity.
And the broken bone is smoothed with the other hand as much as possible and as it can be straightened, then a bandage and splint are placed on it if necessary, and then tightened.
If you feel a splinter broken inside it, cut it open and remove it, and treat the wound with the treatment mentioned above until healed.
The Tenth Chapter.
In Setting a Broken Hip.
It is rare for the hip bones to break, but if they do break, it happens that the edges of the bone splinter and crack lengthwise and tilt inward, and this causes pain in the place, numbness, and paralysis of the leg on the side where the fracture occurred.
And to set it, you must pass your hand over it until you feel the fracture and see its shape. If the break is only at the edges, smooth that break according to what appears to you in straightening it until it resembles its natural shape.
If the break is lengthwise or if it has tilted inward, place the patient on his stomach until you are able to set the fracture. When you have straightened it, apply a bandage and then put a splint of wood or leather on top of it and tighten it firmly.
Do not fear for him that the fracture will shift or that the splint will come loose, and smooth out any bumps in the wraps until they fill it up until the tension takes hold on evenness.  Command the patient to sleep on his back or on his sound side; if he develops a hot swelling.
Release it and allow it to heal until the hot swelling subsides, then apply what soothes it as previously mentioned, then return to its dressing and tightening as appropriate. If splinters or fragments from its edges appear in the bone, it should not be removed.
Do not touch it but smooth it externally as we have said, and leave its tightening until it heals.
The Eleventh Chapter.
In setting a fractured humerus.
The humerus is that between the elbow and the shoulder, so if it breaks, set it on one of two sides: one being to take a rigid, smooth, medium-thickness splint like this image: .
And tie it at its ends with two cords, then hang it from a raised position and have the patient sit on a chair, then place his broken arm on the splint until his armpit adheres to the middle of the curve of the splint, then suspend something heavy above it.
Or, have a servant extend it downwards, then the physician smooths the fracture with his hands along with it until the fracture returns to what is appropriate, and the other side:  the patient lies on his back, and his hand hangs from his neck with a cord.
Then order two servants: one to hold above the fracture with his hands, and the other below it, extending each one in his direction, and if you want the extension to be stronger, tighten below the fracture with a cord and above it with a cord, and have each servant extend them in their direction.
So if the fracture is near the shoulder end, it is necessary that the middle of the cord be under the armpit and the other under the fracture toward the elbow, and similarly if the fracture is near the elbow, it is necessary that the cord be placed in that location and on the elbow itself.
Then the fracture is set gently without force until the fracture becomes level as it should and unites well, then it is bandaged if there is no hot swelling. If a hot swelling appears, leave off bandaging until the seventh day and place upon it a poultice moistened with vinegar and rose oil.
Until the swelling subsides, then bandage it. The method of bandaging is to place the bandage on the fracture, then place a new linen band over the bandage, then gather the arm on its own shoulder and place her hand open on her knee.
And carry the linen and bandage on the shoulder and arm so that the arm takes the place of splints if nothing prevents you from doing so, and nothing has changed in the broken bone. If you fear that something will change, then use splints.
And this is to place on the fracture itself a splint that is wider and stronger than all other splints, and let there be between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with an increase of three fingers from each side.
Then bandage the splints with the bandaging mentioned at the beginning of the treatise.
And this is that your bandaging on the site of the fracture be tighter.
And every time after the fracture, the bandaging is looser. If you see the placement of the splints and bandaging as we said at the time of your mending of the limb from that hour, then do so.
And if you fear the hot swelling, leave off the bandaging and splints until the seventh day as we have said, then inspect the bandage every three days so that no roughness or puffing occurs in the site, or the food is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive bandaging, then correct all of this as we have mentioned.
If you are confident that nothing of that sort will happen, then do not remove the bandage until after many days, and the patient should lie on his back with his hand on his stomach, and a cushion filled with wool should be placed under his shoulder.
Keep a watch at all times, day or night, so that the broken limb does not lose its shape or relax the ligament; repair it all with your effort. Make the food of the patient according to the order we have presented, so that the food is gentle first until the bone begins to harden.
When it is necessary to thicken his food, for the habit of the arm and leg is to harden in forty days; then he should bathe and be treated with ointments that are suitable for this, if the fracture is a gaping one that is festering.
Do not remove the splint from him until fifty days or two months.
The twelfth chapter.
In setting a fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones and they are called the radius; one is small, which is the one following the thumb, and the other is large, which is located below the small one from below; perhaps the larger radius broke alone or the smaller one alone, and perhaps they both broke.
When the smaller radius above breaks, its mending is easier and its recovery faster; when the lower radius breaks, it was a bad fracture and its mending difficult and slower. And if both bones broke together, then if the bone that broke was the smaller radius above.
Then it is necessary for the physician, when mending it, to make its length easy and gently until he makes it straight; if the larger radius was broken, then it is necessary for him to make its length stronger. And if both radii were broken, then it is necessary for him to make the splint very strong.
It is necessary to place the shape of the hand when mending it and its length stretched out on a cushion, and the thumb of the hand should be above all the fingers, and the little finger below all the fingers, and the patient sitting upright on himself.
Let the pillow be at his side in height so that the patient does not labor with difficulty.
Then a servant extends the arm from below, either with his hand or with a bandage, and another servant extends it from above as well, then the physician sets the bone until he returns it to the best possible shape, if there are fragments of bone in the fracture, they are set.
Return every fragment to its place with all your effort, if a protruding fragment appears which is piercing the skin and you have no desire to force it, then cut through it and remove it in the manner mentioned previously, if the fracture was accompanied by a wound, a separate chapter has been allocated for it.
Then take its treatment from there, if a hot swelling appears in the first setting of the bone, apply a poultice made with qaytar, scented with rose oil and white wax, let it be medium between thick and thin and tighten the poultice on it gently until the swelling subsides.
Then remove the qaytar and place the prepared bandage from ground chalk with egg white, then carry the splints and let the splint placed on the fracture itself be slightly wider and stronger, and know that in most cases the number of arm splints will be six.
Whether the fracture was in one forearm or in both, then make your tightening on the site of the fracture stronger and tighter, and as you tighten upwards or downwards, make the tightening slightly looser, as mentioned previously at the beginning of the chapter.
Let the poultice that wraps around the fracture be a soft, moist one and not too hard, let the thread used to tighten it be from special cotton, medium between thin and thick as we described, and inspect the limb and the bandage after a few days.
If something happens that needs to be fixed, such as an irritation that occurs in the limb, it is necessary for the limb to be bathed with warm water until the irritation subsides, and the limb is left untightened at night until it rests, then tightening is resumed.
If the tension has relaxed and the bone has set, or something similar, then repair it to the best of your ability. Also look, if food is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive tension, it is necessary to relax it a little and leave it for days until nourishment reaches it, then tighten it again.
If the patient does not experience any of what we have mentioned, then he should not be released until after twenty days or so. Then, suspend the patient's hand to his neck and let his arm be moderately extended. He should avoid strenuous movements and sleep on his back.
Know that this fracture of the arm heals in thirty days or in thirty-two, and perhaps in twenty-eight, all depending on the patient's constitution and strength.
Chapter Thirteen.
On Setting a Fracture of the Hand and Fingers.
The metacarpals of the hand and phalanges of the fingers rarely fracture, but they often experience contusion. So, when a fracture or contusion occurs in the hand...
...it is necessary for the patient to sit upright with a stool in front of him at an even height.
Then he places his hand on it, extended, and the bone servant stretches the broken bone and sets it straight until when it is joined well, then it is necessary to apply a bandage and splint if there is no hot swelling, then carry a plaster from above according to the place.
And I have included it in a soft cloth, if the fracture is downward toward the palm of the hand then make a shape like a ball from cloth and order the patient to grasp it with his broken hand then tighten it with a long cloth.
And let the plaster be from leather that is soft so that it touches the skin with the bending of all the hand and tighten it as necessary, if the fracture is outward then it is necessary to make a plaster above and another plaster below in the palm so that the hand remains open and standing.
Then he holds the tension as the hand turns and interlaces the fingers with the bandage, and if the fracture is to one of the phalanges of the fingers, if it is the thumb, let him make it smooth as befits then he tightens with the hand, and if you wish, make for him a small standing splint to set the fracture.
And it does not move, and if the fracture is to the rest of the fingers like the middle finger or the index finger or the ring finger or the little finger, let him make it smooth and bind it with the following healthy finger, or bind them all on allegiance, this is better, or place a small standing splint on them.
As we said in the thumb, and inspect while binding it, and after it from the hot swelling, oppose it with what is fitting when something of that happens, as what was repeated its description.
Chapter Fourteen.
In Setting a Fracture of the Femur.
The femur often breaks and it is felt because it moves forward and backward, and its setting is done by tightening a bandage above the fracture and another below the fracture, and the patient lies on his face.
Then he stretches each bandage servant to its side on moderation, this is if the fracture is in the middle of the bone, and as for if it is near the root of the femur, it is necessary that you tighten a soft bandage, either from wool or the like.
Near the groin so that the stretching falls above and the other bandage below the fracture, as well as if the fracture is near the knee, let the bandage be near the knee so that the stretching falls below, then the physician smooths the bone with both hands until he returns it to the example of the natural shape.
And the bone comes together well, then it is necessary to hold the bandage and tension if nothing happened to the limb, a hot swelling, if it happened to him, leave it for days until the hot swelling subsides then return to his treatment.
As for stretching it, it is necessary to wind a wide, stiff bandage around the fracture two or three times and leave what remains. Then the leg is stretched until the heel reaches the base of the thigh, and a long thread is inserted between the femur and tibia near the knee from below, and the ends of the thread are made above on both sides.
Then the remaining bandage is wound around the leg and thigh, then a splint is placed on the thigh in the same place as the fracture, and one splint is made on the tibia. Then the gap between the femur and tibia is filled with soft padding so that the tension is even.
Then begin pulling strongly from the middle at the site of the fracture three or four times, and as you move the bandage away from the fracture site, make your pull less and softer and looser.
Then go to the ends of the thread you inserted between the femur and tibia and tie them to the remaining splint from above, then pass the ends of the thread down until they reach the ankle, and pull on them also to tighten the edges of the splints on the other side.
So that the bandage does not come loose from its place, then leave the tension on it as long as the limb does not report pain or swelling or any such thing. If anything of that sort happens, act quickly to fix it and repair whatever has happened, as we have mentioned repeatedly.
If there is a fragment of bone, it is necessary to smooth it if you can, otherwise cut through it and remove it, and treat the wound with what has been mentioned previously until it heals. This fracture may be stretched from the femur without adding the leg with splints.
As we mentioned in the arm and shoulder, except that healing it this way does not expose the patient to limping. And if it is set alone without joining the leg to it, then the owner will inevitably limp always.
Know that the thigh strengthens in fifty days or a little more or a little less, all of that according to the difference in temperaments and other conditions.
The fifteenth chapter.
In the fracture of the kneecap.
The kneecap rarely suffers a fracture, but it often experiences contusions. If it fractures, it is either a split or broken into pieces, with or without a wound.
And you rely on this all by feeling, and set it by straightening what is scattered of its parts with your fingers until they come together and conform according to what the setting allows, gentleness, and perfection, then place the dressing and put a circular splint on top of it if that is needed.
And tighten the tension above that which corresponds to it, then take care of all the circumstances that we described in other fractures like the hot swelling and so forth by meeting each occurrence with what suits it until it heals.
The sixteenth chapter.
In setting the fracture of the leg.
The leg has two bones, one thick and called the femur, and the other thin and called the tibia. Both are subject to the types of fractures that occur in the arm bones. Therefore, its setting is like the setting of the arm, and the procedure is one and the same. If both bones fracture, the leg turns in all directions. If the thinner bone fractures, the leg turns forward. If the thicker bone fractures, especially from below, this should be clear to you.
So use the application of pressure and setting, and binding the splints accordingly, all except that if a leg fracture is a very bad fracture with many fragments, then the pressure should be less and lighter, and you should be gentle in its setting.
And in the leg, there is something extra from the arm's work: When you have finished setting the splints and all your work, take two strips of pine wood that are used for smoothing the rooms between the cracks of the boards or are made from palm fronds or similar.
Choose from them what has a little thickness and is not thin, and let its length be on the length of the leg from the knee down, then wrap around each one two layers of cloth along its length, placing one on the leg and the other on the opposite side.
And let it be from the knee to the bottom of the foot, then tie the two fasces in three places from the ends and the middle, for with this bridle the leg prevents leaning right and left, and is well tightened, and a gutter of wood may be used along the leg.
And it is placed in it to preserve it from movement, and most of the time it is necessary to do this in a fracture if it is accompanied by a special wound, then inspect the leg every day and pay great attention to it for swelling or puffiness or anything else. Then when something of that happens, meet it with what is appropriate until it heals, and the bone of the leg sets in about thirty days or so.
The seventeenth chapter.
In a fracture of the bones of the leg and fingers.
As for the heel, it does not expose to a fracture of the bone, but as for the bones of the leg, they may be exposed to a fracture, and the fingers also rarely experience a fracture, but rather injury in most cases.
So if a fracture of the leg bones occurred and you saw that some of those bones protruded over each other, let the patient put his foot on the ground upright like walking, then you place your foot on what rose from those bones and press it down and level it.
Until it returns to its places, then carry the bandage and splint from above, and put under the sole of the foot a small board with two flat heads, then tighten the foot tightly after wrapping it with cloth and everything else you need.
If three or four days have passed, release the bandage, and you will find that the bones are level, whether they were broken or dislocated, so act as you see fit. As for if some of the fingers are broken, force them and level them according to what I described to you for setting the fingers of the hand.
Then make a splint for the broken finger, along the length of the finger and let it be slightly narrower than it. Then place under this foot the board which I described to you and tighten it firmly. If what broke was two or three or more bones
Make on each finger a splint the width of a  strip in soft cloth and tighten the board at the bottom of the foot, let each head of the heads of the board be outside the belly of the foot to hold it well.
And you should not forget to take heed of all that we have mentioned to you in all fractures from the conditions which we have mentioned and meet each condition with what is necessary.
Chapter Eighteen.
In the fracture of a woman's pubis bone and the man's.
When the woman's pubis bone is fractured, have her sit upright then slightly bend her back and hold her from behind and the midwife packs her vagina with cotton until it fills it and becomes in her vagina like a ball.
Then the woman is shaken and her pelvis is raised slightly, then that cotton comes out until it becomes at the entrance of the vagina like a ball and the bone fracture returns. Then she lays a cushion on her back, and when she wants to urinate, she removes the cotton gently until she urinates.
And it is returned in the way it was first inserted, then she returns to her cushion. Do this for seven days or so, as it will heal. If you wish to take a sheep's bladder, tighten its mouth with a short tube and insert the whole bladder into her vagina.
Then inflate the tube with force until the bladder inflates inside the vagina, as the fracture returns. Then pack it with cotton and stay on what we have described for days until it heals. As for when the pubic bone of a man or woman is fractured, it is used in its healing.
Its treatment is as we have described for the hip bone, and it is not hidden from you that what is right in these strange fractures which rarely occur, especially for those who have some experience and understand this book well, because the fracture itself indicates to you in most cases.
On the right path in its healing and stretching, so understand.  But as for the case of a man if his thigh bone fractures at the hip joint, he puts a poultice into it, then places a bandage of linen on top, and binds it, leaving it for three days or thereabouts until it heals.
The Nineteenth Chapter.
In setting fractures of the bones if they are with a wound.
It is necessary for one who presents with a fracture along with a wound, and especially if the bone is large like the femur or humerus or similar, to act quickly and separate it from its time if the conditions of trepanation have aided you as we presented previously.
If the wound is bleeding, it is necessary to act quickly and cut it by applying powdered saffron to it; if nothing else is available, then take to setting the fracture on that very day and do not delay it.
If a hot tumor does not occur, if a hot tumor occurs, leave its setting until the ninth day until the hot tumor subsides and do not approach it at all on the third and fourth days because it is exposed to bad symptoms.
If the broken bone is exposed to the skin, it is necessary that you gently push it back and set it with your hands with a slight stretch, and if you cannot push it back and set it with your hands, then set it with this instrument which is made of iron, seven or eight finger lengths long. And expose it to the extent of the wound.
And therefore, it is necessary for the physician to take three or four of them, according to what he needs for treatment in each type of fracture, and let them be round with a slight thickness so that they do not bend when pressed upon them during work.
It is sharply pointed at its end and has a bend at its tip, with its upper part being thicker and from half of it downwards becoming very thin. This is its image.
It is called in Greek "perim," they want a small awl, so it should be that its sharp point which is bent, should be on the end of the bone coming out and push it with it once until when the bone returns and becomes some level then set the ends of the fracture to each other.
If the broken end is slender and the instrument did not grasp it well, then it is necessary to cut the end of that bone until the instrument can take hold of it, if it could not return the bone as we described at all, then cut it with pieces similar to those we mentioned.
Or spread it with one of the saws as much as you can, then remove what remains in the bone of roughness and thin peels, if you returned the bone and found the injured person after its return severe and annoying pain, know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
If you were able to return it to its natural place, then do so because you benefit the injured person a great benefit, if you complete your bone setting, dip a cloth in a black astringent syrup especially if you are in summer and do not put on the wound a poultice or anything greasy in it.
Lest it becomes rotten and corrupt, then use splints while you are free from setting the bone and leave the wound uncovered by cutting with scissors in the bandages a hole according to the size of the wound.
And beware all caution that you tighten the wound with the fracture because many times ignorant physicians did that and they caused to their patients either death or gangrene or abscesses, let your tightening be lenient relaxed unlike the tightening of other fractures.
If the wound is bad or was a large wound and you feared on it some of the bad symptoms we described and he found pain in the place disturbing, then it is not necessary to put splints on it and make for him bandages from strong cloth in place of the splints and tighten them with it.
If it is after a day or two and you see the wound has begun to produce pus, remove the cloth that was placed on it with the drink, then use the poultices and ointments which we are accustomed to using for wounds, such as the four-part ointment and similar ones.  It is also necessary for you to apply a bandage.
And inspect the wound every day in the evening and morning until it closes and heals, and it is necessary to place the limb in a position so that pus can easily flow downwards. If the wound has passed many days and it has not closed or the pus has not stopped flowing, know that there are small bone splinters within it.
It is necessary to inspect the wound with a probe, and whatever of those splinters are clean, remove them and take them out. Whatever of them are not clean and are causing pain to the limb, then cut them and remove them as best you can.
If a cold, sore, or another type of corruption and ulceration appears in the wound, it is necessary to treat each one with its appropriate remedy as described in its chapter.
And of what it is necessary to pay attention to and keep in mind if a large bone breaks and the limb is bent like the femur, humerus and similar major limbs, do not attempt to pull it or remove it. For often, that exposes one to death. Leave it until it decays, and perhaps it will fall out on its own after twenty or thirty days.
Then treat the wound if you see a place for treatment, otherwise leave it.
Chapter Twenty.
On Treating the Complication That Occurs After Some Fractures.
This complication often occurs after the healing of a fracture, especially those near the joints. It makes the limb unsightly and may prevent it from performing its natural function.
If the abscess is soft, employ astringent medications such as frankincense, myrrh, aloes, and gum Arabic, or similar substances, by taking some or all of them and mixing them with a styptic liquid, egg white, or vinegar.
And carry it to the abscess in a compress and bind it tightly, keeping the pressure on for many days, then remove it and reapply another until the abscess disappears, God willing, or you can put a compact lead plate on top of it.
For lead has the property of dissolving everything within the body. If the abscess becomes hard, severe, and urgent to be removed, then cut into it from its top and remove the pus that comes out or clear it with some kind of tool until it goes away, then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-One.
In treating a fracture, if it sets and the limb remains soft after that, unlike its original nature.
If a bone breaks and the limb remains soft and weak afterward, it is due to many reasons. One of these reasons is either because of excessive loosening and improper tying of ligaments, or because of excessive tightening of the ligaments so that nourishment cannot reach the limb, or because of excessive rubbing, or excessive movement at the wrong time, or because of a deficiency of blood in the patient's body and his weakness.
And the treatment for this is to nourish the patient and enrich his body until his blood increases, and using baths and bringing him joy and happiness, and so on, then place a poultice on the limb to attract nourishment to it or keep it rubbing with warm water. Until nourishment flows in it and it returns to its natural form.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
In treating fractured bones if it is splinted crookedly and its function is restricted improperly.
When a member appears after healing to have deformity or outgrowth of the fractured bone or complexity and ugliness for that reason, a picture of the member is shown. Except that the limb did not prevent its natural function, it is not fitting to accept the saying of one who claims to break the limb from the top and many ignorant physicians and surgeons used to do this in our land.
And this act is highly blameworthy, it leads to great harm and deformity. But if the deformity and complexity are mild, then it should be treated with water that has been boiled with soft herbs such as rue, its root, crown imperial, and the like.
And it is bandaged with soft dressings such as diachylon well made, or the sap of rue is taken and beaten with chicken fat, sheep fat, and it is bandaged with it, or ripe figs are taken and pounded with pigeon droppings and similar medicines called anti-calcification.
And gradually the complexity is dissolved by continuous gentle massage with the hands and the movement of the limb in all directions at all times. If the deformity has become prominent, severe, hardened, and necessity calls for its treatment with iron.
Then it is necessary to cut above it and release the connection of the bone, and cut what remains of the deformity or bone with delicate cuts, and use gentleness and care in doing so, then treat the wound as mentioned before until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Three.
The jaw is the displacement of a joint from its place, so it hinders movement and disfigures the shape of the limb, and causes great pain and suffering to the patient. So when a case of dislocation of the jaw appears, it is necessary to immediately attend to its reduction.
Do not delay treating it, for if you do, the swelling of the place will increase and make it difficult to reset the jaw. Therefore, it is not advisable to delay treatment or move or stretch it while it is swollen because it often causes pain and severe discomfort in the patient.
But if this happens, it is necessary to quickly treat the patient with a bloodletting and then leave it until the swelling subsides a little, then massage the area with warm water and oil, and then gently reset it and treat each part according to what will be mentioned in its place.
I have also arranged the sections on the jaw according to what precedes in the fracture, from the upper part of the body to the lower.
The Twenty-Fourth Chapter.
On Treating the Lower Jawbone Fracture.
The separation of the jawbones occurs rarely except in a situation where it comes loose on either face, either slightly moving and relaxing somewhat or completely dislocating so that they are completely relaxed. It may be to the extent of the chest so that saliva flows from the patient and he cannot hold it back, nor can he withstand applying his jaw and mumbles when speaking.  However, if the dislocation is slight, it may return in most cases by itself with the easiest thing.
But if the dislocation is complete, it is necessary to immediately attend to its return and not delay it at all. This is done by a servant holding the patient's head and the physician inserting his thumb into the base of the jaw inside his mouth if the jaw is on one side.
Or both thumbs if the jaw is on both sides and the rest of his fingers from the outside adjusts them and orders the patient to relax his jaw and release it to go in all directions, and the physician adjusts the jaw and pushes the jaw until it returns to its place.
If it is difficult to return them, especially if all the bones are broken, use a compress with hot water and oil until they are easy to put back in place and do not delay their return at all as we have said.  When they return and settle and the patient's mouth closes and does not relax, then at that time place on them pads of cloth along with plugs made from wax and oil.
Then it is gently tied with a loose bandage, and the patient sleeps on his back with his head elevated between two pillows so that he does not move his limbs or try to chew anything but rather eats soft food.
Until the pain goes away and the jaw is united, let him eat what he wishes, and let him do so gently and not force his mouth open when eating, drinking, or yawning until the jaw heals completely.
If it is difficult to return the jaws if they have broken apart at some time and have not returned to their places, then often there are fevers and constant headaches and perhaps the patient's belly swells and he vomits repeatedly. If you see this, know that it is defective.
And many die from this within ten days.
Chapter Twenty-Five.
On Setting the Collarbone and Shoulder End.
As for the collarbone, it does not break from the inside due to its connection with the chest, but rather breaks outwards and this is apparent to the touch. To set it, the patient lies on his back and extends his arms.
Then you press the location with your hand, pressing forcefully, and it returns. Then a bandage and pads are placed on it and tightened. As for its end that is next to the shoulder and connected to it, this does not dislocate except rarely. If it dislocates one day, then it should be returned and set as mentioned before and as you deem appropriate.
Then you place upon it the dressing, the padding, and the tightening, and order the sick person to keep to rest and quiet until he heals, and with this treatment alone the dislocated shoulder is set back in its place as well.
The Twenty-Sixth Chapter.
On Setting a Dislocated Shoulder.
Know that the shoulder dislocates in three directions: one is a dislocation toward the armpit and downwards, the second is a dislocation towards the chest, and perhaps it dislocates upwards towards the upper shoulder, which is rare.
And it does not dislocate backwards towards the shoulder blade nor forwards towards the nerve, and most often it dislocates and exits downwards towards the armpit, especially in those whose flesh is scant because it exits quickly in them and enters quickly.
As for those whose flesh is abundant, it is the opposite, meaning that it exits with difficulty and enters with difficulty, and perhaps a blow or a fall occurs to some people, causing swelling of the shoulder and a hot abscess, so they think that it has dislocated, so one must examine it until you ascertain its health.
Then, when examining it, you progress in its treatment, and the dislocation is recognized if it is downwards towards the armpit; if you press between the dislocated shoulder and the healthy one, you find a visible difference, and you find the head of the shoulder twisted, and under the armpit upon touching the head of the shoulder as if it were an egg.
And the sick person is unable to raise his hand to his ear nor move it in all movements, and similarly if it dislocates towards the chest or upwards, you find that clearly visible upon touch, not concealed.
And this dislocation may be easily set if it is fresh or the sick person is a boy, and to set it, have a servant raise his hand upwards, then you place your thumbs under his armpit and lift the joint forcefully upwards to its place, and the servant raises his hand and stretches it upwards.
Then he cuts it downwards, for it returns quickly. If it does not return as we mentioned, and if the jaw has been fractured for many days, then it is necessary that the patient bathe in hot water and use a poultice which relaxes and softens like boiling the roots of  black cumin, aniseed, and crown imperial in water, and he should apply this.
Then the patient lies on his back and a ball of wool is placed under his armpit, which should be moderate between softness and firmness. Then the physician places his heel on the ball and grasps the patient's hand with his own and extends it downwards.
And he pushes the ball with his leg, for it returns to its place. If you wish, return it in this way: which is to bring a man taller than the patient and make him stand beside him from the side, and insert his knee under the armpit of the patient and raise his armpit upwards until the patient is suspended in the air. And another servant pulls the patient's hand downwards towards his belly. If the patient is light, it is necessary to hang something else from him to weigh him down, for it returns the jaw within an hour. It can also be returned in another way.
And this is by placing in the ground a long plank whose head is round like the pestle of a mortar, neither thick nor thin, and it is placed under the armpit of the patient after putting a soft cloth on top of the plank, and the patient stands on the length of the plank.
Then he extends his hand downwards from the other side, and he also extends his body from the other side with force, for the joint returns to its place quickly. If it is difficult to return it by all that has been mentioned, use this treatment: which is to take a plank about two arms long. And its width is the length of four fingers and its thickness is the length of two fingers, it should have a round head to make it easy to enter into the depth of the armpit in this way: .
Then a soft, flexible band is tied around the round head so as not to injure the sick person's wood. Then it is placed under the armpit and the whole hand and arm are extended onto the wood and downwards, and the wood is tied to the upper arm and forearm and hand.
Then the arm is placed on a beam. The body is supported across and the hand extended downwards, leaving the rest of the body hanging from the other side, because the joint enters in its time. When it has entered fully, in any way possible, then under the armpit a ball of moderate size of wool should be placed.
Then the prepared dressing of flour dust with frankincense and egg white is applied to the whole shoulder as it rotates above, then the ball under the armpit is pulled tightly and rotated on the dressing from above, and his hand is suspended up to his neck.
And he leaves his hand unmoved for seven days, and it is necessary to make the food of the sick person little until the limb strengthens, because this is faster for healing, then after seven days or five it is treated with movement. If it hardens and does not relax, it has healed.
If the joint frequently dislocates due to dampness or another ailment, it is necessary to use cauterization with the three types of cautery as previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization. If all this has been done and the bandage was removed after seven days and the joint did not set.
The dressing was reapplied and tightened several times, but it did not set and fell off, and relaxed, and could not be raised above. Know then that the nerve in the shoulder head has been severed or stretched or relaxed, know at that time that the joint will never stay in its place ever again.
As for the jaw which is near the chest and breast, and behind its individual part, it is treated by pushing and stretching with the hands until it returns, and all tightening and treatment are applied to it until it heals. If after healing, stiffness appears in the limb and movement is slower.
Let the sick person use the bath frequently until that joint softens and returns to its original nature.
The Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
In Treating a Dislocated Shoulder.
The shoulder joint is difficult to dislocate, and it is also difficult to reduce; it can be dislocated in all directions, especially forward or backward. Its dislocation is not hidden from you because it is visible under the eye and to the touch, no matter what shape it has been dislocated into.
And if you compare the dislocated shoulder with a healthy one, it becomes clear to you visually by examining its dislocation; the arm cannot be bent, nor can you touch his elbow with it. It is necessary that you act quickly and reduce the dislocation from the moment it happens before a hot tumor develops in it.
Because if it develops a hot tumor, its reduction becomes difficult and it may not heal at all, especially if the dislocation is backward; because it is the most difficult of all types of dislocations and the most painful, and often death accompanies it.
And if its cure is possible, that which can be reduced: let a servant extend his hand with both hands and the arm outstretched, and the physician's hand on top of the shoulder joint, from underneath it, and he pushes the joint with his thumbs or the base of his palm until it returns to its place.
As for if the dislocation is forward, it may be reduced by bending the hand once until it hits with the base of its palm the elbow which confronts it. If the dislocation does not return, then use strong and forceful pulling; that is, let two servants extend the arm.
And the sick person, too, shall be grasped by two servants so that it does not leave during the pulling; then the arm is turned in every direction after being wrapped on his hand with a folded cloth or a wide piece of fabric. And if the physician starts with his hands to massage the joint with oil, it will become easier for the joint to slip.
Then, he pushes the joint forcefully until it returns to its place. And after its return, a bandage containing compression and drying with egg white should be applied to it and tightened tightly. The arm is suspended from the neck of the patient and left for days.
Then, if the joint has set in its place, release the bandage from it and leave it. But if you see that the joint is not firmly fixed, reapply the bandage and splint and leave it for days until it becomes firm, then release it.  If a swelling occurs after the return of the joint and its release.
If movement is difficult, he should apply a warm bath and gentle massage and rubbing until it softens or place a thick layer of fat from a sheep on the joint, then bind it and leave it for a day and night, then remove it and take him to the bath. If he sweats, rub the joint with moderate friction.
Then, apply the fat again a second and third time with bathing until it softens. And if you wish to place a layer of moistened cow's dung with butter on it and bind it tightly, do so several times because it will soften and return to its original state.
The Twenty-Eighth Chapter.
In the Treatment of a Broken Wrist.
The wrist joint often breaks, and its repair is easier than other joints except that it should be quickly set the moment it breaks before a swelling occurs or a hot swelling develops in the area.
To set it, place the injured arm on a board and extend its hand. The physician places his palm on the top of the joint and pushes it until it returns, but he should examine to see if the fracture has moved inward towards the inside of the hand.
If the fracture has moved outward toward the outside of the hand, then the patient should place the palm of his hand on the board when extending and setting it. But if the fracture is protruding towards the back of the hand, then he should place the palm of his hand on the board so that the physician's hand falls on the same top of the joint. If it returns to its original position immediately, but not, tightly bind it with a bandage to reduce swelling.
Leave him and do not disturb him, for he cannot bear it, nor can you recover from it after the days have passed except that the joint remains on its surface and does not harm the patient except if the hand stretches and is unable to grasp anything.
Then you will know that the nerve has been severed or bruised, and there is no remedy except to tighten it with a sling, perhaps it may be of benefit and perhaps it may not be of any use at all. When the radius has been set, apply the bandage we have described, then tie it and leave it for five days.
Then it is removed and the hand is exercised, if its movement becomes difficult and there appears something of the flesh on its surface, soften it with warm water and rub it repeatedly until it softens.
The Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
In the Treatment of Fractures of the Fingers.
Fingers may be fractured in every direction, so when a finger is fractured to the outside or inside of the palm, extend the finger and push the fracture with your thumb until it returns, then tie the head of the finger and suspend it towards the direction it was fractured.
Leave it for two days then release it and extend it until it becomes straight on that day, so if it is at night you tie it in the same way, do not stop releasing it during the day and exercise it with movement and tie it at night, do this for days until it strengthens.
And so you do if it is fractured to the inside of the hand, tie it towards the same direction and do with it what you did in the first instance until it heals, and so do with it when it is fractured in any other direction.
The Thirtieth Chapter.
In the Treatment of Fractures of the Spine.
When a fracture occurs to one of the vertebrae of the back or neck, either completely fractured or many vertebrae have moved from their places there is no treatment for it because death quickly comes upon the patient.
A sign of this is that the stool of the sick person comes out involuntarily, and he cannot hold it back, and many times some of his limbs relax, whether his legs or arms or one of them. And if one bead (of sweat) moves from its place, it often moves.
And it moves to four directions, the one that moves to the back is called a hump, and as for its treatment, if you look at it and find that the hump occurred from childhood, there is no treatment for it, nor is there any cure from it whatsoever. But the one that happened from a fall or a blow and the like...
For the ancients mentioned it with various treatments in a long discourse, most of which do not return much benefit. I have abridged from that what is sufficient to replace much of what they said, approaching the meaning, explaining it, and depicting the instrument differently than they described and explained it.
So I say that the hump that occurs in the chest from the front has no remedy or cure for it, and the same is true for the one on both sides. But only the one that occurs on the back is treated, specifically with what I will describe, which is to stretch the patient on his face.
On a flat counter near a wall, and spread a damp cloth under him so as not to hurt his chest, then place a standing plank embedded in a pit in the ground at one end of the counter towards his head and another plank towards his feet at the other end of the counter.
And a servant holds the plank, so that it is not fixed in the pit, and another servant holds the other one in that position, then wrap around the patient's chest and under his armpit with a soft and tight cloth, and stretch one end of the cloth to the plank at his head and tie it there.
Then tighten with another cloth over his hips and thighs and above his ankles, then gather all the ties and tie them to the other plank at his feet, and each servant stretches his plank towards his side with the tie, and the two planks do not move from their original positions.
Unless they are secured as we mentioned, the physician places his hands on the bead with force until it returns, or he places a board on it and leans on the board with his legs until it returns. If it does not return with this treatment, take a board that is about three cubits long.
And you dig in the wall which we said should be near the patient, a place where the end of the board enters, then you place the middle of the board on the hump, and the physician puts his legs on the other end and pulls tightly until he compresses the bead.
And it returns to its place, and if you wish to make it with the screw that is tightened by hand, which is to dig into the ground at the head of the patient, in the end of the room, two pieces of wood which are a cubit long, and at his feet in the end of the room also two pieces of wood.
And let there be after each piece of wood a span, and it was made in each piece of wood a hole where the screw runs, and the wood is all secured in the ground firmly so that it does not move at all, and you insert a round rod which is the screw that is wound in the holes of the two pieces of wood.
And in its end there is a hole which was secured with a rod a span long which is wound, and in the other two pieces of wood like that, then you tighten the rope which you tightened on the chest of the patient in the screw at his head and the ropes that you tightened on his legs in the screw at his feet.
Then a servant stands at each screw tightening his hand with the wrench that winds it, and the physician levels the hump as we presented before, and this is a picture of the screw and the bed and the patient:
Then after the hernia returns and the place is leveled, it is necessary to apply the dried bandage with egg white then the plaster, and then you place on top of the bandage a splint from a board which is three fingers wide or so and its length is as much as takes the place of the hump.
And upon some of the sound beads, then it is bound with the appropriate bandage and the patient uses fine nutritious food until it heals. If some protrusion remains in the place at the end of healing, it is necessary to use medicines that soften and relax along with using the plate which we described a long time ago.
And a lead plate may be used in that. And a protrusion may appear at the end of the back beads, and it is thought to be a slipping (of something), but it is an extra bone that has protruded, so do not expose it to this treatment, for perhaps death may occur.
Chapter thirty-one.
In the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Know that the hip joint and the elbow joint are only subject to dislocation, and they are not subject to what other joints are subjected to of slight displacement and dislocation. And the hip joint dislocates in four directions.
And that is because it dislocates inward, outward, forward, and backward, and most of the time it dislocates inward, and rarely does it dislocate forward or backward, and a sign of its dislocation inward is that if you align the limb of the healthy patient with the diseased one, it will be longer.
And the knee will be more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his leg at the hip, and the place below the hip will be warm and soft as if the head of the thigh has gone there.
And a sign of the one who has dislocation outward is that his symptoms are opposite to these symptoms, and a sign of the one who has dislocation forward is that he extends his leg fully except that he cannot bend it without pain in the knee, and even if he wants to walk forward, he cannot.
And he is obstructed in his urination and feels pain in his hip, and when he walks, his weight is on the heel, and a sign of the one who has dislocation backward is that he cannot straighten his knee and cannot bend it before bending his hip, and his leg is also shorter than the other.
The thigh should be relaxed and the head of the femur at the level of the vertebra, as for the return of this fracture, it should be examined if the fracture has become old and remained with its owner without an attempt to correct it, and remained in its state, then there is no treatment at all.
So it should not be subjected to manipulation, as for the one whose fracture is recent and whatever type it may be of the four types of fractures, hasten to make the joint bend and extend it inside and outside and move it right and left so perhaps.
It returned and did not need anything else from treatment, if it does not return like this then it is necessary that you prepare a strong assistant to extend his leg from below either with his hands or with a rope tied on his leg above the knee and another assistant extends it from above.
So that he puts his hands under his armpit and then pulls with a soft rope at the root of the thigh and holds one end of the rope, another assistant third is needed and his extension is either from the front from the side of the buttock to the collarbone or from behind to the back.
And they should be extended all at once until the patient rises with his body from the ground and remains hanging, for this type of extension is a common type for the four types, if the fracture returns as we have said, otherwise there is a need for each type of what I mentioned from special treatment.
As for its special return if the fracture is inwards, it is necessary that the patient lie on his right side and then a rope is placed on the root of the thigh between the head of the femur and the place under the buttock.
Then the rope is extended upwards from the side of the buttock to the top of the body to the collarbone, and then another strong assistant takes hold with his arms around the thick part of the thigh of the patient and extends it outwards with a strong pull as it returns to its place.
This type is easier than all other types of treatment by which this member is returned.  If it proves difficult for you and does not respond to this type of treatment at all, then it is necessary that you bind both legs of the sick person firmly with a strong, soft bandage on the heels and on the knees.
And it should be after each one of its owner the measure of four fingers, and the injured leg is extended more than the other by the measure of a finger, then the sick person is hung from the head with wood that is in the house and it should be from the ground the measure of an arm.
Then you command a strong boy to embrace the thigh and hang the sick person another boy and push the other boy embracing the thigh with force, for the joint returns to its place quickly, as for his special return if the bone is outside.
Then it is necessary that the sick person lie on the board as we described in the owner of the hump and tighten the bandage on his injured leg especially and on his chest, then two planks are placed one at his feet and the other at his head, then an extra plank is placed in the middle of the board firmly attached.
A wet cloth may be wrapped over it so as not to harm the sick person, and the plank should be between his thighs so that he does not fall down when pulled, then each servant stretches to his side and the doctor smooths the hip with his hands, if it responds to returning.
And if not, then put the plank on him and press it as we mentioned in the hump except that it is necessary that the sick person lie on his right side, and if the dislocation is to the front, then it is necessary that you stretch the leg of the injured person once while he is in this description exactly on the board.
And the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the injured collarbone and presses it with his other hand, and at the same time he makes the pressure extended downwards towards the knee, and if the dislocation is to the back, it is not necessary that the injured person be stretched downwards.
It is elevated above the ground, but it should be placed on a solid thing, as it should also be from its hip and knee to the outside, according to what we mentioned about its position on the bench, while lying on its face and the bandages are tightened.
As we mentioned before, it is necessary to use the clamp with the board also on the place where the joint exited, so that if the return of the hip joint is complete as it should be, and the sign of its return is not hidden from you, which is that you extend the leg of the patient.
If you see them level and the patient flexes and extends his leg without difficulty, know that the member has returned as it should. Then, align the thighs and apply a bandage, tightening with a turban so tightly that the hip does not move in any direction.
And the patient must be confined to bed for three or four days, then remove the bandage and compare the leg with the other. If you see them equal in length, know that the fracture has set, so release the patient to walk. But if you see any looseness in it...
Go back and bandage him and tighten it according to your first tightening, and leave him also for three days, then remove it and walk slowly on it for a few days until it is strong by God's will.
The Second Thirty Chapter
In the Treatment of a Knee Fracture.
The knee breaks in three ways: inward, outward, and downward (meaning backward), and it does not break forward from the bottom. And the sign of its fracture is to order the patient to press his leg against his thigh.
If it does not stick to the thigh, know that the knee is fractured. And the setting of all types of fractures is that the patient sits down with his legs extended if he is able, and a helper sits behind him to grasp his waist and pull him back slightly, then you sit on his thighs.
You press your back against his face and make his leg between your legs, then you clasp his knee with your hands and interlace them between your fingers on his knee, then you press the sides of his knee with your hands firmly and another servant stretches his leg until the knee returns to its place.
And the sign of its return is that you press the leg to the thigh in a soft, unforced manner, then bandage it and press the leg to the thigh again, then tie them all together with a strip for three or four days, then release them, and he should not use except for little walking for several days until it strengthens.
If returning it as we described proves difficult for you, then use strong traction with the straps that I have previously described in the treatment of the hip until it returns.
Chapter Thirty-Third.
In Treating a Broken Heelbone.
The heel bone may be displaced slightly, or it may completely break, and its fracture is either inward or outward, and the sign of its fracture is that you see the heel swollen and protruding in the direction to which it fractured.
As for the treatment of its displacement, it is easy to return it by gently stretching it and straightening it until it returns. But if it fractures completely, it is necessary that you seat the patient seated and a strong servant grasps him from behind his back in the middle.
Then you grasp his foot from its upper part with your right hand and from below his ankle with your left hand, then pull the foot towards you with your right hand and then with your left twice, then stretch it with your left and push the front of the foot with your right towards the leg without force.
Do this twice as we have described, then push the front of the foot to the leg in the third time while you pull the ankle, if it returns in one or two attempts with this method and you see the foot leveled, otherwise repeat the work on it because it will return.
If it does not return for you by what we have described, then lay the patient on his back on the ground and insert a wedge into the earth firmly so that it falls between his thighs. And you have wrapped a cloth on it so as not to harm the patient, then hold his thigh firm.
Then, another attendant stretches the man's leg either with his hands or with a bandage tied to his neck. Then each attendant stretches in opposition to the stretch of his companion, and the wedge stands between the patient's thighs, holding it so that his body does not sag downwards during the stretching, then the physician sets the jaw with his hands.
And another attendant holds the healthy leg downwards, for the jaw returns quickly. If the jaw returns and you see that its return is correct, then take the dressing and the splint and tighten it with strong bandages, and tie the foot with a bandage to the bottom, and it is necessary to avoid the nerve that is above the heel from behind.
So that the bandage is not tight on it and harms him, then leave him for two or three days. If the bandage relaxes, tighten it again, then release it on the third or fourth day. The patient refrains from walking for forty days.
If he intends to walk before this period, do not be assured that the jaw will not break and spoil, and it will not accept treatment after that. If a hot swelling appears on him, it is necessary to use what we have described elsewhere in the treatment and cauterization until it goes away.
Chapter Forty-Third.
In the Treatment of a Broken Finger.
It is necessary to set what has broken from it with a slight stretching, without violence, and this is not difficult, but it is easy. If the fracture is in some of the bones of the heel, then it is necessary to make the patient's foot on a flat place on the ground.
Or on a board and he is standing like the walking one, then you stand and put your foot on what remained of those joints then stamp it with your foot forcefully until it returns and you see that it has become straight and there does not appear in the place any projection.
Then put under the sole of his foot a board that takes the whole foot, it should have two heads then tighten it tightly and firmly for three days then remove it and protect him from walking for many days until it strengthens and the return is prevented, God willing.
The Fifth Thirty-First Chapter.
In Types of Jaw Fracture Which Is With a Wound or With a Fracture or Both
When something of that happens and it is treated and healed, often death follows.
Therefore it is not fitting to undertake the treatment of such a thing except by one who is skillful in the craft, long experienced, gentle, compassionate, patient, not hasty or reckless and that he should use at the beginning medicines that calm hot swellings only and reassure the sick person.
To the power of God, except what I have hoped for his safety from disease with a light sickness and you have seen in it some hope, so return him to your mercy at first before the hot swelling happens.
If the limb returned to what I have desired, then use the arrangement that calms hot swellings and treat the wound with whatever ointments are suitable for it of drying ones, if the jaw was fractured and there were bone fragments protruding, then remove them. And follow in that what we have mentioned in simple diseases previously in their places.
And take care in your effort and purify yourself from entering the path of speculation as I have previously mentioned and advised you, for that is better for your standing and safer for your exposure, God willing.
