And the author of this book said when he completed for you, O people, this book which is a part of the science of medicine in its completeness and reached the goal in it from its clarity and explanation, I saw that I complete it for you with this article which is a part of work by hand.
Because work by hand is refined in our country and in our time entirely absent, to the point that its science was almost studied and its trace disappeared. And what remained from it are slight drawings in the books of the ancients which were corrected by hands and its errors and confusion were rectified until its meanings became obscured and its benefits disappeared.
So I saw that I revive it and compose in it this article on the path of explanation, clarification, and brevity and bring images of surgical instruments and all tools of work because it is from increasing clarity and aiding what needs it.
And the reason there is no skilled artisan by hand in our time because the craft of medicine is long and whoever wants to practice it must study before that the science of anatomy as described by Galen. Until he understands the benefits of the organs and their types and humors and connections and separations, and knows the bones, nerves, muscles, their number, exits, veins, arteries, and the places where they emerge.
Therefore, Albucasis said that physicians are many in name but few in deed, especially in the craft of the hand, and we mentioned a part of this in the introduction to this book.
Because whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have mentioned from anatomy, has inevitably fallen into errors that kill people, as I have seen often from those who imagined themselves in this science and claimed it without knowledge or study.
And that is because I saw a ignorant physician who incised a tumor of a pig's on a woman's neck, so he severed some of the arteries of the neck and blood gushed from the woman until she fell dead before his eyes.
And I saw another physician who advanced in removing a stone from a man whose tooth was inflamed, and the stone was large so it ruptured; he removed it with a piece from the bladder's wall. So the man died for about three days, and I was called to remove it; seeing the size of the stone and the condition of the sick person, I judged that outcome.
And I saw another physician who was making a living by treating some of our country's leaders.
So it happened to a young black boy who had a broken leg near the ankle with a wound; the physician, in his ignorance, quickly bound the fracture to the wound with splints and bandages tightly, not leaving any space for the wound to breathe.
Then he released him on his whims and left him for days, ordering him not to loosen the bandage until his leg and foot swelled; he was close to death.
So I was called to him and quickly loosened the bandage, he found relief and was free from his pain; except that the corruption had become firm in the limb and I could not reverse it.
And the corruption continued to spread in the member until it died.
And I saw another physician who treated a cancerous tumor and after days it increased until the patient's affliction became great, for if cancer is composed of black humors then it should not be treated with iron at all.
Except if it is in a member that can potentially be removed entirely.
And for this, my sons, it is necessary for you to learn that work with the hand is divided into two parts: work accompanied by safety and work that brings harm in most cases.
And I have warned in every place mentioned in this book the work that contains danger and fear, so it is necessary for you to avoid it and reject it.
Lest the ignorant find a way to slander and attack, take for yourselves firmness and caution, and rely on gentleness and steadfastness.
And use the best path leading to safety and a blessed outcome, and avoid dangerous and difficult illnesses that are hard to cure.
And be wary of what might cause you fear that doubt will enter into your religion and worldly affairs, for it is more beneficial for your worldly status and higher in this world and the hereafter for your fates.
For Galen said in some of his precepts, 'Do not treat a bad illness so that you are called bad physicians.'
And I have divided this article into three chapters.
The First Chapter.
On cauterization by fire and cauterization by a sharp drug, arranged from the century to antiquity and pictures of instruments and tools for cauterization and all that is needed in work with the hand.
And the Second Chapter.
On incision, poultice, phlebotomy, cupping, and surgeries, and extracting arrows and all of that kind, arranged,  and pictures of the instruments.
The third chapter.
Concerning fractures, dislocations, and treatment of the sciatic nerve, and similar ailments, it is arranged in order from the top to the bottom with pictures of the instruments.
The first chapter.
Concerning  the incision.
And before we mention how to perform it, it is necessary to mention its benefits and harms and in what temperament it is used.
And I say that the discussion of the benefits and harms of the incision is a long discourse and a precise science, and a hidden secret, and many of the wise men have spoken about it.
And they differed in it, and I have abbreviated from their sayings a little out of fear of prolixity.
And I say that the incision is beneficial in general for all bad temperaments that are with substance and without substance, except for two temperaments: which are the hot temperament without substance and the dry temperament without substance.
As for the dry temperament with substance, they differed in it, some saying that the incision is beneficial in it, and others saying the opposite, that the incision is not suitable in a disease that is from heat and dryness because the nature of fire is heat and dryness.
And it is impossible for a hot and dry disease to be cured by a hot and dry remedy, and the one who says the opposite says that the incision with fire can benefit from a hot and dry disease that occurs in people's bodies. Because when you add the body of man and its moisture to the temperament of fire, you make the body of man cold.
And I say what he says because experience has revealed it to me many times, except that it should not be imagined about this matter except by one who has practiced and trained in the science of incision extensively. And who stood on the differences of people's temperaments and the states of diseases within themselves, their causes, symptoms, and duration.
As for the rest of the humors, there is no fear from them, especially cold-wet diseases, which all physicians have agreed upon and have not differed in the benefit of purging them.
Know, O sons of physicians, that the secret of treatment is cauterization with fire and its superiority over cauterization with burning medicine because fire is a single essence whose action does not extend beyond the organ that is cauterized, nor does it harm another connected part except for slight harm.
And cauterization with burning medicine may exceed its action to what is beyond the organs and may cause disease in the organ that is difficult to treat, or even death, while fire, because of its honor and generosity of essence, does not do this except if it is excessive.
And this has become clear to us by experience through long service, attention to the craft, and standing upon the facts of the matter.
For this reason, I have dispensed with lengthy speech, although if it were fitting for this book of mine, I would have presented to you in fire a hidden secret and the manner of its action in bodies and its negation of diseases with philosophical and demonstrative discourse that penetrates your understanding.
Know, O sons of physicians, that they have differed in the time suitable for cauterization and have made the best time the spring season.
And I say that cauterization can be suitable in every time because the harm caused by time is overtaken by the benefit brought about by cauterization. Especially if the cauterization is from a necessary and strong pain that is pressing, not bearing delay because what may follow it is a calamity greater than the slight harm entering from time.
And do not conceive, O sons of physicians, what the common people and ignorant physicians imagine that cauterization which cures a disease does not return again ever and make it lasting.
They should not think, because of the kindling and drying effect of cautery that it is like a medicine which alters humors and dries up the superfluities which are the cause of pain.
But cautery surpasses medicine in the speed of its success, the strength of its action, and the intensity of its power.
And the disease may return after a while, depending on the patient's temperament, the strength of his illness and its establishment, and what is prepared in his body from the gathering of humors and his neglect in acquiring them from food and suchlike causes.
Except that the disease for which cautery is employed be a mild one and in a member with little humor and moisture. Like cauterizing a tooth for pain and the like, it may not return in that case, which is at the very least.
And as for the common saying that cautery is the last of remedies, it is a true saying not to what they go for because they believe no remedy will be effective after cautery by medicine or otherwise and the matter is otherwise.
And what is meant by cautery being the last of remedies is that when we have employed all kinds of treatments for a disease and those medicines have not been effective, then we employ the last thing which is cautery and it becomes effective from here it happens that cautery is the last of remedies. Not according to the meaning that the common people went for and many ignorant physicians.
And the ancients mentioned that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they said this because of the moderation of gold and the nobility of its essence, and they said it does not scald the place of cautery, which is not true at all.
Because I have tried it and found that it does that in some bodies but not others, and cautery with it is better and more preferable than iron as they said, except that if you heat the instrument of gold in the fire, it doesn't become clear to you when it heats to the degree you want for redness because of the gold.
For it hastens towards the cold and if you increase it with fever it melts in the fire and becomes dispersed, so that the maker falls into trouble from that. Therefore, iron became faster and closer to the right for us to work by God's will.
And I have arranged this chapter on cauterization into sections organized from the head to the foot, so that it is easier for the student what he wants from it by God's will.
The first section.
In cauterizing the head, there is one kind.
This cauterization is beneficial from the excess of moisture and coldness on the brain, which are the causes of headaches and an increase in discharges from the head towards the eyes and ears, as well as excessive sleep, toothache, and sore throat. And in general for every disease that appears from coldness like stroke, epilepsy, and muteness, and similar diseases.
The image of this cauterization is to order the sick person first to vomit with a laxative medicine that purifies the head for three nights or four, according to what the strength of the patient and his disposition and habit require.
Then order him to shave his head with a razor, then sit him down in front of you, seated with his hands on his chest.
Then place the base of your palm on the base of his nose between his eyes, and where your middle finger ends, mark that place with charcoal.
Then heat the cautery iron, which its image is....
When a part of the bone becomes exposed like the size of a hazelnut or a grain of wheat, raise your hand, otherwise, return your hand with the same iron or another if it cooled. Until you see from the bone what I told you, then take something of salt, dissolve it in water, and soak a cotton swab in it, place it on the site, and leave it for three days.
Then place upon it cotton soaked in tallow and leave it on until the char has gone from the fire, then treat it with the quaternary ointment until it heals, God willing.
And they have said that the wound, every time it remains open, produces pus which is better and more beneficial.
And some of them have mentioned that the skin should be cauterized to the bone, and hold the cautery until some thickness of bone burns, then after that strip what has burned from the bone, then treat it.
And others have said that it is necessary to exaggerate the cauterizing until it affects the bone strongly, so that it falls from the bone like a diamond or a small meteorite, and they claimed that it releases steam from the head from that place and leave the wound open for a long time.
Then treat it until it closes, and I do not see these two types of cauterization at all except in some people and on the path of deception, and leaving it with me is better, and with safety if it exists, because the head increases when its natural connection is broken, as we have seen in other limbs.
Especially when the patient's head is naturally weak, and the first type of cauterization is safer and better with me, and by it I work, do so safely God willing.
The second chapter.
In the skull as well.
If a chronic headache occurs in the general head and has lasted for the patient, and he used poultices, cauterizations, plasters, ointments, and bandages, and especially if it had been cauterized with the single cauterization we described, and nothing benefited him from that, then look. Then if the patient's head is strong in its structure by nature, and was not weak, and he found a severe cold, cauterize another cautery slightly above that one. Then take hold of each horn of its head until the thickness of the skin goes away and the bone becomes visible, as we have described. And take hold gently at the back of the head in the place known as the hatchet and lessen your hand in this one, and do not expose the bone because the patient will find for it a severe pain unlike the pain of all the other parts of the head and I shall mention this incision in its place.
The cautery that is used to cauterize the horns of the head and its back should be milder than the cautery that is used for the middle of the head, and this is its image.
Chapter Three.
In which [type] of headache  that is not chronic.
If pain occurs in the split of the head with a headache and the pain extends to the eye, then purge the patient with medicines that purify the head and use all the treatment that I have mentioned in the classifications of diseases. If this does not help, cauterize it on both sides. Either cauterize with a sharp, burning medicine or with iron.
As for cauterization with a burning medicine, take one clove of garlic, peel it, and cut off its ends from both sides, then make an incision in the place of pain on the temple with a wide scalpel until there is a space under the skin that can hold the clove.
Then place it under the skin until it disappears, then pull on it with a firm and tight tug, leaving it for about fifteen hours, then remove it and take out the garlic and leave the wound for two or three days, then carry on.
Upon it place cotton soaked in butter until the place is cauterized, then treat it with ointment until it heals, God willing. And if you wish, do this with some of the burning medicines that I have mentioned in the eighteenth article on burning medicines.
As for cauterization with iron, it is done in this manner: the iron implement whose figure is as follows:
And it is called the nail-shaped cautery because its head resembles a nail, with some holes in it and a small protuberance in the center.
Then, it is placed on the site of pain and you hold it with your hand while turning the iron slightly, and the amount burned from the thickness of the skin should be like half of it. And you raise your hand so as not to burn the vein that is below, and bleeding occurs, then you soak cotton in salt water and place it on the site and leave it for three days. Then you cover the cotton with ghee and treat him with ointment until he heals, God willing.
And if you wish,  you can burn this wound with the sharp edge coming from the cautery and preserve it from cutting the vein in this non-chronic wound especially.
Chapter Four.
Cauterizing a chronic wound.
If you treated the wound with what we mentioned from the previous treatments and what we mentioned in the sections of diseases, and the treatment did not work, and you saw from the cause what cannot be treated by what we mentioned of the first cauterization with medicine or cauterization with fire. Then it is necessary to cauterize the nail-shaped cautery until it becomes white after having learned on the site of pain in a line whose length is half a finger or so, and leave your hand once while pulling it until the vein is cut and reaches near the bone.
Except that you must be careful not to touch the jawbone that moves when chewing, so it burns the muscle or nerve that moves it and causes stiffness.
And be careful and cautious of bleeding from the vein you cut, for there is danger in cutting it. And especially for one who does not know what he is doing and has no experience in the practice and abandoned work is better.
And will come the mention of arranging for blood flow from the artery on its face in its place from the book, if God wills, and if you see from the cause what this kind does not accomplish.
And you saw the body of the sick person covered with a boil like this kind in the middle of the head as we described and treated the wound until it heals if God wills.
And if you wish, you used the kind that we mentioned in the chapter of piercing the artery with the iron tool having two blades, for it is a better and more effective kind than this.
The Fifth Chapter.
In the kind of ear aches.
If pain occurred in the ear from cold and treated with laxatives and all other treatment that we mentioned in the division, and the pain did not go away, then grasp the iron tool called the point whose image is this.
Then prick with it after heating it around the ear entirely as they rotate or all around them if the pain is in both. And move away with the kind from the root of the ear a little after you have learned the location with the lead pencil and the kind should be the amount of ten points in each ear or thereabouts, then treat the places until it heals if God wills.
The Sixth Chapter.
In the kind of abscesses.
The abscess that is treated with the kind is only the one that happens from phlegm as mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
And it avoids the kind that happens from boils and tightening of the nerve.
When you treated this kind of abscess with poultices and cupping and gargling and your treatment was not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize the sick person with three kinds. One is at the root of the ear and the second slightly below the notch and the third at the junction of the lips.
Make your position opposite to the diseased side because relaxation occurs in the side that appears healthy.
And the shape of the support is to mold it as a support opposite the upper corner of the ear slightly under the parietal bone and another in the temple, and its length should be equal to the length of the thumb.
Lower the support with your hand until it burns to about half the thickness of the skin, and this is the shape of the cautery, which is a type of knife that has advanced in its image but is slightly gentler than it, as you see. It should be slightly thicker at the edge of the knife, then treat the place as previously mentioned until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Seven.
In  chronic stroke.
If you treated the stroke and treated it with what we mentioned, but your treatment did not benefit, and there was no fever in the sick person, make four supports. On each horn of his head a support and a support in the middle of the head as we mentioned, and a support at the back of the head as previously mentioned.
The description of the cautery as previously mentioned, and it can also cauterize a support on the mouth of the stomach, which is more effective, then treat as previously mentioned.
Chapter Eight.
In forgetfulness.
The one who is caused by phlegm should be given the patient first with large herbs and brain-purifying pills.
Then shave his whole head, and carry on the back of his head a mustard poultice written in the article of the poultice, carry it several times because it is a type of support.
And do it on the same order that I mentioned there, if he is cured by that, otherwise, make three supports at the back of his head, aligned from the top of the head to the bottom of the neck.
Make between every band and band a thickness of a finger, then treat the sore as mentioned before.  If you wish to increase it and the patient is able for it, add the middle band.
If you wish to increase it, add on to the two horns then treat it until it heals, and the pad will be olive-shaped as shown previously.
The Ninth Chapter.
In paralysis and relaxation of the whole body.
It is necessary that you proceed in purifying the head with the poultices and what we have mentioned, then shave the patient's head, then add a band in the middle of the head and a band on each horn of the head and a band on its back.
And three on the vertebrae of the neck, if in a case of relaxation of the body you need more than that and the patient is able for it and the disease is strong and stubborn, add four bands on the vertebrae of his back. And make the band hot until it burns most of the skin and raise your hand then treat him as mentioned before until it heals, God willing, and the pad will be olive-shaped.
The Tenth Chapter.
In epilepsy.
Only the epileptic who has epilepsy from before phlegm is treated, so it is necessary that his nose be purified first with the large poultices and all the treatment mentioned in the division if the patient is large and able to take medicine.
But if he is a child who cannot bear medicine, then let him use gargles and the cleanser that purifies the brain before that for many days with improving his nourishment.
Then shave his head and add one band in the middle of the head as mentioned before in the description and another band on its back. And on each horn of his head, a band. If the patient is strong and able, add the bands mentioned in the case of paralysis and relaxation of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back, and the pad will be olive-shaped as described previously.
If the patient is a child, make the cauterizing iron gentle in this way.
The eleventh chapter.
On the treatment of melancholy.
If the cause of melancholy is putrid humors and thick phlegm, apply the cauterizations we mentioned in the treatise on apoplexy.
If the cause of melancholy is black bile and the body of the patient is moist and putrid, purge his nose as described previously in the division.
Then shave the patient's head and make a firm cake of cotton like a circle, then place it in the center of his head with the patient sitting upright holding onto each side, then take one ladleful of old sheep fat.
Then heat it on the fire at a moderate heat, as much as the finger can bear if inserted, then pour it in the center of his head in the circle and leave it until it cools. Do this to the patient every week once with all his good care until he heals, if God wills.
And if you wish, cauterize it with small dots without holding the cautery in your hand, but be a  light touch; this type of cauterization moistens the brain moderately.
Then put cotton soaked in sheep fat or chicken fat on top of it.
The twelfth chapter.
On the cauterization of water flowing in the eye.
If you notice the beginning of water flowing in the eye with the signs mentioned in the division, immediately purge the patient's head and protect him from all moisture and sweat him in the bath on an empty stomach for days.
Then shave his head and cauterize in the center of the head, then cauterize two on the temples if the beginning of water flowing in the eye is in both eyes or from one side if it is in one eye.
Then cut with the knife all the veins and arteries under the skin, and let the cauterizations be long in width across the temples, and take care that there is no bleeding.
If you see something of it, cut it at its place with any treatment that is possible for you, and we shall come to the wisdom in closing up arteries and cutting them and taking care that there is no bleeding.
And two good cauterizations may be made on the back of the head under the bones.
The Thirteenth Chapter.
On Chronic Blepharorrhagia.
If the tears of the eye are chronic and constant, and they are from the veins and arteries which are on the outside of the head from outside the head, and you are convinced that this is from a cold phlegm thick like boiling water, then cauterize as I have described before at the beginning of the water flowing down. Cauterize in the middle of the head and two on the temples, and two on the back of the head under the bones, and if you need to increase it, cauterize in each side of the base of the eye at the edge of the eyebrow with a small knife.
The Fourteenth Chapter.
On Cauterizing a Smelly Nose.
If you treated it with what we have mentioned in the division and the treatment did not work, then hasten to prescribe the sick person three nights of cupping, then shave his head and cauterize the middle one with an olive oil knife. Then cauterize with the nail-shaped knife two on the eyebrows above the hair a little, and take care of the artery, do not cut it, and this is the shape of the nail-shaped knife.
The Fifteenth Chapter.
On Cauterizing a Drooping Eyelid.
If the eyelid droops because of disease or moisture, cauterize the eyelid with one cauterization using this crescent-shaped knife.
If you wish, place two little lines above the eyebrows on each side, a little distance from the temples, and let the length of each line be equal to the length of the eyebrow.
Do not exaggerate your hand with the lines, but only as much as a third of the skin is burned, and the image of the iron will be like this.
The Sixteenth Chapter.
Lines on the Eyelid.
If its edges turned inward, so as to close in on the eye, then the lines within it are of two types. Either the lines with fire, or the lines with a burning medicine; as for the lines with fire, you must order the sick person before this to leave his lashes if he is one of those who pluck them until they grow long and even.
If they are plucked while growing, then bind his eyes with a bandage so that they do not move until they grow and become even. And if they have grown and become even, place the head of the patient in your block, then trace on the eyelid with lead a mark in the shape of a sheet of paper (i.e., a thin line).
And the beginning of the mark is near the lashes, then place under the eyelid cotton soaked in egg white or in the saliva of the lizard (i.e., a type of gecko), then heat the iron with this image.
Then cauterize on the shape which you have traced, little by little in many times until the surface of the skin which is like the shape of a sheet of paper burns entirely; its appearance is special and a sign that your work is correct is to see the eyelid become blackened and the hair rise above the lining of the eye.
Then raise your hand at that time and leave him for three days, then apply cotton soaked in butter to it until the scab falls off, then treat it with ointment until it heals if God wills. If something of the hair returns after some time and the eyelid relaxes.
Then return the eyelid to its place as you did before. If the hair is in the lower eyelid, it must be removed until it returns to its natural place and does not injure the eye. As for the cauterization with a burning drug, tell the patient to leave the incisions until they grow long and even.
Then you make from the paper a picture of a sheet of parchment, and take from the usual soap and from unslaked lime, from each one weight of a dinar or thereabouts. You grind them both very finely, and do this quickly so that it does not dry out. Then you spread it on the paper that you made in the likeness of a sheet of parchment, and place it on one or both eyelids, and put under the eye cotton soaked in egg white, and the head of the patient in his block.
And you place your index finger above the medicine and press it gently, and move it whenever the patient feels a prickling sensation from the medicine because he will feel a burning sensation like fire. As long as he feels the tingling sensation, leave the medicine and move it with your finger. If the tingling sensation subsides, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And look, if you see that the eyelid has risen as it rises when exposed to fire or cutting, otherwise, apply the medicine again on the place where the medicine did not affect and did not darken until you complete your work and the eye is cauterized. Then, place cotton with ghee on top of it until it removes the sting of burning.
Then, treat it with the palm ointment or other ointments until it heals. And it is necessary for you when working to be extremely careful that nothing of the medicine falls into the eye. If the eyelid relaxes after days and we fear something from the hair falling into the eye.
Then apply the medicine again on that place where the eyelid relaxed, especially as you did before, and then treat it until it heals. And this is a picture of a sheet of parchment.
Know that the eyes of people differ in size and magnitude, so according to this let your cupping be, and it is not a hidden way for him who has practice in this craft.
The seventeenth chapter.
Of the kind of tumor that appears at the corner of the eye.
If you treated the tumor with what we mentioned in the classifications of diseases and your treatment was not successful, it is necessary to cauterize it in this manner.
Order the patient to place his head in a block and have a servant hold his head between your hands, holding it so that it does not move or strike against his head.
Then place cotton moistened in egg white or the saliva of the barzquta on his eyes, then heat the cauterizing iron whose image is this.
It should be hollow like the form of an eagle's feather from one end which is where the cauterizing takes place, and if you wish it to be perforated at the other end, and if you wish it to be solid like a rod, except that this hollowing is better for your work, God willing.
Then, squeeze the tumor if it is open and remove its pus and dry it or if it is not open, open it and extract its discharge, then when you do this, place the cauterizing iron on it while it is very hot, hold it with your hand until it reaches the bone.
And withdraw your hand slightly at the cauterizing from the eye toward the nose so that your hand does not err or make the patient uneasy and the cauterizing iron falls into the cornea, thus spoiling it. If it reaches the bone in the first cauterization, otherwise, reheat the cauterizing iron a second time if you need to do so.
Leave him for three days, then apply cotton soaked in butter and treat him with the drying ointment until it heals. If forty days have passed and it has not healed, apply the severe medicine to burn until the bone is exposed and leave it as will be mentioned in its chapter, God willing.
Another method for treating a nasal discharge that some of the earlier surgeons have mentioned, is to cut into the site of the nasal discharge, then place a thin probe in the same incision. This is its image.
And pour into it a weight of a silver dirham melted lead, and hold your hand on the probe tightly firmly and steadily, so that the patient does not move at all lest the melted lead spill into his eye. And it is necessary to place on the eye of the patient cotton moistened in egg white or water.
For the lead burns the site of the nasal discharge and purifies it with a wonderful cure. If the nasal discharge is cured by what has been mentioned of cauterization and treatment, otherwise there is no need to use a nostril piercing and returning the nasal discharge to its nasal passage as will be mentioned in its more specialized place.
The Eighteenth Chapter.
In cauterizing a cleft lip.
A cleft lip is frequently found, called "the whisker," especially in the lips of boys, for it happens very often. If this cleft is treated with what has been mentioned in the previous section and the treatment was not successful, then take a small iron tool like a knife and heat it up as shown in the picture.
Its hollow should be like the sharpness of a knife, then place it forcefully in the cleft until the cauterization reaches the depth of the cleft and then treat it with the  "al-qiyurati" (a type of plaster) until it heals, God willing.
The Nineteenth Chapter.
In cauterizing the nasal discharge that occurs in the mouth.
If it appears in the root of the gums or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth, a tumor then bursts and becomes a discharge from pus. If it is treated and the treatment was not successful, then you must heat an iron tool to a degree suitable for the nasal discharge.
Then you introduce a shield into the hole of the nail and hold your hand until the iron, shielded, reaches its pit and its end, and you do this once or twice then treat him afterwards with what we have mentioned of the treatment until he is healed if Allah wills.
If the material was cut off and healed, otherwise it is necessary to expose the place and remove the decayed bone according to what will come in its chapter if Allah wills.
Chapter Twentieth.
On how to treat loose and loosened incisors.
If the gums loosened because of moisture and the incisors moved, and you treated them with medicines and they did not benefit, put the head of the patient in your stone and then heat the iron that comes with its image after this after you have placed the tube on the tooth.
And introduce the iron shielded quickly and hold your hand a little until the patient feels the heat of the fire reached the root of the tooth, then raise your hand and then return the iron several times as much as you want, then the patient fills his mouth with salt water.
And he holds it for an hour and spits it out, and the loosened tooth becomes fixed and the loose gums tighten and the harmful moisture dries up.
Chapter Twenty-First.
On how to treat toothache.
If the toothache is from the cold or there is a worm in it and the treatment with medicines did not benefit, then its treatment comes in two ways: either the treatment with butter or the treatment with fire.
As for the treatment with butter, it is that you take the cow butter and boil it in an iron ladle or a saucer, then take cotton and wrap it on the tip of the rod and dip it in the boiled butter and place it on the aching tooth quickly and hold it until it cools.
Then you return it repeatedly until the strength of the fire reaches the root of the tooth, and if you wish to immerse a cloth or cotton in cold fat and place it on the aching tooth and place the protected iron above it until the fire reaches the bottom of the tooth.
As for cauterizing it with fire, you should resort to a copper pipe or an iron pipe that has some thickness so that the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient, then hold the hot instrument whose image comes and place it on the same tooth and hold your hand until the instrument cools, do this repeatedly.
For the pain goes away either that same day or the next, and it is necessary after this cauterization that the patient fills his mouth with good fat and holds it for an hour then spits it out, and this is the image of the instrument.
Cauterize with any side you wish and on the measure you can, and this is the image of the pipe.
The Second Twenty-Second Chapter.
On Cauterizing Pigs.
If the pigs are from phlegm and cold humors and do not respond to ripening with medicine and you want rapid ripening, then heat the hollow instrument whose image comes here, its ends penetrating.
So that smoke comes out from the other end during cauterization, place it protected on the same tumor once and twice if you need to until it reaches the depth of the tumor, and if the tumor is small, make the instrument equal to the size of the tumor.
Then leave it for three days and carry on it a cloth soaked in fat until what was burned by the fire goes away, then treat it with ointment and threads until it heals, God willing.
The Third Twenty-Third Chapter.
On Cauterizing Hoarseness of Voice and Shortness of Breath.
If the humors prevail over the windpipe, especially if this is accompanied by a cold temperament, it becomes necessary for the patient to be first purged with laxatives, then to have a poultice applied at the notch of the throat at the root of the larynx in the lower position.
Beware that you do not bring the poultice to the larynx, nor burn from the skin except half of it, then apply another poultice at the articulation of the neck in the last bead of it, and make the compress stapled as in the manner mentioned before.
Then treat him with what has been mentioned before until he is healed, God willing.
The Twenty-Fourth Chapter.
On a poultice for a disease of the lungs and cough.
If the cough and lung disease are from cold humors and the patient has no fever nor dropsy, and the disease is chronic, apply two poultices on the upper sides of the collarbones in the low, soft, vacant spots and another poultice in the middle of the chest between the breasts.
And make the compress stapled as in the manner mentioned before, and if you wish, let your poultice be a drop with the compress called the point, and whose image was previously mentioned in the treatment of earache, and it consists of thirty points or thereabouts.
Then treat him with what has been mentioned before until he is healed, and you can make a compress of three branches in this manner, and it hastens the application of the poultice because you apply three poultices at once with it, and this is the image of the compress.
The Twenty-Fifth Chapter.
On a poultice for the armpit.
If the head of the humerus has dislocated due to slippery humors or it did not stay firm when it was returned from its dislocation until it became customary for it to be displaced and return again with even the slightest movement, as we have seen, then it is necessary to first set the jaw. Then the patient lies on his back or on his right side, and then you raise the skin inside the armpit with your left hand fingers if the joint is dislocated inwards.
Then you heat the two-footed iron as shown in its picture.
Then you cauterize the skin with it until it pierces to the other side and the shape of the cautery is four cauterizations, and it may be cauterized with an iron that has three heads, so the shape of the cautery then becomes six cauterizations and the heads are on the strength of the one who brings it.
And this is a picture of the three-headed iron.
And one may be added to this number so that the cauterizations become eight, then it is carried on the cauterized repeatedly with salt, then the patient is given rest and does not move the limb for a time until it strengthens, and if the dislocation is upward and rarely does that happen.
So it is cauterized above the shoulder one cautery good or many cauterizations in drops for the joint becomes firm and the moisture goes away and the patient heals.
Chapter twenty-sixth.
On Cauterizing the Stomach.
If there is in the stomach a cold and much moisture until it brings it out of its temper and the discharges increased to it and was treated with various treatments but did not benefit, then it is necessary that the patient lie on his back and stretch his legs and arms, then cauterize him three times. One cautery under the chest spoon, a finger's width with a pointed iron and two cauterizations below its sides of the one cautery until the shape of the cauterizations becomes triangular and further apart between them so that they do not converge if they are burned and the depth of the cautery is one-third the thickness of the skin and the shape of the cauterizations.
In this picture and to this extent no more.
And if you wish, sew it as one large piece in the middle of the stomach as shown in this picture.
And the iron used to sew this single patch should be circular as shown in this picture.
And the stomach can be sewn stitch by stitch if it is cut from this patch, which is to learn on the stomach point by point on the amount you want with lead, then sew it with a needle-shaped iron, then treat it with the treatment that I present until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
In a patch for a cold liver.
If the liver presents pain from coldness and dampness or from hot air until it has departed from its natural constitution excessively, and the sick person was treated with what was mentioned in the division, and that did not benefit him. Then it is necessary for the sick person to lie on his side, and learn three patches with lead in this form and this exact amount on the liver below the shoulder blades where the human arm ends.
And after each patch, it should be the thickness of a finger, and the patch should be straight along the body and do not clamp your hand with the iron yes.
And let the amount that is burned from the thickness of the skin be half, no more, and the sick person should stand on his feet; if he cannot stand, let him lie down with his legs extended and his arms raised, and this is a picture of the iron.
And you can sew these patches with a needle-shaped iron if you have an assistant and are skilled in craftsmanship, and be careful not to overdo the patch so that it burns all the skin, burning the abdomen until it reaches the intestines, for the skin there is thin; know this.
Chapter Twenty-Eight.
In a tumor of the liver with a patch.
If a fistula appears in the liver and you want to know if that tumor is in the liver flesh or in its peritoneum, if it is in the liver flesh, the patient will feel heaviness and pain without sharpness.
And if it is in the peritoneum of the liver, there will be severe pain along with sharpness and you will see that physicians have been unable to treat it. It is necessary for the patient to lie on his side then learn about the location of the tumor with ink.
Then heat the iron in the fire, and this is the iron that resembles a hoe, and here is its image. And shape it with one incision until it burns all the skin and reaches the peritoneum, so that the entire abscess comes out, then treat it with the treatment of fistulas until it heals.
And this type of incision should not be used by anyone except one whose experience in medicine is long and who has repeatedly treated these diseases with his own hands, so that he then undertakes such work, and leaving it to me is better.
Chapter Twenty-Nine.
On the Incision of Fistula in the Testicles.
The ancients described the incision of a cold testicle fistula as follows: take one long, dry root of ziraunond, as thick as a finger, and immerse it in oil and heat it in the fire. Then shape it with one incision between the connection of the collarbone and the neck, and two small incisions a little below the underarms, slightly slanted towards the side below the beard, and two large incisions above the breasts, between the third and fourth ribs.
And two incisions also between the fifth and sixth ribs, slanted slightly backward, and one incision in the middle of the chest and another above the stomach, and three incisions from behind, one between the shoulders and two on the sides of the spine below the incision that is between the hands.
It is not fitting that your hand goes deep into the abscess, but it should be a probing at the skin's surface. Some of the ancients mentioned that there are people who use an iron tool like a curved sword and heat it and insert it between the ribs until they reach the tumor itself.
And the pus comes out as we mentioned in the case of a liver abscess, and from this probing into an abscess, either the patient dies within the hour or a festering sore is exposed in its place that does not heal.
Chapter Thirty.
On Abscesses of the Spleen.
If you treated the spleen illness with what was mentioned of treatment in the previous division and your treatment did not work, then probing it is done in three ways, all of them correct. One of them is to probe it three or four times in a row along the length of the spleen.
In the shape of probes for the liver, as depicted and described earlier, with a space between each probe equal to or slightly more than the thickness of a finger. The quality of the probe should be as mentioned in the probing of the liver. Do not delve deeply with the probe, and the patient lies on his back.
The other method is in the armpit. Lift the skin opposite the spleen where the patient's left arm ends, and lift the skin opposite the spleen where the patient’s right arm ends.  Raise the skin across the width of the body so that the probes fall along the length of the body.
Then, insert the three probes, very carefully, until they penetrate the skin from the other side, and then withdraw the probe, making four probes in total. If you wish, you can probe with the other probe, the one with the three heads.
Then treat the site of the probing after leaving it to drain pus for many days, as this is more effective than all other treatments mentioned before.
Chapter Forty-one.
On Hydrops.
Cauterization is only beneficial for hydrops of the stomach, especially if the one suffering from hydrops has been treated with the types of treatments mentioned in the classification and your treatment was ineffective, then it is necessary to cauterize four around the navel and one on the abdomen.
And another cauterization on the liver and one on the spleen, and two behind his back between the vertebrae, one in front of his chest and another in front of his abdomen, and the depth of the cauterization should be close to the thickness of the skin, then the cauterization is left open to drain the pus for a long time.
And do not leave the patient without treatment after cauterization with what is necessary to bring together the interested parties so that he may recover quickly, and the picture of the iron that is used to cauterize the back is as described before and the one that is used to cauterize the back is olive-colored.
The Second Thirty Chapter.
On Cauterization of the Feet and Legs.
If they swell in hydrops and are filled with yellow water, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot in the notch between the thumb and forefinger.
And place your hand with the cauterizer and do not remove it then raise your hand and do not return it at all because it drains the yellow water and the cauterizer is in this picture.
Then cauterize on the legs two cauterizations in each leg and the cauterization should be at the sharp end of the cauterizer and the cauterization is along the leg one below the knee and another lower than it towards the middle of the leg and on each thigh two cauterizations.
And leave the cauterization open without treatment for a long time to drain it and then treat it with all that has been mentioned.
The Third Thirty Chapter.
On Diarrhea
If the diarrhea is from cold and moisture until it weakens the powers of holding and digesting in the stomach and intestines, and it was treated with various treatments and did not heal, and I saw the patient likely to get worse, then I would do a large enema on his abdomen. As for what has been mentioned in enema of the stomach with a circular cautery and four enemas around the navel, it is gentle with the cauterizing instrument and an enema on cotton above the coccyx large or two.
If you saw the moisture abundant and the patient likely to that, then do an enema on the anus and an enema on each rib and perhaps add two small enemas on the abdomen near the large one, for it is a successful treatment that does not miss its benefit if God wills.
Chapter forty-third.
On Hemorrhoids of the Rectum
If there are chronic hemorrhoids in the rectum, many or one, and they were from thick cold humors or corrupted moisture, and treated with what was mentioned in the division, and the treatment did not benefit, then do three enemas on the lower part of the lumbar vertebrae under the table slightly triangular.
And an enema under the navel like two fingers, and if you estimated that his stomach has become cold and his food is not digested, and you saw his face swollen, then do on his stomach a large enema as mentioned above and an enema on his liver. And another on his spleen with a cauterizing instrument and leave the enema open for a while then treat him until he heals if God wills.
Chapter fifty-third.
On Hemorrhoids
After cutting it if the hemorrhoid was cut, take the cautery that resembles a sickle and then insert it burning into the same cut hemorrhoid, and hold your hand until the cautery reaches the mouth of the duct from which blood flows do this once or twice.
If the boils are many, treat each one as we have described and then treat them with ointments suitable to them until they heal. And if you cauterize them with a large cautery on cotton, it will be more beneficial.
Chapter Thirty-Six.
Of the cauteries that are in the buttocks and its environs.
If the ailment does not respond to the incision and the treatment we have described in its place, perhaps it will heal with cauterization. And if a boil occurs on one of the buttocks and has festered, pus has flowed from it, and foul matter has collected, the first thing that is necessary for you to do is to measure it with a thin probe.
Then know the depth of its cavity with the probe, then take the cautery which resembles a pointed instrument and insert it heated into the same boil on a straight line with the direction of the boil's cavity and the depth that the probe entered, and repeat the cauterization until all those foul substances are burned once or twice or thrice, according to your need.
And beware of burning a nerve if there is one or a large vein, and if the boil leads to the bladder or the intestines.
So beware of all these locations, and only do this if the boil is in a fleshy location and you have judged that it is not infected. Then treat the area until it heals. If the area closes up and the materials are cut off from it and it remains so for a while, know that it has healed completely.
And if the materials are not cut off from it, know that it is infected or that there is a rotten bone or something similar to it in its cavity, which will be mentioned in its place.
Chapter Thirty-Seven.
Of the cauteries of the kidneys.
If pain occurs in the kidney from cold or a violent wind and as a result of this, there is a gathering of the ailment, it is necessary to cauterize it on the lower part of the back, on the same kidney, with the pointed cautery which we have mentioned before. And perhaps you should cauterize it thrice in the same area so that three cauterizations are aligned, and this will be more beneficial.
The Eight-and-Thirtieth Chapter.
In the bladder.
If weakness and relaxation occur in the bladder due to cold and moisture until the patient cannot hold urine, cauterize a line at the base of the penis on the bladder where the pubic hair begins and a cautery on the right side of the penis and another on its left side.
And after the cauterization from each side, it should be the width of a thumb's joint, and make a cautery at the base of the back or two cauteries if needed, and the cauterizing instrument should be as previously mentioned.
The Ninth-and-Thirtieth Chapter.
In the womb cautery.
If a substance from cold and moisture occurred in the womb, which has prevented it from accepting the cord and corrupted its milk and made its passage difficult or caused pain upon coming, then three cauterizations should be applied around the vulva as mentioned in the bladder cautery. And a cautery on the pubic bone at the base of the back or two cauteries, and the cauterizing instrument should be as previously mentioned.
The Fortieth Chapter.
In the hip joint cautery.
Mucous moisture may settle into the hip joint, becoming a cause for it to be dislocated. Its sign is that one leg lengthens over the other when pressed together, and you find an empty space in the dislocation site. Therefore, cauterize the patient on the hip joint itself, like a semi-circle.
After you learn with the pencil around the joint as it rotates so that the same joint falls in the center of the circle, and the cautery instrument is shown in the stomach cautery. If this instrument isn't available to you, then cauterize with three cauterizations using the large olive-colored cautery.
And make the cauterization deep to the extent of the thickness of the entire skin, then treat it until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Forty-One
Concerning Sciatica.
If pain occurs in the buttock and its cause is cold and moisture, and the patient was treated with what was mentioned in the classification and the treatment did not work, and time passed, then it becomes necessary to ease the patient from the thick humors by a poultice of henbane or a poultice of spurge and the like.
Then, apply a poultice and place the  treatment on two blows, either by using burning drugs or by cauterization with fire, and cauterization with fire is done in many ways; one of them is to cauterize three times on the buttock itself, like this.
And it should have a good depth, and the space between each cauterization should be the thickness of a finger, and the cauterizing instrument should be olive-shaped; and one may cauterize once in the middle on top of the hip itself, making four cauterizations. And if you wish, cauterize with the circle which was mentioned before in the cauterization for treating the hip, one cauterization.
So that the circle encircles the whole hip and burns all the thickness of the skin, this is the characteristic of cauterization for sciatica if the pain is persistent in the hip itself and does not extend to the thigh and leg.
But if it extends to the thigh and leg, cauterize two times on the thigh at the place indicated by the patient where he feels pain, and one time above the ankle four fingers' width towards the outer side, slightly, and the cauterizing instrument should be flat and thin, and the depth of the cauterization should be equal to the thickness of the skin only.
And if he indicates that the pain extends towards the toes of the leg, cauterize where he points to you with a point instrument three or four times or more if it is necessary. And if he indicates the pain below the knee towards the leg, cauterize there one time, flat and thin.
Be careful in all your incisions that you do not reach a nerve or large artery, for this will result in a serious and painful ailment to the patient.
And I have seen one and another who was cauterized above the ankle and a cut was made in the incision, so that the leg became swollen until it reached the foot and it ulcerated all over and rotted the whole leg, then diarrhea occurred and death followed afterwards. If the pain is on both sides, cauterize both sides in the same manner.
And some wise men have mentioned in the incision of the hip, that it should be made like a cup made of iron, with its diameter half a cubit and at its mouth, a thickness of a date pit or a little less, and inside this cup there is another cup and a third.
And what is between each cup should be the size of a thumb joint, and the cups should be open on both sides and their height should be about one or two joints and they should take handles from iron well-fixed in the cups and this is its form.
Then it is heated in the fire until it becomes red-hot and throws sparks, then it is placed on the hip of the patient and the patient leans on his healthy side so that three round incisions are made in one go, then he is left for three days and cauterized with butter and the wound is left open for several days.
Many times, then it is treated with ointment until it heals. The author of this book said that this type of incision is rarely used because of its difficulty, its bad appearance, and the few people who can endure it, except that it is a good incision for those who endure it and suffer from it in its place.
As for the incision with burning medicines, it is to make two cups like the throat of a chalice in which a reed pipe made of copper or iron descends.
Its sides should have a height of two joints or so, and what is between them should be the thickness of a finger, and it should be open at the bottom and closed at the top, and some parts are held together like this form.
Then bring it down upon the hip and place the afflicted person lying on his healthy side, pressing your hand firmly. Then pour between the two circles of the sharp water, which is heated by the brazier, and hold it for a Roman hour. The afflicted person endures its sweetness and burning; he feels a burning like fire.
Until the burning subsides, then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe the sharp water from the entire hip with fresh water. Then leave it for three days and apply butter to it until the blackness of the burn disappears. Leave it for days until pus flows from it, for this is more beneficial.
Then treat him with ointments until he heals. If the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make a mold for him similar to what was made for the hip, holding water in it according to the same method as for the hip. This is the description of the sharp water, and I have established it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Take from the salt of the kidney and from unquenched quicklime, one part each, grind them together, and put them in a new pot that has been pierced at the bottom with a small hole equal to what the water enters. Put another pot under the bottom of the pot, filled with water.
And pour on the kidney and quicklime fresh water, enough to cover them with a finger after you have pressed them well with your hand. Leave the pot until the sharp water descends into the bottom pot filled with water, then collect all of that water and pour it on other quicklime and kidney, renewing them again.
For it becomes then very powerful, effective in many medical procedures and for treating all kinds of ailments because it acts like fire itself. And there are medicines that also cauterize the hip with it such as the thaphsia, honey from the  bladders (?), and quicklime mixed with soap steeped in vinegar.
And Galen claimed a story about an ancient man who treated hip pain and sciatica, exaggerating its importance greatly and claiming that it didn't need any other treatment and that it healed with a single application.
Even perhaps he may enter the bath carrying it and come out cured, which is to take from the green shistrj, if the green is not found, then take the recent dry one and finely pound it with some tallow and place it on the hip where the pain is, or in the leg or in the thigh.
And tighten it and leave for three hours or as much as the patient feels the burning subside, then put him in the bath, if his body is softened, then put him in the basin, because the pain goes away and he is healed by God's permission, if he doesn't heal, repeat the poultice after ten days once more.
For he is healed if God wills, and know that it is not proper for anyone to use these remedies except after emptying the body, and Dioscorides mentioned that goat's milk whey when applied as a compress to sciatica was beneficial from it.
And the cautery should be like this, take wool and soak it in old oil and place it on the deep place that is between the thumb of the hand and the cubit, which is closer to the cubit, then take dried goat's whey.
Then ignite it with fire until it becomes embers, then place it on the wool and leave it until it goes out, then take another one and do not stop doing this until the feeling reaches from the middle of the arm to the hip and the pain subsides by God's permission, and this type of cautery is called the goat's whey cautery.
Chapter Forty-Second
On Cauterizing Back Pain.
Pain in the back may occur from many causes, either from a fall or a blow or excessive vomiting and so on, and it is caused by cold wet matter, and cauterization only occurs in this category alone.
That which is caused by cold matter, it is necessary after emptying the patient's body with a poultice of mutton fat and so on, to cauterize on his back where the pain is three rows across the same width as the table, after learning the location with plaster in each row five cauterizations or more according to what you see from the patient’s possibility and strength.
It should be cauterized with a point, and if you wish, cauterize it three or four times with a medium-sized nail iron according to this picture.
The Third Chapter.
In cauterizing the beginning of the hump.
This ailment often occurs in young children, and its sign at the beginning in a child is that shortness of breath occurs when standing up and moving, and you find at the end of the vertebrae of his back a bead that has protruded above all the other beads.
So if you see this and want to stop it, cauterize it with an iron that is circular in shape according to this picture. To take the cauterization on each side of the vertebra equally, and if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a point iron in two or three rows, and let the points be close to each other, then treat the area until it heals as we have mentioned.
And beware that you do not use cauterization in the hump that is from a nerve tightening,.
The Fourth Chapter
In cauterizing gout and joint pain.
If the pain in the joints is from cold dampness that flows into any member of the body, then if the pain occurs in the legs, it is customary for physicians to call it gout specifically.
So if the cold gout is treated with the types of treatment mentioned in the division and the pain does not go away, then cauterization removes it, which is to cauterize after emptying around the joint of the leg many times, and the iron should be medium-sized olive on this picture.
And if you need to cauterize on the face of the leg, do so with a point iron, and if the pain rises to the knees or to other joints, and this often happens, cauterize each knee three or four times from each side with this same olive iron.
If you require more than this amount of cauterization, do not overdo it and do not deepen your hand with the cautery but let it be about the thickness of the skin. If the pain ascends to the hips or back, use what was mentioned of the cautery in its chapter.
If the pain is in the hands only, then prick around the wrists as two rows of circles turn. If the pain remains in the fingers, prick them on every node and on the palm. If the pain ascends after days to the elbows or armpits .
Then cauterize them from each side and let the patient not be deprived of good care and taking medicine, for if he eats well and expels phlegm, he will heal with this cautery, God willing.
The Fifth Forty Chapter.
On Cauterizing a Hernia.
If a hernia appears in the groin and some of the intestines and peritoneum have descended into the testicle and it is newly formed, it is necessary to order the patient to abstain from food for the day and use emollient medications that help evacuate stool from his abdomen.
Then have him lie between your hands on his back and order him to hold himself until the peritoneum or intestines protrude, then return it with your finger and learn with the lead pencil under the hernia on the pubic bone a mark resembling half a circle with its ends towards the upper part of the body.
Then cauterize this shape with a hot iron.
Until it turns white and throws sparks, then return the intestines or peritoneum into his abdomen, and let a servant place his hand on the spot so that the intestines do not protrude. Also, loosen between the patient's legs and place a cushion under him and another servant tie around his legs.
And another one on his chest holding his hands, then bring the hot iron down on the same mark and your hand with the iron standing straight, and hold it until it reaches the bone or apply it again if it does not reach the bone the first time.
Take care to avoid the intestines protruding while you cauterize them lest you burn them and thereby cause the patient either death or a great affliction. Know that if you do not cauterize deeply enough, your work will be unsuccessful. And it is necessary for the iron of the youth to be gentle on their bodies and for the elderly on theirs.
Then treat the cauterized area after three days with butter until the marks of the fire disappear, then treat it with all other ointments until it heals. Let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is sealed.
It is necessary to make his diet during treatment the following:  to keep his belly full so that the intestines do not protrude when he moves or strains himself. Then, if he wants to get up after forty days, use a tight bandage and hold it for another forty days, reducing exertion and fullness from food and drink, and loud shouting.
For if he uses this method thus, he will heal completely, God willing. I will mention the treatment of inguinal hernias in its chapter, God willing. As for the hernia that occurs in the rest of the abdomen and is just beginning, if you want it not to increase, cauterize the hernia with a round iron according to its size. And let what you burn from the skin be like a third of it, then treat it with what we have mentioned, for it will not increase, God willing. Some of the ancients mentioned cauterizing the hernia with a triangular iron in this manner.
After you have learned to treat the hernia with cauterization, make a line with the pencil on the side of the top of the hernia and the other line towards the bottom, and lower your hand in the middle with one cauterizing iron. The first cauterization is easier and better, God willing.
Chapter Forty-Six.
On Cauterizing the Varices.
If a loss or blow occurs in some of the organs, and pain persists for a long time and does not yield to medicinal treatment, it is necessary that the point be cauterized with a hot iron, and each organ should be cauterized according to its size, whether large or small, weak or strong.
And if the pain and throbbing cease, then he is cured from the first cauterization; otherwise, it should be repeated upon him because these pains are accustomed to transfer from the organ to what is near it, so it is necessary to follow them with cauterization until the sick person heals.
The Forty-Seventh Chapter.
Cauterizing Leprosy.
As for those with leprosy, they may benefit greatly from cauterization, especially the type of leprosy that comes before the putrefaction of phlegm and blackening.
If you wish to cauterize a patient, if the leprosy is just beginning and you treated it with what was mentioned in the division and it did not improve and did not stop, and you fear that corruption will overcome his entire temperament, then cauterize five points on the head. One in the center of the head as usual, and the second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hair, two on the temples, and one from behind on the nape of the neck, and make your hand's cauterization slightly so that it affects the bone to a slight degree.
And remove scales from it so that breathing becomes easier for the thick steam, and cauterize it similarly on the same spleen as mentioned before. As for if leprosy has persisted in the patient and appeared clearly, then it is necessary to cauterize these points mentioned on the head. And cauterize one point on the tip of the nose, two points on the cheeks, two points on the cervical vertebrae, six on the dorsal vertebrae, one large one on the coccyx at the tailbone area and another above it in the same place, and two on the shins, one on each. Two on each knee, two on each ankle, two on each elbow, two on the armpits, and two on the joints of the fingers of his hands and feet, and on every heel of his legs and wrists of his hands.
And be cautious of the nerve on the back of the heels lest you burn them, and it may be cauterized at the pubic bone and another on the mouth of the stomach and another on the liver, and know that every time you increase cauterization it is more beneficial and better.
And know that the sick person does not feel pain from cauterization as the healthy person does because his body has become numb, and it is necessary that the cauterizations be large or small according to the organs and joints as mentioned previously in the descriptions of the instruments.
Then treat the cauterization with a fine poultice of honey and all other treatments until it heals, if God wills.
The Eighth Forty Chapter.
In cauterization of numbness, when a member from the members has been treated with medications and ointments and bandages but did not heal, cauterize the same numbed member with cauterizations according to what it deserves based on the size of the bone or smallness of the member and let your cauterizations be slightly thicker in the thickness of the skin.
Then treat it with ointment until it heals, and it may be cauterized for some numbness that appears in the hand or foot at the vertebrae of the back when the nerve that moves that member exits, so that the numbness goes away.
And do not proceed with this except one who is knowledgeable about the anatomy of the organs and exits of the nerves that move the body.
The Ninth Forty Chapter.
In cauterization of leprosy.
If leprosy has become chronic and no cure from the remedies of medicine has helped it, then cauterize on it with cauterizations a little depth according to the thickness of the skin until the whiteness goes away and its color changes.
Then, treat it with fine lentils with rose oil, the tongue of a lamb, and the blood of pigeons or doves, one part of each. Mix all together and apply it to a cloth and bind it to the place until it heals.
The Fiftieth Chapter.
Concerning cancer.
If cancer is just beginning and you want to stop it, burn it with a circular cauterizing instrument around it as it revolves. Some wise men have mentioned burning a blister in the center of it, but I do not see this because I expect that it will scald, and I have seen this happen several times.
So the right thing is to cauterize around it in a circle as we said, or with many cauterizing instruments.
The Sixty-First Chapter.
Concerning the treatment of ringworms.
If a ringworm has developed on someone and it is slow to mature, either because of the person's nature, or because of old age if he is weak in blood, or because of time, and you want to speed up the maturation of the ringworm, cauterize around it with many small cauterizing instruments that drip.
Then leave it, for it will speed up the maturation. If you want to cover it with a cauterizing instrument, take the cauterizing instrument whose image is shown here.
And lower it into the center of the ringworm until it penetrates the skin, and let the cauterizing instrument be from below so that the pus can flow easily, then treat it as appropriate until it heals.
The Seventy-Second Chapter.
Concerning the cauterization of ulcers.
An ulcer is a corruption that spreads in the body, eating it away like fire consumes dry wood. If you see an ulcer in a place where cauterization with fire is possible, take many small and large cauldrons, as appropriate for the place containing the ulcer.
Then take it from each side until the entire decay is removed and nothing of it remains at all, then leave it for three days and apply to the burned places powdered sulfur with oil until all scabs and all the decay are loosened.
Then treat it with healing ointments for the flesh. If, after three days, you see that the flesh is growing healthy growth without decay, otherwise, re-burn the remaining decayed areas, and the ulcer may be treated with a strong medicine.
For it is more effective than fire in healing quicker, and I have mentioned treating it with a strong medicine in the division, so take it from there whenever you need it.
The Thirty-Fifth Chapter.
On Burning Nails, Both Reversed and Unreversed.
This ailment often occurs in the soles of the feet, which is a rough thing that afflicts men, and burning it has two methods, either by fire or by hot water.
As for burning with fire, it is to heat a curved iron tool resembling an eagle's feather, made of iron according to the extent of the nail on all sides and having a thin edge, then place a hot protective layer on the nail and turn your hand with the tool around the nail until the tool reaches the depth of the nail.
And leave it for three days to be covered in pitch, then bandage it with pounded fine bread mixed with salt and leave the bandage on her overnight as it will loosen from its roots, and then treat the wound site with a healing ointment for the flesh until it heals, if the nails are not reversed.
And it often occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, so you should take a tube of brass or iron or an eagle's feather, place it over the nail or wart, then pour a small amount of hot water into the tube.
Hold your hand and while turning it slightly, you cause the tube's edge to reach the screw’s base, and the sharp water finds its way down to the screw's root and the patient endures for a little while the pain of the sharp water for a moment.
Then you leave it and the screw will come loose with its roots, thus do this one by one until you reach all that is in it within the body, then treat its places after it has been removed with what grows flesh from ointments.
Chapter Forty-Five.
In the case of a festering sore.
If a festering sore occurs from cold in the nerve or from a quarter fever or otherwise, it is necessary to make four or five poultices on the back of the spine between each bead and a poultice in its chest. And on his abdomen, a poultice with the olive oil iron, so that the festering sore settles and hastens the ripening of the cold illness.
Chapter Fifty-Five.
In the case of a bruise that occurs in the body.
A bad bruise may appear in the body, caused by cold, thick and rotten substances, so when it first appears, a gentle poultice should be applied on top of each sore with a stick whose end has been lit by fire or with the root of long saffron or with an eyeglass iron.
And the buboes may be poulticed at their first appearance in this way so that they do not increase and the effective power of the treatment fades away, and the patient recovers from it except that it is necessary to do this after the patient has been bled.
Chapter Sixty-Six.
In the case of bleeding that occurs when an artery is cut.
Bleeding often occurs from an artery that has been severed at a wound exposed from outside or when cutting a tumor or poulticing a member, etc., making it difficult to stop its flow.
If this happens to someone, hasten with your hand to the artery's mouth and place your index finger upon it and pull it tightly so that the blood is constricted under your finger and nothing comes out of it. Then put in the fire small and large olive-sized pieces of kindling and fan them until they become very hot.
Then take one, either small or large, according to the wound and the place where the artery burst open, and put the hot piece of kindling on the same vein after you hastily remove your finger and hold the piece until the blood stops.
If the blood rushes out when you raise your finger from the artery's mouth and the hot piece of kindling cools, take another hot piece quickly from the prepared kindling in the fire and keep doing this with one after another until the blood stops.
Be cautious not to burn the nerve that may be there so you would inflict another ailment on the patient, and know that if an artery bleeds from it, it cannot be cut, especially if it is a large artery, except in one of four ways: either by cauterization as we have mentioned, or by amputation if it has not already been amputated. For if it is amputated, its two ends contract and the blood stops, or it can be tied with strong thread, or medicine that stops bleeding and tightening with bandages tightly can be applied to it.
As for anyone who tries to cut it with a ligature or by tightening with cord, or by placing burning things and the like on it, it does not stop completely except rarely. If this happens to someone and there is no doctor or medicine available, he should hasten to put his index finger on the mouth of the wound as we have described.
And he should pull it tightly until the blood is constricted and it stops flowing from above the wound and on the artery, and the finger does not remove from it with cold water always, constantly until the blood solidifies and stops, and during that time, you look at what he needs of cauterization or medicine.
Chapter Two.
On incisions, ruptures, venesection and similar surgical procedures.
Al-Khalaf said: We have mentioned in the first chapter all illnesses that are treated with cauterization and corrosive medications, their causes and reasons, instruments, forms of cauterization, and made it sections from the top to the bottom.
And I follow in this chapter that same path so that it is easy for the student to obtain what they need...
Before I begin that, it is necessary for you, my sons, to know that this chapter contains more danger than what is in the first chapter about cauterization.
And because of that, the warning in it should be more severe because work in this chapter often involves the emptying of blood which is responsible for life when opening a vein or making an incision on a tumor, abscess, or to treat a surgery or remove an arrow or make an incision on a stone, and the like, all of which accompany danger and fear and most of them end in death.
And I advise you to avoid falling into what is dubious among you, for in this profession, many types of people with various illnesses may come to you, some of whom have been weakened by their illness and are close to death.
Because of the severity of their illnesses, and the length of their suffering, and the illness's indication of death, and some who exhaust their wealth to seek health from you with a promise of reward, and their illness is stubborn, it is not right for you to help anyone whose characteristics clearly show this.
And let your caution be stronger than your desire and eagerness, and do not proceed with anything of that unless you have certain knowledge about what will happen to the desirable outcome, and apply in all treatment of your illnesses, advancement of knowledge and warning about what leads to safety.
For in that, there is for you help in acquiring praise, glory, remembrance, and thanks. May God enlighten you, my sons, with guidance and not prohibit you from righteousness and success, indeed that is by His hand, there is no god except Him.
I have arranged this chapter into sections according to what came before in the chapter on wounds from the back to the front so that it would be easier for you to obtain what you want from it, God willing.
The First Section.
In Treating the Water That Collects in the Heads of Boys.
This ailment often afflicts boys at birth if the midwife squeezes the baby's head roughly, or it may occur from a hidden cause that is unknown.
I have not seen this ailment in anyone other than boys, and all that I have seen of them died quickly. Therefore, I saw it as best to leave treatment for it.  I have seen a boy whose head was full of water and his head grew larger every day. Until the boy could not sit on himself because of the size of his head, and the dampness increased until he died.
This dampness is either collected between the skin and bone or collected under the bone on the peritoneum, and the treatment for it if the dampness is between the skin and bone and the swelling is small is that you should make a single incision in the middle of the head lengthwise, about two finger-lengths long, until the dampness drains. This is the shape of the scalpel.
If the dampness is more and the swelling is greater, make it two incisions that intersect in this shape:
And if the dampness is under the bone and its sign is that you see the sutures of the head open from every side, and the water sinks when you press it with your hand inward, and this is not hidden from you, then it is necessary to make three incisions in the middle of the head in this shape.
After the incision, all of the dampness comes out, then you sew up the incisions with thread and dressings, then cover it from above with syrup and oil until the fifth day, then tie the bandage and treat the wound with ointment and pastes, do not leave the head binding too tight, and feed the patient with every dry food that is low in moisture.
Until the member is strong and healed, another prescription from incision: observe where the tumor bone appears and the gathering of water because it may be in the back of the head or in its front or on the right or on the left.
So it is meant by incision where the tumor appeared to you and the water filled, so you cut it as much as you can and be careful not to cut a vein so that bleeding occurs and the patient dies from that bleeding along with the expelling of moisture.
Chapter Two.
The cutting of the two veins behind the ears known as the jugulars.
When a severe ailment appears to the eyes or to the chest, and for that time there is no remedy with medicines, then the treatment in this case is the cutting of these two veins.
When you want to cut them, shave the head of the patient with the razor then rub the place with a rough cloth so that the vein appears, then tighten the neck of the patient by means of his garment and look where the sweat pulsates and their locations are the two low spots behind the ears, rarely concealed except in some people.
Then mark them with the stylus and cut them with the scalpel, cutting to the bone, that being the breadth of the head, and if you wish, insert the scalpel from below the vein and penetrate it upwards by cutting, making the length of the cut about two fingers clenched together.
For if the sweat is cut, blood will come out with a pulsating flow that reaches forward and backwards in a continuous stream. If the vein does not appear to the touch, then you should measure from the ear three finger lengths then mark it with the stylus and cut to the bone.
Send from the blood six awqats in the middle and perhaps you send more or less, all that depending on what appears to you from the strength of the patient and the fullness of his veins, then look at the wound if something of the peritoneum remains on the bone, cut it.
So that a hot tumor will not appear and the wound is tightened with a thread from coarse linen, and it is treated with ointments until it heals.
The Third Chapter.
Slitting the Arteries in the Wrists.
If a person experiences chronic sciatica or acute attacks due to hot humors and heat in the muscles of the wrists or severe chronic headache, and treatment with various medical methods has been ineffective, we have tried in these diseases slitting or cauterizing the arteries in the wrists as we described.
And the method of work in slitting them is to shave the hair on the wrists, meaning the superficial artery in the temple because it becomes apparent to you from its pulse and rarely is it hidden except for some individuals.
Or in case of severe cold if it is hidden from you, let the patient pull his head up with the help of his clothing, then rub the area with a cloth or cover the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly visible. Then take the scalpel whose picture is this. Then you gently slit the skin with it until you reach the artery, then insert a ligature into it and pull it upwards until it is brought out of the skin and freed from the membranes beneath it on all sides. If the artery is thin, twist it with the end of the ligature. Then cut a portion from it equal to the distance between its ends and it contracts without bleeding, for if it is not severed and cut, the blood will not stop at all, then drain the blood for six hours to three.
If the artery is large, it is necessary to tie it in two places with a strong doubled thread, and let the thread be either from abrism or from bowstrings, so that the decay does not hasten to it before the wound heals and bleeding occurs.
Then, cut the excess between the ligaments. Do this at that time or after a while. And if you want to mold it like bone with a knife, until its edges become blunt, then it will perform this work in itself or better as we have said.
Except if the patient has a fever or an imbalance in his temperament because cauterization helps to eliminate fluids, so it is more beneficial. It is also necessary after cutting the two arteries to fill the place with wool and put on compresses tightly. After healing, it should be treated with dry medicinal herbs that promote the growth of flesh and plaster until it heals, God willing.
If bleeding occurs from the artery during your work, quickly proceed to cut it either with cauterization or by filling the place with antimony and tightening your hand until the blood stops. If none of these are available to you, put your finger there until the blood clots.
Then, wash the place with very cold water until the pain subsides and tighten it as necessary.
And you bring it down firmly until it reaches the bone, and the sweat is cut in two places so that there may be a distance between its ends, for it does not fuse together with this kind at all, and this is the image of the iron.
The two blades of it should be sharp, resembling the two small pointed ones, except that they are much less sharp than a knife, because if they were as sharp as a knife, cold would reach them faster and the flesh would not be cut quickly;  and if there is some thickness in them, the heat will cling to them.
And flesh is cut quickly by it, and this work is better than all works, lighter and easier, and let there be after the two blades a thickness equal to the thickness of a finger.
Chapter Four.
In the treatment of hot and constant flow of tears from the eyes.
If the tears are constant and their flow is from the vessels on the skull's surface from the outside, and there is no benefit in treating it with medicines, and I see the face of the patient have reddened. And he feels in his forehead a prickling like the prickling of ants, and his eyes are sunken, wet, and the corners of them have been affected and their eyelids have become chafed from the intensity of tears; then they were forced in treating it to this work, and they call it treatment by the sword, which is that you order the patient to shave the hair on his forehead.
Then, you make three incisions on the forehead, parallel to each other along the length of the forehead, and the length of one incision is about two fingers;  the first one is parallel to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, the second one a little distance away from the movement of the muscle in the temple, and the third one on the opposite side.
And be careful not to cut the two arteries on the sides, and keep your hand away from the connection of the jaws;  and let there be after each incision a distance of three fingers compressed, and let it be with you a piece of sponge prepared or many dry cloths for absorbing blood.
Then you insert the pointed double-edged knife, whose image is this. From the incision following the temple to the middle incision and with it you dissect all the skin that is between the incisions, along with the peritoneum on the bone, then do this also from the middle incision to the third incision, then you withdraw this knife. And you insert into the first incision another instrument called a sharp-edged  one on one side and rounded, not sharp on the other, and this is its image:
And you make its sharp side toward the flesh adhering to the skin and its rounded side toward the bone, and you push it until it reaches the middle incision and with it cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes without the cut reaching the outside of the skin.
Then you do this in the middle incision to the other incision, and after a moderate amount of blood has flowed, you press on the sites from where the clotted blood is coming out, then you put a cotton thread soaked in vinegar water in each incision, and place a pad that has been drenched with wine and oil or vinegar and oil on top of it.
So that a hot tumor does not occur, and on the third day, the bandage is removed and a lot of warm water is used for rinsing, then it is treated with a salve of vaseline mixed with rose oil and everything else that surgical wounds are treated with until it heals, God willing.
The Fifth Chapter.
In the Treatment of Tears and Drippings to the Eyes from the Interior of the Head.
When one experiences a lot of acute, sharp, constant dripping and sees the eyes from it sunken and small, and his vision has weakened, and the eyelids are eroded, and the lashes have fallen out from them. And there is a sharp, painful ache deep in the head and a constant sneeze, so know from these symptoms that those materials and drippings come from many deep blood vessels, and the best treatment for this is this treatment, which is to order the patient to shave his forehead and then make one incision in the middle of the forehead.
And there is a sharp, painful ache deep in the head and a constant sneeze, so know from these symptoms that those materials and drippings come from many deep blood vessels, and the best treatment for this is this treatment, which is to order the patient to shave his forehead and then make one incision in the middle of the forehead. Or raise slightly sideways and begin the incision from the left temple to the right temple, making it to the bone and keeping your hand away from the muscles of the temples that move when chewing until the bone is exposed and all blood is wiped with a sponge.
Then separate between the lips of the incision with cotton swab or a piece of linen, then pull from above with sutures and soak the sutures in syrup and oil so that a hot swelling does not occur. And when you dissolve it and see that the hot swelling has broken, it is necessary to scrape the bone until the beginning of flesh growth starts there.
Then treat it with the drying treatment that promotes flesh growth, such as taking two parts of wheat flour and four parts of calamine from which a salve is prepared and used for flesh growth in these incisions.
Chapter Six.
In treating what falls into the ear.
All that falls into the ear is one of four types: either a metallic or semi-metallic stone like iron and glass, or a vegetable particle like lentils, seeds, and the like, or something fluid like water, vinegar, and the like.
And if it is an animal, when a stone or kind of stone that does not easily enter the ear falls into it, receive the ear with sunlight. If you see the stone, put something of violet fat or cerium oil in it, then try to remove it by moving your head or using a cotton swab. And plug the nostrils when sneezing comes after you put a ring of cloth or wool around the ear and pull the ear upwards, as it often exits with this treatment. If it doesn't exit, then try to remove it with a soft cotton swab as shown in its image.
If it comes out with the swab, otherwise try to remove it with a soft, slightly bent blind probe. If it doesn't come out with that, then make a tube of copper and insert one end of the tube into the hole of the ear carefully.
Then plug around the tube with soft, greasy material so that air does not have a way out other than through the tube, then draw it out with your breath forcefully and repeatedly, and very often it will be drawn out this way. But if it is not drawn out as described above, then take a small amount of  the chewing gum of the Arabs or of the sharpened gum that birds use and put it on the end of the probe.
After it has been wrapped in tightly packed cotton, then insert it into the ear canal gently after the ear has dried from moisture, and if all that was described above does not come out, then immediately make an incision before a hot swelling or inflammation occurs.
The incision prescription is to first cut the patient's ear carefully and drain the blood from him according to its strength, then sit the patient between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and make a small incision at the base of the ear near its fleshy part in the lower area.
And the incision should be crescent-shaped until you reach the stone, then remove it with whatever tools you can, and then stitch up the incision immediately and treat it until it heals.
And if the thing that fell into the ear is one of the beans that swell and inflate, try to remove it as described above. But if it does not yield to being removed, then take a thin, delicate scalpel like this.
And try to cut that type of bean that fell into the ear with it, but only do this if you are certain that the bean has been moistened by the ear's vapor until it becomes small pieces, then remove them with a blunt forceps or a soft swab or with suction.
As we mentioned, it is easy to remove them. And as for water entering the ear, it is necessary to use the patient's sneeze with a handkerchief first, and after his ear has been filled with some loose cotton while he is lying on that ear that has water, if it comes out by doing so.
Otherwise, take many small smooth pebbles and warm them slightly by fire, and insert one into the patient's ear hole and make him rest his leg on that side and strike the stone in the ear with another stone.
He should continue to do this with one stone after another until all the water comes out, and he may also bring it out by taking a reed or feather and inserting one end into the ear and heating the other end in fire until most of it burns, then replacing it with another feather.
Do this repeatedly until all the water comes out, or draw it out with a tube as mentioned before with the stone. As for removing any animal inside it, look: if it is small like a flea or similar, treat it as mentioned in the previous section, but...
if its body is large and can be felt, try removing it with a probe and tweezers. This is easier than all other things that may occur in the ear. As for removing a worm that has developed in the ear if you treated it as mentioned in the previous section on 'Earwax' and your treatment did not work...
then you should look into the ear in the sunlight: if something of the worm appears to you, remove it with a probe or tweezers carefully. If nothing appears to you, take a tube of this shape...
Narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, and insert the narrow end into the ear as much as the patient can tolerate, then suck on it with a strong pull. Do this repeatedly until all the worm comes out. If it does not come out, seal around the tube with wax as I mentioned to you with the stone.
If it does not come out with what has been mentioned, use the earwax as I have mentioned before, which was experimented with by the first healers to kill the worm and you will find that in the section on 'Earwax'. It is through this instrument that you pour medications into the ear: its shape is...
As you see, it is made from silver or brass, narrow at the bottom with a small hole, and wide at the top. And if you wish the plunger inside the tube to be of well-fitted brass, or if you wish, take a reed and wrap cotton tightly around its end.
Then you put the grease or juice or whatever you want of these medicines in the tube while it is in the ear, and then insert the reed with cotton from above and squeeze it with your hand moderately until the grease is driven into the middle of the hearing and feels.
With the sick person inside, and let what is poured into the ear have been warmed slightly in the fire, and beware that what is being dripped into it is not very cold or very hot, for the ear cannot tolerate that.
Chapter Seven.
In the Treatment of a Obstruction in the Ear.
Some children may be born from their mothers' wombs and their ear canals unpierced.
And some people may also suffer from a blockage in the ear canal due to an injury or a fleshy growth inside it, and this blockage may be deep within the ear canal beyond sight.
And some may be visible a little outside the opening, and it is seen. The one that appears deep inside the ear and cannot be seen is in most cases difficult to remove, and the one that is seen should put the patient's ear in the sun. And look into it, if you see the blockage visible, then open it with a gentle scalpel, and this is its shape:
Its tip has some slight curvature, and the rest of the scalpel is smooth on both sides so as not to harm the ear. If the blockage is due to flesh that has grown in the ear canal, grasp it with a gentle forceps and cut it gently until all the flesh is removed.
If the blockage is deep inside the ear, take a gentle, smooth wire, warm it slightly in the fire, then insert it into the ear canal. If you feel the blockage and the patient feels heaviness of hearing, move it gently.
Take precaution not to injure the ear nerve and then put a wick in the ear that is the size of the hole, having soaked it in Egyptian ointment, do this for days until you are sure the wound has healed or take a wick, wet it in water, and sprinkle powdered saffron on it.
And use it, and if you see the ear has swollen with a hot pus, it is necessary to remove the wick and replace it with another wick that has been soaked in rose butter until the swelling subsides, then treat her until she heals.
If bleeding occurs, soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use the rest of the treatment that stops the bleeding mentioned in the article on cauterization.
Chapter Eight.
In treating warts that appear in the eyelids.
These warts that appear in the eyelids may be wet or dry, so it is necessary to hold them with a tweezer or pliers and cut them with a scalpel from their roots, then apply powdered saffron to the place.
If it bleeds from them, cauterize it with a fine lentil iron and cover it best after cutting, and often they return if something remains of their roots, and if cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and they do not return.
Chapter Nine.
In treating the cold that appears in the eyelids.
Often, something resembling frost in its severity and rigidity appears in the eyelids.
And because of this, it is called frost, which is the gathering of thick moisture in the upper eyelid and the lower eyelid, and the action in it is to look if the frost appears prominent on the surface of the eyelid, moving in every direction, then its matter is easy, so make a slit in it lengthwise.
Then, I would gently dissect it from all sides until you are free of it, then hang it on the suture and cut it off. If it does not appear to you to be able to cut it off except after the eyelid has been cut by the incision, there is no harm to the patient. If the cut is large, gather it with stitching and treat it until it heals.
And if it is small, there is no harm in leaving it; the ointment will cover it and heal it. If the flap is tilted inwards towards the inner surface, turn the eyelid over and hang the flap with a suture without needing to make an incision, and cut it off from all sides.
If the eyelid has been cut by the incision, there is no harm in this. Then wash the eye after cutting the flap with salt water and treat the area with something that will heal it until the patient heals.
The Tenth Chapter.
In Treating a Stye That Appears in the Eyelid.
A sty is a swelling that occurs in the layers of the upper eyelid, and it most commonly affects children. It weighs down their eyes and causes them to have discharges in the mornings, and they are unable to look at sunlight. Because the tears hasten toward them.
And therefore you see them leaning on their faces always, and on it they sleep. Their eyelids are beneath their eyebrows, wet with a puffiness and swelling of the sty is visible to the eye. And when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the sty between them.  The work to be done is that the patient put his head in a basin.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare from it a wick, and make from that wick a circle the size of what encloses the sty on all sides, then place it on it and press with your fingers on all sides to gather the sty in the center of the circle.
Then make an incision in the middle of that moisture with the knife, a longitudinal incision and do not make it larger than the incision made in venesection. As for the depth, you must cut through all the skin until you reach the trachea.
And in most cases, the trachea protrudes from the incision in the form of a white fatty piece. So you draw it out with a cloth that you have wrapped between your fingers to the outside while you turn your hand right and left until it is separated. And beware of increasing the incision so that the knife does not touch the eye and harm it.
If the trachea does not appear to you in the first incision, it is necessary that you increase the incision a little gently until the trachea protrudes and then draw it out as we said. Then you dip a cloth in vinegar and water and place it on the location and hold it firmly. And some people crush salt.
And he puts it in the depth of the incision so that what remains of that moisture dissolves, then treat him until it is healed. If a hot tumor occurs at the location, treat it with a soothing poultice until it heals.
Chapter Eleven.
In Kinds of Eye Scurvy.
If growths appear in the eyelid, excessive eyelashes beyond the natural course under the natural lashes and they are constricted, then they harm the eye and cause some diseases such as continuous tearing, relaxation of the eyelids, whiteness, and thickening until it becomes a cause for blindness of the eye.
And eye scurvy in four ways, either by cauterization with fire or by a strong medicine as mentioned before in the chapter of cauterization, or that it may be by cutting and stitching or by reed as I will describe this.
It is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your block and then turn the eyelid with your left hand, if it turns, otherwise, insert a needle into it with a thread from below the eyelid and penetrate the needle with the thread from above, and this should be near the hair itself, and draw the thread upward to the eyelid.
Turn it with the forceps and then make an incision in the inner part of the eyelid without the excessive hair, with a scalpel, from the larger canal to the smaller canal. Then loosen the thread and place under the eyelid a small pad of cotton or linen and then learn on the eyelid with ink.
Like the shape of an ace card, except that the shape should be to the extent you want to raise the eyelid because people differ in this respect. Some need a portion of the eyelid to be cut according to how much the eyelid relaxes.
And some need less cutting, all of this according to the relaxation of the eyelid. Then make an incision with a scalpel along the two lines I taught you, starting from the larger canal to the smaller canal, and the incision should be near the natural hair, like the thickness of the forceps.
Then insert the needle into one of the corners of the skin and then loosen it all, then stitch the lips together with a needle and thread of fine wool, and wipe the blood and glue what remains of the threads on the eyebrows with some fine things.
You may wish to do this, or not, then the stitches and threads remain for about three or four days, then treat it, and if you want, leave the wound without stitching and treat it with what dries and contracts, because the eyelid rises when the wound is sealed and joined together, and stitching is better.
So this face of the eyelid, I mentioned it by the ancients, except that there is hardship on the patient, and it is from good work and no danger in it, and another face in the eyelid also, which is to learn on the eyelid a shape like the shape of an ace card as we described. Then raise the eyelid with three needles that are separated or grouped in this image:
Then cut what remains of the eyelid with a small pair of scissors in this image, cutting moderately.
If you cannot hold the forceps, and it does not suit you, take a needle in its eye with thread and insert it in the center of the form, and insert another thread near the larger opening and a third thread near the smaller opening, and gather the threads together with your fingers moderately, then raise your hand with them moderately.
And raise the skin attached to it all as we described, then gather the edges of the wound with the stitching and treat it until it heals. If a hot swelling appears at the time of your cutting or incision, soothe that swelling with the use of pitch and similar soothing ointments.
And it may happen to the lower eyelid that its edges turn inward, so what we mentioned regarding cutting, stitching, cauterization with fire and sharp medication should be used in it. Cauterization with fire or sharp medication is more effective and gentler on the patient than cutting and stitching. Cutting and stitching are also more troublesome.
Cauterization with a reed should be done as follows:  Turn the eyelid and make an incision on its inner side as described, then craft two or three thin reeds or twigs whose length matches that of the eyelid and width is less than the width of a scalpel.
And you should sharpen the ends of them on both sides where the threads will cling, then gently gather them over the remaining portion of the eyelid and tightly pull the reeds from both sides, leaving it for days. The stretched skin dies, darkens, and decays.
Until it falls off by itself, if it delays then trim it with pliers and treat it until it heals. If it unites, the eyelid rises and the edges of the eyelid do not turn inward, and this is the shape of the two reeds crafted in this manner and this measure in length and width:.
Chapter Twelve.
On Raising the Ingrown Hairs from the Eye with a Needle.
If a hair or two hairs need to be worked on, take a fine needle and thread it with a fine, smooth silk thread, then gather its ends and tie them in a very small knot. Let the length of the thread be about a cubit.
Then, in the clamps, place another fine thread without knotting it at the end, and tie its ends if you wish. Then place the patient's head on the stone near the sun so that the work is visible because it is delicate work, then insert the needle with the thread into the base of the extra hair.
And insert it into the eyelid with haste until you bring it out above the natural hair, then pull the thread upward to the clamps and insert that hair, whether one or two or three, no more.
Then pull your hand with it until the hair comes out with the clamps in the eyelid along with the natural hair. If you pulled the clamps and the hair did not come out with them, pull the clamps down with the thread that you had placed in them until the clamps exit from the upper hole.
Then you put the hair back in and pull them both. Do this until it rises in the upper hole and you see it with your eye. Then, release the clamps and thread, take them out, and tighten the eyelid and leave it tightened for two or three days until the hair stays in its place and flesh grows on it.
If the hair is short, either add a long hair from the natural hair so that it rises with it, or leave it until it grows longer after a while, then lift it.
Chapter Thirteen.
On the treatment of hairs that occur in the upper eyelid of the eye.
The one who is afflicted by this hair is called an 'arnibiyyah', and these hairs are either natural or acquired. The acquired ones come from the closure of a wound, a cut, or something like that.
The method of treatment in this case is to make an incision in that abscess and separate its lips, making a wick of cotton between them and tying it until it heals. It is not fitting to use things that dry out and constrict in treating it.
If you do that, the lesion will return worse than it was. Instead, use things that soften it like fenugreek and flaxseed steeped in water mixed with a little bit of cumin and cotton wool soaked in diachylon ointment that has been melted with some fat and applied to the wound.
The aim of treatment is to do everything possible to prevent it from closing up in the same way it was originally. This work we mentioned is only a part of repairing the lesion, not restoring the area to its original form.
Chapter Fourteen.
In Treating an Abscess in the Lower Eyelid
This abscess that is from the lower eyelid,  is truly called a "stratum." It can be natural or accidental. The accidental one is from a wound, cut, or prick, and so forth.
The method of treatment in this case is to take a needle with double thread and insert it into the flesh, passing it from the left corner to the right corner until the thread is at both ends of the flesh. Then, you extend the flesh upward with the needle and cut it with a wide scalpel.
If the eyelid returns to its proper shape, then good. Otherwise, take a spatula and place it on the incision site, turning the eyelid over with it. Make two incisions on the inner side of the eyelid, whose ends meet at the corners of the previously cut section, forming a corner. Until they converge, its shape resembles this shape: .
It is the Greek letter lambda, then remove that flesh as much as the sharp side of it is below the eyelid, and then bring together the separated parts with two sutures using wool thread, then treat it with the softening medications and ointment mentioned until it heals.
And if the lip has been slit by a cut or suture or cauterization, then it is necessary to make a simple incision without hair also on what preceded, then separate the lips with a swab as mentioned.
And the statement of the saying in treating the lip if it is from above or below, that work be carried out according to what appears to you of the form of the lip because it can be very different in appearance, and the craftsman devises the way in whatever way he can.
Until the shape returns to its natural form or approaches it, and the same disease directs you to what is suitable for him of work and tool in most cases,.
The fifteenth chapter.
In the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or the cornea.
This adhesion may expose many people that the upper eyelid adheres to the white of the eye and prevents it from easy movement and hinders its natural actions, so it is necessary to insert a pointed probe under the eyelid.
And raise it up or extend it with a suture, then cut the adhesion with a delicate scalpel that is not as sharp as the edge of the scalpel but is slightly so as not to disturb the patient during the work and the scalpel escapes and harms the eye with its sharpness, and the cutting is like you are peeling off that adhesion.
And expect until if the eyelid returns to its natural form and the adhesion heals completely, then at that time pour into the eye salt water and wash it with it or instill from the zinc ointment dissolved in water, then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a cotton thread.
And place above the eye a compress soaked in egg white, and after the third day use crushed ointments until it heals.
The sixteenth chapter.
In cutting off the fingernail and trimming the flesh of the nails.
The scirrhus comes in two types, either it is a nervous type which resembles tough, thin peritoneum, or it is a non-nervous type resembling a hardened white moisture; if iron touches it or one attempts to take it with pliers, it will break.
No pliers have been found to be effective in it, and both types begin from the larger opening until it spreads gradually until it covers the viewer and prevents light and eye movement, and the way to work in cutting it is that he places the patient's head in a stone block.
Then he opens his eyes and you raise the eyelid with your hand, then you take a pliers with little bending and stretch it upwards and then you take a needle and insert a horsehair or cow hair into it along with a strong thread and bend the tip of the needle slightly and insert it into the middle of the scirrhus.
And you thread it with the needle and tie the scirrhus with the thread and stretch it upwards and peel off the side of the scirrhus next to the pupil with the hair as if you are spreading it with the hair to the end of it then cut the rest at the root of the opening with a fine scalpel or a small pair of scissors and leave the natural flesh of the opening.
So that it does not expose from its cut a constant flow of tears, and it may be stretched with the pliers alone or with the thread as we mentioned then peel it with the smooth scalpel the tip which this image shows.
And be careful not to touch the cornea with the scalpel so that it causes a break and the pupil becomes inflamed, then after cutting it, put something in the eye from powdered salt or from the black lead and leave it until another day then treat it as necessary until it heals.
If the scirrhus is non-nervous and you could not insert a needle into it nor get pliers to hold onto it, then this type of scirrhus is often treated with medicines and heals as described in the classification; if you want to cut it, open the patient's eye.
Take a scalpel that is fine, smooth, and has a weak edge like this illustration: . And scrape the tip of the bone with it gently. If you see that it crumbles and frays, and only a trace of the scraping remains, then put some salt into your eye from the zanzibar  (black) or red salt or powdered salt, and hold the eye shut for another day.
Then, repeat the scraping until it is all gone except if a hot tumor obstructs you in your eye, then leave it and treat the hot tumor until it heals, then return to scraping it until it heals. As for the fleshy outgrowth of meat...
For if the fleshy outgrowth harms the eye painfully, then ligate that fleshy outgrowth with a suture and cut some of it away, and do not overdo the cutting lest there be a flow of tears, then instill into the eye socket red or zanzibar salt until it heals.
The Seventeenth Chapter.
On cutting away growths and excess meat in the eye.
A red flesh may grow in the eyes of some people, piled upon itself until it covers the vision or approaches it or overflows onto the eyelids and perhaps the eyelids turn outward resembling a blooming carnation.
And the work on it is that the patient places his head in a stone block, then opens his eyes and seizes that entire red flesh with the sutures placed accordingly.
Or grasp it with pliers or a hook, then cut the first flesh first until all of it is removed by cutting and be careful of the eye lest it be harmed during work, and your cutting should be either with the scalpel that we described in scraping the bone tip or with a small pair of scissors. Like those which are used to pick up threads as they appear in the illustration in this book.
And if the cutting is complete and all the redness has gone, fill the eye with finely ground salt or instill a drop of red zizira or similar potent drugs, and put cotton wool dipped in albumen on top of the eye from the outside to prevent hot swelling.
If some redness remains and the blood overpowers you and you fear hot swelling, leave the eye alone and treat it with something that calms the swelling, then return to the operation until it heals. Do the same for any excess flesh that appears in the eye of this type.
Except that you should avoid treating every weak eye, either by natural remedies or surgery with metal instruments, and do not put your hand into anything of these operations until you see that the organ is capable of it.
The Eighteenth Chapter.
On Removing a Foreign Body from the Eye.
The foreign body is red veins that intertwine on the eye, obscuring vision and weakening the eye with the passing days. It is necessary for you first to examine it: if the eye in which the foreign body is located is strong and there is no other illness in it besides the foreign body.
Then the removal is for you to order the patient to put his head in a box, then attach those veins with a single thread or two, depending on your skill, and the threads should be finely flexible like this:
Or two strands interwoven into one body like this:
Then, with a fine pair of scissors, gently pluck those veins until you see the eye has rid itself of them and the blood has subsided. Be careful not to harm the eye with the edges of the scissors. Let your work be during half the day facing the sun.
And be very careful in your work so as not to cut any other veins. When you finish, instill green or red myrrh into the eye so that its sharpness will eat away at any remaining foreign body. If you cannot remove it all in that hour, then compress the eye with something that soothes eye pain.
Leave it for days until the pain subsides and the hot swelling is calmed, then resume work on this same method until the scar of the incision disappears completely.
Leave it [and have the head of the patient on the student's lap, and the other wipe away tears and examine the front and back of the eye]  The principle in working is to open the eye with fixed or triangular openers held by a student.
Fix [it] and have the head of the patient on the student's lap, and the other wipe away tears and examine the front and back of the eye. And you can choose to begin with the forceps from the upper or lower part of the eye, and it is better that two tweezers be placed in the upper cheekbone, one at the end and the other at the beginning.
And hold it between the middle and index fingers, then attach tweezers from below opposite them. Then grasp with your ring and little finger, and remove your hand gently until you see all the blood vessels have risen. Cut from the smallest end using scissors if possible, or a gentle scalpel.
And insert the needle into the opening and straighten all the blood vessels until they rise on the ligament, and do not cut off the weeping for if tears and blood mix you will be in trouble.
Then cut with the scissors all that exceeds the edge from above and below until nothing remains except in the cornea. If you can raise it from the cornea, detach it with the needle; this is better, and it may be difficult for some people.
And if you have cut it, let it remain untouched for days until the pain subsides and the hot swelling calms, then resume working on it.
Chapter Nineteen.
On restoring the feather to the nose.
Physicians call the feather a "nasus" if it is treated with cautery or sharp, corrosive medicine as described above and does not heal, there is no remedy except to open the swelling when ripe and extract all the moisture or pus within it.
Until the bone is revealed, and if the bone is revealed and you see damage or blackness in it, separate it with a tool whose image is:
And it is called the rasp, made from Indian iron, and its head is rounded like a pearl. Fine engravings of the chisel or scalpel are etched on it. You place it on the site of damage in the bone, then turn it between your fingers while you squeeze your hand slightly until you feel that the damage has been separated.
And you do this several times, then cover the site with drying and astringent medicines. If the site is sealed and flesh grows in it, the flow stops and it remains for forty days, not renewing, not being disturbed, and no incident occurring to it.
So know that it has healed, otherwise there is no remedy but to return the  inserted probe to the nasal passage in this manner: reveal the bone again with iron or a sharp medicine. If the bone is revealed, take a swab soaked on this form:.
Its tip is triangular and its shaft is conical, tapering towards the end as you see. Then place it on the bone itself, near the nasal passage and slightly farther away from the eye with your hand, then turn your hand with the swab until it penetrates the bone and the patient feels it.
If he feels air coming out of it when he holds his nose, then cover the site with drying and astringent medicines as I have taught you. If flesh grows and the place hardens, the material that was protruding outwards returns to the nose, which is easier for the patient, God willing.
The Twentieth Chapter.
In Returning an Inturned Eye.
If the eye is turned inwards, with no damage or loss to sight, it should be made easier for the patient, then it should be separated in the skull and a small bandage placed on the back of the head without any condition, and a fine syringe used.
Then you place on the eye a poultice made of acacia gum, frankincense, and resin, and then bind the eye from above with a pad using many layers, and the recipe for the layers is to take a soft burning cotton fabric and fold each piece of it four times to make many.
Then you place them one on top of the other as much as the eye needs, and then bind it with a strong, firm piece of cloth, and reapply the dressing from inside without a condition, then remove the dressing and leave the eye bound for a day and night.
If the bandage relaxes during that time, it is necessary to tighten it again, then remove the bandage after a day and night as we said. If you see that the eye has returned, otherwise, reapply the dressing, layers, tightening, and dressing until it returns.
The twenty-first chapter.
In cutting the eyelid.
If a hernia appears in the eyelid layer and it protrudes outside the eyelids like the shape of a fig and disfigures the appearance of the human being, and you want to cut it, then the work is done as I describe.
And it is that you insert a needle into the base of the hernia from below to above, then insert another needle into it with a doubled thread from the side of the mouth, and pass through it and leave the first needle as it is.
Then you cut the place where the doubled thread bends and tie some of the hernia around the needle, tighten it well, then remove the needle and put on the eye cotton soaked in egg white and leave it until the threads fall off with the hernia, then treat the eye with what strengthens it.
Until the wound heals, and you may tighten the eyelid from each side with a circle of cloth until the eye becomes more relaxed, then apply a fine scalpel that reaches the depth of the eye so that the egg white moisture drains and the eye descends and shrinks on its place, then tighten it until it heals.
The Twenty-Second Chapter
On treating the carbuncle.
This ailment called a carbuncle is a swelling that gathers in the eye, resembling water flowing down but not being water, and the way to treat it is to make the patient sit on a straight-backed chair, then take his head in your hands from both sides.
And move him until you see the swelling descend downwards with your eye, then it settles and does not move, and light flows and the patient sees things as he used to, if it doesn't descend downwards we know that it is water, if the swelling doesn't appear to descend as mentioned.
Otherwise, have the patient sit before you and take a fine scalpel and make a small incision above the cornea at the junction of the carbuncle with the cornea in the circle until the matter comes out.
If it comes out, pour into the eye hot water that you have mixed with honey or water that has been boiled with quince seeds and honey, then treat him with the rest of the treatment until he heals.
The Twenty-Third Chapter
We have mentioned the types of water in the classification and which one is suitable for cupping with a detailed and explained explanation, so take it from there on sound health. Then, it becomes necessary to make the patient sit before you comfortably facing the light near the sun.
And tie his healthy eye and pull it tight, then lift the eyelid of his eye with your left hand if the eye that has water is the left eye or with your right hand if it is the right eye.
Then place the tip of the cupping glass near the circle at a thick, strong suction in the white of the eye from the side of the smaller pupil, then push the cupping glass forcefully while turning it with your hand until it penetrates the white of the eye and you feel that the cupping glass has reached something empty.
It is necessary that the depth of the probe's insertion correspond to the distance from the pupil to the end of the blackness, which is the circle of the eye, for the copper is seen by the viewer in the same way as the eye itself because of the transparency of the cornea, then the probe goes above to the place where the water is.
Then you press it down repeatedly, if the water descends from its time, then the patient sees what has been opened to his sight from his time and the probe in his eye, then it settles for a while, if the water rises, bring it down again without removing the probe.
If it settles and does not rise, then remove the probe gently while you slightly wrinkle your hand with it, then dissolve in the water a little bit of pure salt and wash the eye from inside with it, then place over the entire eye from outside a compress or cotton wool soaked in water.
Rub it with rosewater and egg white, and tie the healthy eye to it, but as for us and our people we place cumin powder mixed with egg white on top, if the probe does not enter the eye due to its hardness because there are people whose eyes are very hard indeed. Where you need to take the forceps called the "brid," which has the following image:
Then you drill with it the very place of the adhesion only and do not insist on drilling, but rather you gently direct the probe into a tender spot then insert the probe as we have mentioned, and upon completion of your work prepare for the patient to lie down tightly in a darkened room on his back.
And he refrains from all movements and coughing, and you make his food what softens his nature, and he does not move his head right or left at all, and the bandage remains on him until the third day, then dress his wound in that darkened room and try his sight.
And show him things then return the bandage until the seventh day, and it is not necessary to do that during the time of treatment or after the water rises from its time but rather avoid doing so before the water quickly ascends due to intense looking.
If a hot tumor appears, it is necessary to cauterize the eye before the seventh day and do this with something that calms the tumor until it subsides, then at that time release its vision and place on its face a blindfold which trains its vision from underneath for days while he is in that dark room.
He exits the house gradually and behaves in his affairs, and know that the surgeon cannot dispense with observation many times, then he proceeds to the work, and I have heard from some Iraqis that it has been said that they make a suction cup in Iraq which absorbs water with it.
And I have not seen anyone in our country make that, nor read it in a book from the early books, and it may be something new, and this is a picture of types of suction cups for him to stand on from his ignorance:
It is made from brass especially and its end is with this fineness with the eye triangularly pointed.
Chapter Twenty-Four.
On treating flesh that grows in the nose.
Flesh may grow in the nose of various kinds, some of it like a scorpion with many legs, and some of it is cancerous flesh, hard-colored, and some of it is soft flesh not hard-colored.
And if any of this flesh is soft, it is not malignant nor cancerous, then it is necessary for the patient to sit before you facing the sun and open his nostrils and place the forceps in that flesh and then pull it outwards and cut what you grasped from it with a sharp fine scalpel from one side.
Until you know that all the flesh has gone, and if something remains of it which you could not cut, remove it with one of the gentle instruments gently so that nothing remains of it, then if blood overpowers you or a hot tumor appears.
Then meet it with what is necessary, or if it was from the malignant tumors, then hasten to cauterize it until the bleeding stops and all the flesh goes away, and after cutting, place water or a drink in the nose so that the nostrils open and moisture flows down into the throat.
Know that if he has healed, and if the moisture has not run off as it should, know that his inside is meat raw in the upper part of the loose bone;  the instrument did not reach it with a cut, so then you must take a thread from linen which has some thickness.
And you knot it with many knots and make between each knot the measure of a finger or less, and the patient moves his hand to insert one end of the thread into his nose with moderation or whatever he is able, after making it like a bead, and you pull on its wind until it reaches the nostril.
And it comes out on his throat, and many times the boys do such an act in schools, which is easy for whoever wants to do it, then you bring together the two ends of the thread, one that came out on the mouth and the other that remained in the nose.
Then you use the spreading of flesh with the knots in the thread, doing so until you learn that the flesh has been cut by the thread of the knot, then you take out the thread and it remains in the nose after wiping the blood, a wick which has soaked in Egyptian ointment, do this for three days or more.
Until the ointment eats up all that remains of the flesh, then the last thing in the nose becomes a lead pipe for days until it heals, if he needs treatment to dry it out, you used that.
And this is a picture of the spout which drips medicines into the nose:
It is placed from silver or copper like a small candlestick, open on the inside and with a channel as well.
And if you wish, you make the tube closed like a pipe and the spout of the ointment flat.
It has a handle at its end, as you see, and you grasp it when the fat is heated in it or whatever from juices or things that are fluid.
The twenty-fifth chapter.
In cases of nasal polyps growing at the tip of the nose.
Often, a polyp grows at the tip of the nose and increases in size with the days until it becomes unsightly.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut it at its first appearance and remove all of it. Then apply to the place either a cautery or a burning medicine that replaces the cautery. If cutting it is delayed until it grows large, look if it is hard and rigid like wood with little sensation.
Do not expose it to iron, for it is a cancerous tumor and I have often seen that from cutting this tumor a great affliction returned upon its owner. If the tumor is soft to the touch and not rigid in color, and you see that cutting can be done throughout it all. Then, empty the ailment and cut it without hesitation or stopping, and treat the place with what dries and contracts until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Sixth.
On stitching up the nose, lip, and ear. If the connection of them is severed from a wound or similar, know that when the connection is severed in one of these cartilages, little that is helpful can be done except for some people.
Therefore, when one is presented with something like that, look if the wound is fresh with blood, then gather the edges of the wound with stitching and treat it until it heals. If the separation of the connection has separated its edges and each incision became whole, then it is necessary to scarify each incision with the thickness of its visible skin until it bleeds.
Then, gather the edges with stitching and tighten them, and apply a poultice of frankincense and mastic powder on top. Place from above the gauze a plaster of palm ointment or another binding ointment and leave it tightened for two or three days then unwrap it.
The drug is changed and left until the threads separate themselves, then it is treated with ointment until it heals. The description of suturing is to bring together the separated parts, either with needles as we described in the stitching of the abdomen, or with thread as we have informed you there.
The twenty-seventh chapter.
On extracting a knot that has appeared in the lips.
Many people may appear to have small, hard tumors inside their lips, some resembling a corn, and others smaller or larger. Therefore, it is necessary to turn the lip and cut on each knot, and attach it with a suture.
And it is cut from each side, then the place after cutting is stuffed with powdered alum until the bleeding stops, and it is rinsed with vinegar, salt, and the places are treated with what is inside them until the wounds heal.
The twenty-eighth chapter.
On cutting excess flesh in the gums.
Often, excess flesh grows on the gums, which the ancients call apulus. Therefore, it should be sutured or grasped with a forceps, and cut at its root, and the time is left to drain or bleed, then powdered alum is placed on the site.
Or one of the clamping, drying points if that flesh returns after treatment, it often returns so cut it again and cauterize it, for it does not return after cauterization.
The twenty-ninth chapter.
On extracting teeth with iron.
Sometimes, coarse, unsightly scales may gather on the surfaces of teeth from inside and outside, and between the gums. They may darken, yellow, and turn green until this causes decay to reach the gums, and disfigures the teeth for that reason.
Therefore, it is necessary to make the patient sit between your hands and their head on a stone, and extract the molar and tooth where you see scales and something like sand until nothing remains of it, and do the same with the blackness, greenness, yellowness, and so on until it is cleansed.
If what is in it from the first stage of the extraction goes, otherwise you return to it with the forceps another day and a second and a third until you reach the goal of what you want, know that the molar requires different shapes and many forms of forceps according to what is suitable for your work.
For the forceps that extracts a tooth from inside is not like the one that extracts it from outside, and the one that extracts it between teeth is in another form, and these are several forms of forceps that you have all prepared.
Chapter Thirty.
On Tooth Extraction.
It is necessary to treat the molar for its pain with all means and delay its extraction, as there is no substitute for it if it is extracted because it is a noble essence, even if there is no other choice but to extract it.
And when the patient decides to extract it, it is necessary to ensure that the painful molar tooth is sound for you. For often the patient deceives himself about the pain and thinks it is in the sound tooth, so he extracts it, then the pain does not go away until he extracts the diseased molar, we have seen this many times from the actions of barbers.
If the painful molar tooth is sound for you, then it is necessary to circumcise around the tooth with a scalpel that has some strength until the gums are separated from all sides, then move it with your fingers or with the delicate forceps first a little at a time until you dislodge it.
Then, you can then seize it with the two large forceps with a firm grip and the patient's head between your knees held securely so that he does not move, then pull the tooth straight so as not to break it. If it does not come out, otherwise take one of those instruments and insert it under it from each side gently and shake it as you did at first.
If the molar tooth is perforated or fractured, it is necessary to fill that hole with a piece of felt and plug it tightly with a fine point so that it does not come loose while you are pulling on it with pliers, and it is necessary to investigate by probing around the gum from all sides indeed.
And be cautious in your effort so that you do not break it, for if some remains it will return on the sick person as a pain greater than his first pain, and avoid doing what ignorant blacksmiths do in their bridge and rushing to demolish without using what we have described.
For often they inflict great harm on people, the least of which is that the molar tooth breaks and its roots remain, all or some. Or that they may extract some of the jawbone as we have seen many times, then gargle after its extraction with wine or vinegar and salt, if bleeding occurs from the place, then often it happens so tamp it at that time with a little bit of saffron and fill the place.
Or if that does not work for you, we have the image of the pliers, the delicate ones by which the molar is moved first, its ends should be long and the handle short and thick so that it does not bend when you grasp it with the molar, and this is the image of the large pliers:.
They are as you see, thick handles so that when you grasp them they do not give themselves and do not bend, short ends, and let them be of Indian steel or well-forged hardened steel with tips that enter each other so that it grips tightly and securely.
And you can make the ends like a chisel, they will also be strong in clamping.
Chapter Thirty-Three.
In Extracting the Roots of Teeth and Removing Broken Jawbones.
If the root of a tooth remains after its extraction, and is broken, it is necessary to place cotton soaked in oil on the site for a day or two until the site relaxes, then insert the forceps or tweezers into it. Which resemble its edges the beak of the bird called the bulbul, and this is a picture of the tweezers: .
It is made like a scalpel from inside or like an eskefal. If it does not work for you to remove it with these tweezers, then it is necessary to dig on the root and expose all the flesh with the scalpel, then insert the tool that resembles a small pulley, and this is its picture:.
Short at the end, slightly thick and not smooth so that it does not break. If the root comes out with this, otherwise use these other tools, and this is their picture, the first one is three-pointed at the end with some thickness: .
A picture of another delicate threefold :.
And we can also use this tool with two prongs, and this is its picture too: .
And with other tools and instruments mentioned in the record of teeth, we can also use this tool that resembles a large spindle, and this is its picture: .
Three-pointed at the end, curved and slightly thick so that it does not break, and not smooth. Know that tools for teeth are many, as well as all other instruments, they are hardly countable, and the skilled craftsman in his craft may invent tools for himself according to what the work and diseases themselves indicate.
Because some diseases have not been mentioned for which the ancients created tools due to their different types, if a bone from the jaw or one of the bones of the mouth breaks or decays, search for it in its place with what suits him from one of these tools and tweezers that were mentioned in extracting the roots.
And we use forceps, and this is its picture: .
There should be some thickness, a little bit, to control the bone so that it does not slip until the bone is brought out, and we compress the place with medicines suitable for this purpose. If the bone has slight decay, remove its decay and blackness until it is purified, then treat it until it heals.
Chapter Thirty-Two.
In the emergence of teeth growing on others.
If teeth emerge on a path other than their natural course, they become misshapen, especially if this happens in women and slaves. It is necessary to look, and if the tooth has emerged behind another tooth.
And if it could not be moved or pushed back, then remove it. And if it is attached to another tooth, cut it with this instrument whose image is:
And it resembles a small beak, and let it be from Indian steel, very sharp at the tip, and your cutting should be done for many days due to the hardness of the tooth so that you do not disturb the other teeth. As for if it emerged firmly rooted, then push it back with a cold chisel whose image is:
It should all be from India and its end be very finely engraved, resembling the chisel used for making needles. Use it to gently push back the tooth a little at a time over many days so that you do not shake the tooth and make it fall out, then file it afterwards and remove it with some pliers.
And if a tooth has broken off from it, and it hurts the tongue when speaking, then it is necessary to also push it back until the roughness of that breakage goes away and it becomes level and smooth so that it does not hurt the tongue or corrupt speech.
Chapter Thirty-Three.
In bracing the loose teeth with silver wires or gold wires.
If the front teeth become loose and move from a blow or fall, and the patient cannot bite on anything to eat lest they fall out, and you treated them with astringent medicines, but the treatment was ineffective.
The remedy for this is to sew it with a gold or silver thread, and gold is better because silver rusts and decays after days, and gold remains in its state forever, it does not undergo that, and the thread should be medium in thickness and width according to what can fit between the teeth.
And the way to weave it is to take the thread and put its loop between the two healthy teeth, then weave at both ends of the thread between the mobile teeth, one or more, until the weaving reaches the healthy tooth from the other side.
Then she re-weaves to the side where it began and pulls her hand gently and wisely so that it does not move at all, and the tightening of the thread is at the roots of the teeth so that it does not slip, then she cuts the ends of the excess thread with the scissors and gathers them together and weaves them into a knot with the pliers and hides them between the healthy tooth and the mobile tooth.
So that it does not harm the tongue, then she leaves it like this tightened for as long as it remains. If it unravels or its tightness breaks, she tightens it with another thread, and she enjoys it like this throughout her life, and this is the image of the teeth and the appearance of weaving in two healthy teeth and two mobile teeth as you see:
And the fallen tooth or two may be returned to its place and woven as we described, and it remains. But this is done by a skilled craftsman, and he may carve bone from the bones of a cow to make it in the shape of a tooth and put it in the place where the tooth fell out. And he tightens it as we said, and it remains, and he enjoys that.
Chapter Forty-Third.
On cutting the tether under the tongue that prevents speech.
This tether under the tongue may be natural, which a human is born with, or it may be accidental from an injury that has healed.
The procedure is to open the patient's mouth and head in a stone, raise their tongue, then cut that nerve ligament across until the tongue releases from its hold. If there is some stiffness and complexity because of an old wound, insert a suture into it and cut it across until the ligament breaks and the knot dissolves.
Beware that the cut not be in the depth of the flesh so that a vein is cut there and bleeding occurs. Then, rinse the area after the cutting with rose water or vinegar and cold water, then put under the tongue a cotton wick which the patient holds every night.
So that it doesn't fuse again, if bleeding occurs, put powdered saffron on the spot, and if the blood overcomes you, cauterize the place with a convex lens burner suitable for that purpose. Then treat it with all other treatments until it heals.
Chapter Thirty-Five.
On extracting the frog born under the tongue.
A growth under the tongue may occur resembling a small frog, preventing the tongue from its natural function and perhaps growing until it fills the mouth. The procedure is to open the patient's mouth facing the sun and look at the growth.
If you see it black in color or hard, with no sensation for the patient, do not touch it, as it is cancer. If it leans towards whiteness and has moisture, suture into it and cut it with a delicate scalpel and remove it from every side.
If you are overcome with blood while working, put powdered saffron on it until the bleeding stops, then return to your work until you remove it completely, and then rinse with vinegar and salt.
Then treat it with all other appropriate treatments until it heals.
Chapter Thirty-Six.
In the Treatment of Tonsil Tumors
And what grows in the throat from other tumors, may appear inside the throat glands that resemble the glands that appear externally and are called tonsils; if treated with what has been mentioned in the classification and it did not heal.
Look then, if the tumor is hard like lead and has little feeling, do not expose it to iron. And if it is red in color and its base is thick, do not also expose it to iron for fear of bleeding, but leave it until it ripens; either it will subside by itself or it will burst from itself.
And if it is white in color and round, and its base is soft, this is what should be cut. And the work done in it is that you look before you work, whether the heat of the tumor has subsided completely or some lessening.
So, when this is the case, seat the patient with his feet in the sun and his head on a stone and open his mouth and take an assistant by your hand who presses his tongue down with a tool whose image is:
It is made of silver or copper and is thin like a knife. When you press the tongue down with it, the tumor becomes visible to you; then take pliers and insert them into the tonsil, and pull it outwards as much as possible without pulling anything from the peritoneum along with it.
Then cut it with a tool whose image is like scissors, but the ends of each are turned so that each end is very sharp towards the other; it is made of Indian iron or Damascus steel:
If this tool is not available, then cut it with a scalpel whose image is:
Sharp on one side and not sharp on the other side, so after cutting one tonsil you cut the other in the same manner of cutting, then after the cutting, gargle the patient with cold water or vinegar and water.
If he has bleeding that is gaping, apply water mixed with the rind of pomegranates or fig leaves or something similar until the bleeding stops, then treat it until it heals. And sometimes growths may appear in the throat other than the tonsils, so they are removed as described for removing tonsils.
I treated a woman who had a tumor that had grown inside her throat, pressing against the esophagus, with little feeling, almost closing the throat. The woman was breathing through a narrow passage and it prevented her from eating or drinking water.
And she was close to death if she had lived for another day or two, and the tumor grew from it two branches until they came out of her nostrils. So I acted quickly, I inserted a hook into one of them and pulled it, and a piece that was healthy came out.
Then I cut it where I reached it from the nostril, and I did the same with what protruded from the other nostril, then I opened her mouth and pressed her tongue down, and inserted the hook into the tumor itself, then cut some of it, and only a little blood came out.
Then the woman's throat opened, and she immediately began to drink water, then she was able to eat, and we continued to cut from that tumor repeatedly for a long time, and the tumor would grow back in place of what we cut until it took a long time for both of us.
Then her throat healed, and the tumor inside her throat disappeared so it stopped growing, then she traveled from that place and I did not know what God had done to her after me.
Chapter thirty-seven.
On removing a tumor of the palate.
The one called a  ‘plum’ if it descended from the throat to the palate and swelled up and was white and oblong, then it is called ‘a column’. And if it was thick at the bottom and round, then it is called a plum. If it was treated with what we mentioned in the classification, and the treatment did not work.
I saw the hot swelling had subsided and it was delicate, so it should be cut. And that which of it was not joined together in a round shape and did not have length and was either bloody or like the color of bile or black or without feeling, it is necessary to avoid cutting it.
There is danger for the sick person in this, so it is necessary when you see it on the description that was mentioned of its whiteness and length, that you make the sick person sit facing the sun and press his tongue with the instrument which is described before, then insert the probe into the cavity.
And pull it down and cut it with one of the two instruments which were mentioned in cutting the tonsils, and it is necessary that you do not cut from it except what increased beyond the natural order without addition because if you cut more from it, you will harm the voice and speech.
Then after the cutting, you use what we described in cutting the tonsils and treat it until it heals, if the sick person refuses to have it cut, it is necessary that you use the trick in its treatment without fear or caution, and the appearance of the treatment is with the sharp medicine which is to put the head of the sick person in a stone.
Then you press his tongue with the instrument which we mentioned, then take from the sharp water that was mentioned in the chapter on treatment and knead with it a dough not extinguished, making it neither thick nor thin, and fill this instrument with it and this is its form:
Its end which you put in the medicine is a cavity like the cavity of a moroccan spoon, and you put the instrument with the medicine on the same place and the sick person lying on his side so that saliva flows from within his throat so that nothing will go down into his throat to harm him.
Then you hold your hand with the medicine and squeeze it on the place for half an hour until you see that it has turned black and the sting of the medicine subsided, if you want to take cotton, wrap it around the end of a moroccan spoon and dip the cotton in the medicine.
Insert cotton into a tube from above until the cotton adheres to the surface. Do this repeatedly until you reach the desired thickness of the plug, then leave it. It will dry and fall off after three or four days. If you need to reapply the medicine, repeat the process.
After the plug is in place, wipe around the wound with cotton soaked in butter and use it to remove any medicine that has spread. Then rinse with cold water and treat externally with poultices and internally with gargles until healed. This type of treatment is safer than cutting and less frightening.
The wound can also be treated with something milder than a plug or cutting. It is treated with incense in this way: take saffron, wormwood, spurge, henbane, frankincense, hyssop, and similar herbs. Gather all of them, or some of them, in a pot and immerse them in vinegar.
Bring to a boil with the pot covered in clay from the wise man's workshop. Make a hole in the center of the lid and place the perforated instrument on it, which is made of silver or copper:
Insert the end with the sieve into the patient's mouth until the vapor rises to the wound through the tube, so that the wound is properly covered. Repeat this several times until it dries out. Beware of doing this treatment at the first occurrence of the tumor.
Because it often increases the tumor, it is best to do this when the tumor has subsided and become less hot. If you don't have this instrument, take a tube and attach an eggshell to its end so that the patient's mouth doesn't burn.
Because the eggshell prevents the heat of the vapor from burning the mouth, and this is a good treatment with safety.
Chapter Thirty-Eight.
On extracting thorns and other things that lodge in the throat.
Often a bone, or thorn of fish or something similar lodges in the throat and it is necessary to remove what is visible to the eye after compressing the tongue with the instrument at the sun.
So that what is in the throat may become clear to you, and if it does not appear and remains hidden in the throat, it is necessary to induce vomiting in the patient before he swallows his food into his stomach, for perhaps the lodged thing will be brought up by vomit, or the patient will swallow a piece of bread or the root of a leek.
or he may swallow a mouthful of dry bread or take a piece of soft sea sponge, tie it to a thread, and have him swallow it, then when it reaches the place of the thorn, pull on the thread quickly, do this several times.
For often the thorn or bone gets stuck there and comes out, but if it does not come out by what has been mentioned, then use an instrument of lead in this form:
It should be a little thicker than the reed, and at its end there is a groove into which the patient inserts in his throat gently while raising his head upwards, taking care not to touch his larynx so that he may not cough, and push out the bone or thorn, or the physician himself may insert it with his hand.
And it is better for the patient to insert it, as he knows the place of the lodged thing and pushes downwards or pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all this according to what seems best for him until it comes out.
The Ninth Thirty-First Chapter.
In Removing Lodged Things from the Throat.
If you have treated the lump with what was mentioned in the division of treatment by medicines and it did not benefit, then look into the throat of the patient at the sun after compressing his tongue with the instrument that has been described to you.
If your sight falls upon the lump, draw it out with a small snare or a soft and firm thread; if you cannot do so with this, then take a hollow tube, insert it into the throat of the patient near the lump, then insert a piece of iron heated in fire into the inside of the tube.
Do this several times and the patient abstains from water all day, then he takes a mouthful of cold water and opens his mouth in it and gargles with it and does not swallow even a drop, and moves the water sometimes with his hand.
For if the phlegm falls on the place when it feels water, and if it does not come out as we described, then gargle the throat with urine and the solution with the instrument that was described in the incense of the throat several times for it will fall.
And the way to work with the incense is to take a pot containing hot coals from the fire and the pot covered with a lid in its center a hole, then insert the tip of the instrument into that hole, then throw the incense and the patient puts his mouth at the end of the tube and closes his mouth so that the incense does not come out until he feels that the incense has reached his throat.
For if the phlegm falls on the place, and if it does not fall, then the incense is repeated several times, and the patient endures thirst and eats salt and garlic and does not drink water, there is no doubt that it will come out with this method, and this is a picture of an instrument used to draw out phlegm from the throat when it comes into view.
And it resembles the tweezers as you see, except that it has this attachment that enters the throat and its ends resemble the beak of a bird; there is roughness in the cold iron if it pressed on something, it would not leave it.
And another instrument that presses on the tongue, it is a wide ring of iron the size of the mouth, above the tongue, it enters the mouth standing on its side, and the mouth remains open without the patient's will, and he cannot remove it at all until it is moved.
The description of the instrument that opens the mouth in this exact way.
Chapter Forty.
Here we discuss the discourse on tumors and their incision.
Tumors have many diverse types, as will be mentioned individually in this book, and they differ in their treatment and incision from two aspects: one is the nature of the tumor itself and what it contains of fluids.
The second aspect is from the location where they occur in the body, because a tumor that occurs in the head is not like a tumor that occurs in the buttock, and a tumor that occurs in a place of fleshy tissue is not like a tumor that occurs in a joint; each one has its own ruling on how to treat it.
And some tumors should not be incised except after the pus within them has ripened and matured, and some should be incised while they are immature and have not fully ripened, such as tumors that are close to the joints.
Because if a tumor occurs near a joint and its duration is prolonged until it decays around it, it may damage the ligaments or nerves of that joint, which could cause paralysis of that limb or because the tumor is near a major organ.
Because if you delay its incision until it matures, you will harm that major organ or because it is near the buttock, you should incise it while immature; however, it is obligatory to excise an immature tumor near the buttocks so that it does not decay and penetrate into the buttock, making it a fistula.
And it becomes in a way that does not heal, and it is necessary to know the time of incision for tumors that have fully ripened, which is when the pain of the tumor subsides, fever disappears, redness and swelling decrease, the head of the tumor softens, and all other signs.
And it is necessary to make the incision at the bottom of the tumor's location if possible, so that it is easier for the fluid to drain downwards or in the softest place of the tumor and most protruding, and let the incision be lengthwise along the body if the tumors are in the hands or feet.
And locations of the muscles and tendons and nerves and arteries, and in general all flat places without bending, but as for the places that bend, it should go with a knife according to that place. And if the swelling is in fleshy places, it is best to leave its incision.
Until it ripens as we said completely, if you cut into it before that, the pus will flow from it for a long time and be much harmful and dirty, and perhaps its lips will harden and its depths will become obstructed, and some tumors can be incised on the side of the body when necessary or according to what the limb needs.
In small tumors, one incision should be used, and in large tumors, a wide incision or many incisions according to the size of the tumor. And some tumors may need to have the skin pulled tight and cut if it has become like parchment.
And it may become to some extent dead like what is found in many blisters and abscesses, and some of them are cut with a three-cornered incision, and some are cut from it in the shape of an Arabic fig leaf.
And some of them use the round incision and the crescent-shaped incision and similar incisions, and if it does not have a head like smooth, flat tumors, it is necessary to cut it with a simple incision only. And it should be done when the tumor is large and has gathered for a long time and it has been cut into, do not rush to remove all the pus at that time.
Rather, extract some of it, then tighten the tumor for another day and then extract some more pus, do this repeatedly in stages until all of it is removed.
Especially if the patient is weak, or a pregnant woman, or a young child, or an elderly man, because the animal spirit often dissolves with the expulsion of pus in one go, and perhaps the patient will die while you do not feel it. So beware of this matter with great caution.
After striking these tumors it is necessary to cleanse the wound and look. If the tumor's wound is small or the incision one simple one, use a gauze of cotton or lint. If the tumor is large and the incisions many.
It is necessary to introduce into each incision a thread until some of them reach each other. If the tumor has been cut from the skin some of it or hardened, it is necessary to pack it with lint or hemp cotton without dampness and tighten it until the third day.
Then remove it and treat it with what is necessary of ointments until it heals. If bleeding occurs during the work, use cold water and vinegar after soaking a cotton cloth in them and apply it to the place of bleeding several times.
If the bleeding persists, it is necessary to use the measures, treatment and dressings that we have described in many places in this book of ours and the classification. If you are in wintertime and the place of the tumor is rich in nerves, it is necessary to wet the pads with a hot drink and oil.
And place them on the place. If you are in summer and the places are fleshy, it is necessary to carry the pads soaked with water and oil or with a drink and oil all of that cold until if it is the third day as we have said, it is necessary to remove the tumor and cleanse it.
And use in its treatment what is similar to it until it heals. This is what you need to know about the treatment of tumors in general. As for the way of detail, I have mentioned each tumor how the way to treat it is summarized and classified.
Chapter Forty-one.
In the incision on tumors that appear in the skin of the head.
Tumors small in size appear in the skin of the head and are of the type of cysts containing them that have conditions such as a hen's egg sac and their types are numerous, some fatty, others containing moisture resembling mud.
Some of them contain moisture resembling broth and soup, and some are hard and solid, all of which pose no danger when cut and removed unless you encounter a vein when cutting into them.
And the work in cutting into them is to first soften them with the instrument whose image comes after this one which is called the "madass" until you learn what they contain. If what they contain is moisture, then cut it lengthwise with a simple incision as shown in this image: .
And begin the incision from line ~b~ to line ~j~.  If the moisture is drained, then peel off the sac that contained that moisture and cut it all up, leaving nothing of it at all, because it often returns if something remains of it.
Then, dip cotton in the salve if it is available; otherwise, in salt water, and fill the wound with it and leave it until the next day, because it eats what remains of the sac. Then, apply the cotton dipped in the salve again and a third time if needed.
Until you are certain that nothing of the sac remains. Then, treat the wound with salves until it heals. And if the swelling contains a fatty mass, cut into it as shown in this image:.
A longitudinal incision and the scalpel at the edge of the wound, peel it from each side, and exert effort in removing the peritoneum that contains it. If you encounter a vein, do what I have described to you before, and do the same with the swelling if it is hardened upon cutting.
And the treatment in this case is as I have mentioned, and the incision on the hardened swelling is easier because it contains little blood and moisture. And perhaps some of these swellings in the head in some people contain no moisture at all, for example when I cut into a swelling...
The head of an old woman, I found the swelling like a solid stone, rough and white, that could not be broken by anyone, even if someone threw it, and none of the other swellings that occur in the head were like this except for those that appear on the heads of children.
When you reach the root of the ear, make a simple incision all around it and make its bottom to be from its lower part so that the flow of material is easier downward, then treat it with what suits it of treatment.
The Twenty-fourth Chapter.
In the incision on the tumors that appear in the neck, these tumors often appear in the neck and under the armpits and in the groin; they can appear all over the body. The one that appears in the neck is sometimes single and sometimes multiple, and some are generated from others.
And every tumor among them is within a special peritoneum, just as in the tumors of the head and the hernia, as we described; and there are many kinds of these tumors, some petrified, some containing moisture, and some malignant that do not respond to treatment.
So I did not see any of them in good health when touched, and its appearance was close to the color of the skin, it moved in every direction, and it was not attached to a nerve in the neck or to a tendon or a vein, nor was it sunken. Where it is necessary to make an incision in it, a simple incision from above to the bottom of the body, along this line from line ~g~ to line ~b~.
And peel it from every side and stretch the edges of the skin with a ligature or two ligatures, or many ligatures if necessary, as we said in the tumors of the head, and take it out little by little, being careful that it does not cut a vein or nerve, and let the scalpel be not too sharp.
So that your hand does not increase the cutting or disturb the patient, cut what you do not need to cut; if you cut a vein or artery and it prevents you from working, put powdered alum or some of the things that stop bleeding in the wound.
And tighten the wound and leave it until the intensity of the tumor subsides and the wound relaxes and begins to heal; for the blood flow stops then, return to your work until you finish, then examine with your index finger if there are any other small tumors remaining, cut them and clean them.
If there is a large vein in the root of the pig, it is necessary not to cut the pig from its root but rather to tie it with a double and tight thread and leave it until it falls off by itself without harm. Then the wound is stuffed with cotton wool that has been soaked in Egyptian ointment and then treated.
And if the pig is cut entirely, it is necessary to bring the edges of the wound together and sew it from its hour after you have learned that there is no leftover piece of the pig. If you see that there is some leftover because of the size of the pig.
If it is necessary to aim at its root and base with the cutting and use the suture mentioned, and if any of the pigs contain moisture, line them with a simple pad where you see the place of ripeness and make the pad as follows below as we said.
Then use after the pad, lint with Egyptian ointment and the like to eat what remains of the rot until when you see that the wound has healed, treat it with ointments for the flesh until it is healed.
The thirty-fourth chapter.
In a slit in the larynx about a tumor that occurs inside the throat.
The ancients mentioned this slit in the larynx, and I have not seen anyone in our country make it. This is their way of speaking. As for those who suffer from angina, they should avoid cutting the larynx because they do not benefit from it.
Because all the ailments and lungs are weak, and as for those who have a hot tumor in the mouth or throat or tonsils if there is no cause in the windpipe, it is necessary to use a slit in the larynx to escape from the defect that arises from suffocation.
It is necessary, if we desire this, to cut the larynx under three circles of the trachea or four small cuts lengthwise between two circles as much as the cut in the peritoneum and not in cartilage. This position agrees with the cut.
Since it is devoid of flesh and blood vessels are distant from it, if the surgeon is cowardly he should stretch the skin of the throat with a ligature then split the skin until reaching the trachea he should avoid blood vessels if he sees any.
Then he should split the peritoneum which we described, and deduce the trachea's incision from the phlegm that exits with it along with the shortness of breath and the stopping of the voice, and leave the wound open for a time. When the time passes in which there was fear of suffocation, bring together the edges of the wound from the skin.
And its plan alone without cartilage, then use the medicines that grow flesh until it heals. Said the author of this book, an explanation of this phrase which we have recounted is if they see the patient's throat blocked by one of these tumors they mentioned.
And the patient on the brink of death, his hope dwindling, they went to split the larynx so that the patient could breathe some air on the wound and escape death.  But they were ordered to leave the wound open until the end of the illness and its duration was three days or thereabouts.
Then they ordered the wound to be stitched and treated until it healed. And what I saw with my own eyes, a servant took a knife and sent it on her throat, cutting some of the windpipe with it.  She was called for treatment and found to be wheezing as a slaughtered animal does, so they uncovered the wound.
And I found the blood that came out of the wound to be slow, so I was certain she had not cut an artery or vein.  And air was coming out of the wound. She was treated, and the wound was stitched and treated until it healed. And nothing happened to the servant except a change in her voice, nothing more.
And she returned after days to her best condition. From here we say that splitting the larynx is not dangerous.
The Forty-fourth Chapter.
In the incision on the swelling that appears in the pharynx from outside and is called a pharyngeal fistula.
This swelling that is called a pharyngeal fistula is a large swelling the color of the body and in women it is frequent and it comes in two types.
Either it is natural or acquired, but the natural one there is no treatment for it and as for the acquired one, it comes in two types, one similar to fatty tumors and the other similar to a tumor that arises from the complication of the vein and in its incision there is danger. So it should not be touched with iron at all except for the small ones, if you probe and examine it with a probe, if its appearance is like a fatty tumor and it was not attached to any of the veins, then cut it as you would cut a fatty tumor. And take out what it contains from the sac if it is in a sac, otherwise, investigate all of it then treat the place with the proper treatment.
The Forty-fifth Chapter.
In the incision on types of tumors.
Tumors come in many types and all their types have been mentioned in the classification, but it is necessary to tell here the difference between a tumor and an abscess because it is problematic. I say that an abscess comes with heat, fever, and frightening pain until the boiling of the vein subsides. And the pus completes, then the fever and severity subside, and the tumor does not come with heat, fever, or pain, and it is contained in a sac that is its special container and it is on the color of the body and its beginning is like the lentil and it becomes like the pumpkin, larger and smaller.
And it is of two types, either fatty or that it contains moisture, and the colors of moisture are many as mentioned in the classification, so if you come to treat the tumor, first probe and examine it with the instrument called the probe, as its image will come in the chapter after this.
Measure the size of the swelling, then remove the probe and look at what comes out after it. If a wet fluid of any color comes out, make a simple incision as I mentioned for all swellings.  If no wet fluid comes out after the probe, know that it is fatty.
Make a crosswise incision on it as I taught you, as in this image.  Suspend it with pins and carefully peel the skin from each side, taking care to remove the sac if you can get it out whole with its contents.
If the sac ruptures during the operation and you cannot remove it whole, as this often happens,  remove it in pieces until nothing remains of it, because if anything is left, whether little or much, the contents will most often return.
If you are overpowered and a little remains, scrape the wound at the end of your work with some sharp pointed instruments and tighten the wound. Place something on top that will soothe the hot swelling and treat it with all other treatments until it heals. If the contents were large, outline its edges and treat it with something that will promote healing.
If a strong or weak sweat vein or something else crosses you and causes bleeding, immediately scrape the area with powdered antimony and leave it tight for two or three days until the wound dries and the bleeding subsides, then return to cutting what remains of the contents.
Chapter Forty-Six
On Images of Instruments
Of the instruments that work in incisions and probes, there are images of probes, which come in three types: large, medium, and small.
Image of a Large Probe:
Image of a Medium Probe:
A small picture drawn.
It is made of iron steel, with square ends, tightly fitting to hasten entry into tumors. And these are the pictures of the probes and they are called cold ones, and there are three types also, large, medium, and small, a picture of a large probe:
A picture of a medium probe:
A picture of a small probe:
They are used to search for tumors, surgeries, fistulas, and cavities about what is inside them of bones and the like. They are made round, polished, smooth, like those made of Spanish brass or Andalusian copper, or of brass or iron or silver, and the best of them are made of Andalusian steel.
And probes can also be made of black lead, and they are used to probe fistulas that have a cavity inside them with a dressing to soften the bend with that dressing, and these are also three types because some of them are long, some medium, and some short.
According to the need of each fistula's cavity, and its thickness is made according to the size and tightness of the fistula, a picture of a large lead probe:
A picture of a medium lead probe:
A picture of a small lead probe:
Pictures of the probes, and there are many types because some are simple, that is, those with one hook, and these are three types: large, medium, and small, and there are also deep probes, which are three types, and there are probes with two hooks, which are three types, and there are curved probes with two hooks. And these are three types, and there are probes with three hooks, which are three types, and all of these types need each one in its place, a picture of a simple large probe: A picture of a medium simple probe: A simple small snare
A large blind snare . A medium blind snare.
A small blind snare.
A large snare with two hooks. A medium snare with two hooks. A small snare with two hooks.
A large snare with three hooks.
A medium snare with three hooks. A small snare with three hooks.
And these are pictures of the instruments that are used to cut and tear through tumors and growths, there are three types because some are large, some medium, and some small, a picture of a large scalpel.
A picture of a medium scalpel.
A small scalpel.
Its edges which it cuts with are limited and the other sides are unlimited, so that one may use them to peel the tumor when fearing a cut in an artery or nerve, and for the patient to find some ease from the burning sensation he feels during peeling of the tumor.
And these are pictures of the retractors, and they come in three types because some are large, some medium, and some small. Picture of a large retractor:.
It is made of  copper, a semi-liquid metal that can be molded, and on one end it has something like a broad spoon with two layers, in the head of which there is a hidden scalpel blade resembling a bird's tongue which goes in and out as you please, as you see.
Pictures of scalpels that are placed between the fingers when  removing tumors so that the patient does not feel them, and they come in three types because some are large, some medium, and some small. Picture of a large scalpel:.
Pictures of hemostats used to cut off bleeding, and they come in three types because some are large, some medium, and some small. Picture of the large hemostat:.
They are made of copper or tin, rounded to the length a little as you see, and they should be flexible. It is necessary that these types of hemostats be with you in both large and small sizes so that you may cut off blood quickly when necessary, and when medicine is not available.
But they should not be used to cut off blood in every place on the body, but rather in fleshy places like the thigh, arm, chest, abdomen, and back, and such other fleshy, moist organs.
And from it you can make other small instruments like the shells of pistachios, in this form: .
It cuts blood if it flows from a place of phlebotomy or when an artery or vein is cut. And from it you can make a circular one, in this form: .
The Forty-Seventh Chapter.
In the Treatment of Men's Chest.
Which resembles the breast of women, some people's chests may swell with a dream's fullness until it resembles the breasts of women, remaining warm and ugly. So whoever dislikes this, should cut on the chest with a crescent-shaped incision in this form.
From line ~b~ to line ~j~:. Then peel off all the fat, and then fill the wound with a poultice of medicine, and bring together the edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals. If the breast has fallen downwards and relaxed its bones as is common in women.
It is necessary to make incisions on its upper edges with two incisions resembling a crescent shape, where each one connects to the other at their ends until the larger line surrounds the smaller one in this form: . From line ~b~ to line ~j~, then peel the skin between the incisions and remove the fat, and use what has been mentioned from sutures and cauterizations and whatever else is needed in treatment until it heals.
If it does not accommodate the cutting of what is necessary for the patient's anxiety or because of bleeding, then it is necessary to pack the wound with cotton soaked in a strong ointment and leave it until it consumes what remains of the fat, and then treat it until it heals,.
The Forty-Eighth Chapter.
In the Treatment of Tumors that Appear Under the Arm Pit.
These tumors that appear under the armpit are of the type of hard pork enclosed in a sac, and some contain moisture. So whatever contains moisture, it is necessary to make a crescent-shaped incision in this form.
From line _a_ to line _c_, and if you have extracted all that is in the swelling from the period, scrape it with clean cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove the cotton.
And treat it with the ointment suitable for it until it heals, and if the swelling is of the type of swine cysts, make an incision on it as we mentioned in the incision on swine, whether it continues to expand and pus flows out, then use the cautery as we mentioned previously.
Chapter Forty-Nine.
In making an incision into a tumor that appears in front of the artery or vein and is called aneurysma.
If the artery is cut and the skin above it heals, then often a tumor appears from that, as well as the vein often appearing to have swelling and a tumor in it.
And the signs by which it is known if the tumor and swelling is from an artery or from a vein, the tumor if it is from the artery will be rectangular, compacted in the depth of the body, and if you press on the tumor with your finger you feel it as if it has a spring.
And the one which is from the vein, the tumor will be round in the outward appearance of the body, and the incision on these tumors is dangerous, especially what is in the armpit and ribcage and neck, and in many places in the body, if they were very large, it is necessary to avoid treating them with iron.
And what was from it also in the limbs or in the head, it is necessary to avoid, and whatever was from it of a swelling of the artery, make an incision on it in the skin lengthwise then open the incision with tweezers then peel back the artery and free it from its layers.
Until it is exposed then introduce a needle under it and pass it to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places as I have informed you about tying the two arteries that are in the forearms, then cut between the tendons with a scalpel until all the blood in it comes out.
The tumor dissolves then the treatment that produces pus is applied until the ligaments drop off, then it is treated with appropriate ointments until it heals.
If the tumor is from a vein incision, it is necessary to hold your hand as much of the tumor as possible with the skin then insert a needle below the place where you held your hand and pass it through with a doubled thread until it comes out on the other side. Then you tie the tumor firmly with a good knot according to what I mentioned to you in tying the grape on both sides at the ends of the thread, if you are afraid that the threads will come loose, insert another needle with another thread under the whole tumor where the first needle intersects.
And tighten your threads in four places, then cut the tumor in its middle until what is inside it comes out, then cut off excess skin and leave what was tied from it, then place a gauze on it that you have soaked in syrup and oil. Then use the treatment that is with ointment and salves until it heals.
Chapter Fifty.
In the tumor that arises from nerve twisting.
As the tumor appears in the artery and vein, so it also appears in the nerve if a blow occurs to it or due to excessive fatigue or the like, and this is more common in the places of the wrists and heels.
And in every place where the joints move, it is a hardened tumor that resembles the color of the rest of the body and is usually painless, and if pressed hard, the patient feels numbness like tingling, and the tumor is not gathered in the depth of the body.
But it is under the skin, and it moves in every direction, but does not go forward or backward, so whatever is from it in the joints should not be exposed to iron because it may cause a hernia, and what is from it in the head or forehead.
If you make an incision in the skin with a knife, and if the tumor is small, grasp it with forceps and cut it from its root. And if it is large, tie it off with a ligature and remove it, then bring together the wound with sutures and treat it until it heals.
Chapter Forty-Nine.
On cutting warts that appear in the abdomen.
Many people often have warts on their abdomens and other parts of their bodies, called "natural" warts because they resemble fungi. Their base is thin and their head is thick, their edges may be turned in and some are small while others become very large.
I once saw a man with two warts on his abdomen that resembled fungi, white and thin at the base, their edges had turned in and cracked, and moisture constantly oozed from them. I cut them out and threw one weighing about eighteen ounces and the other about six ounces.
The procedure for cutting them is to examine if the patient is wet and if the wart is white, moist, and thin at its base, then cut it with a wide knife and have moxies in fire because often when they are cut, a lot of blood rushes out.
So, if the bleeding overcomes you, cauterize it. And if you see the patient is cowardly and frightened of being cut with iron, then take a thread of tightly compacted lead and tie the wart with this description. Leave it for two days, then increase the tightening of the lead and keep tightening it.
Every time it affects the wart until it detaches and falls off by itself without pain, if the wart has a thick base, then cutting it is somewhat frightening and dangerous, especially if it is in the abdomen, but some of it can be cut or half of it.
Then cauterize it so that it doesn't return, and treat it until the wound heals. Be careful not to cut a wart that is dark in color, has little sensation, and looks rough because it is cancerous, and I will mention cancer after this.
The Twenty-Fifth Chapter.
On the Treatment of Carbuncles.
A carbuncle arises from many causes, either from a rupture in the peritoneum of the abdomen through which pus or intestines come out, as is described in other ruptures, or from blood emanating from a vein or artery as mentioned before, or from trapped air inside it.
If it arises from a rupture in the peritoneum and the protrusion of pus, then the color of the tumor is similar to the color of the body, it is soft without pain and appears in different positions. If it arises from the protrusion of intestines, then its condition is even more different than what we have described. If you press it with your fingers it disappears then returns and perhaps there is a crackling sound, and it increases greatly upon entering the bath or strenuous exertion. If it arises from humidity, then it is soft.
It does not disappear if you press it with your hand, nor does it increase or decrease. If it arises from blood, then along with these signs, the tumor appears to be black. If it arises from a growing lump of flesh, then the tumor is hard and firm and remains at one level.
If it arises from air, upon touching it is soft. The action in this case is to look. If the carbuncle arises from blood of an artery or vein or air, then it is necessary to refrain from treating it because there is fear and danger as I informed you in the chapter where I described tumors that occur due to arteries and veins.
If the carbuncle arises from intestines or pus, then it is necessary to order the sick person to hold himself and stand upright stretched, then draw around the entire carbuncle with a lead pencil. Then order him to lie down in front of you on his back, then cut around the carbuncle with a broad scalpel at the place you drew with the pencil. Then stretch the center of the tumor upwards with a large thread and tie the place of the incision with strong twine or silk thread tightly.
The knot of the bandage is then made, and the middle of the tumor that has been tightened above the bandage is opened. You insert your index finger into it and feel for the intestines. If you find that the bandage has taken them, loosen the knot and push the intestines back into the abdomen. If you find a hernia, pull it in with a string.
And cut its excess, and if a vein or artery obstructs you, tie it securely and return to your work. Then take two needles and insert two strong threads into them. Insert the two needles into the incision you made around the tumor, and cross them, then tighten the tumor in four places on the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place until the tightened flesh rots and falls by itself or cut it if it softens and rots. Then treat it with what is appropriate of ointments until it heals. If the growth is from flesh that has sprouted in it.
Or if it is from moisture, it is necessary to cut the tumor as we mentioned and remove the blood or moisture you find in it. Then treat it with what heals the place.
Chapter Thirty-Five.
In the Treatment of Cancer.
We mentioned in the classification, types of cancer and how to treat it with medicine, and warning against treating it with iron so that it does not fester. We also mentioned cancer born in the womb and warned against treating it.
And the ancients said that when cancer is in a place where it can be removed entirely, like cancer in the breast or thigh and similar organs that are capable of being extracted as a whole, especially if it is small and starting. But when it has advanced and become large, it should not be approached.
Indeed, I have not been able to cure anyone from it, and before me, I did not see anyone else reach that point. And in working on it if it is capable as we mentioned, you should proceed carefully so the patient is eased from the black bile, and then dissect it if there is a clear filling in the veins.
Then the patient is positioned in a way that allows for easy work, and then the instruments are placed into the tumor bed which suits it, and then it is cut from every side with skin until nothing of its roots remains, and let the blood flow without stopping it quickly.
But I squeeze the areas and extract all the thick blood with your hand or by any tools you have available, if a great bleeding from cutting an artery or vein obstructed you in work then plug the sweat until the blood stops, then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter Forty-Five.
On the Treatment of Warts.
We have already told you, in the division, the types of dropsy and how water gathers and the signs of each type and its treatment with medicines, and what is treated with iron is only the ascitic type alone, and iron does not approach at all the serous type or the fleshy type.
Because that is a disaster, if you treated this type of ascitic dropsy with medicines and your treatment was not effective, then look, if the patient has reached extreme weakness or if he has another illness besides dropsy, like being .
Cough or diarrhea, like that, then do not treat him with iron because it is a disaster, if you saw the patient strong and has no illness besides dropsy alone and was neither a child nor an old man, then the work to be done in him is to make the patient stand upright before you. And a servant behind him squeezes his belly with his hands and pushes the water down to the direction of the groin, then take a hooked scalpel like this.
Limited on both sides, long and defined at the end like a scalpel, except that it has some slight notches so that it does not slip into the intestine during work and injure it, then turn it if the dropsy originated from the intestines side.
It is necessary to widen the incision from the navel three finger-breadths down with its tip above the pubis. If the hernia has originated due to a liver disease, let your incision be on the left side of the navel for three finger-breadths. If it has originated due to a spleen disease, let the incision be on the right side for three finger-breadths.
It is also not necessary for the incision to be on the side that the patient wishes to lie on so that the fluid does not flow into that weak spot, then pierce the skin entirely with the instrument and insert the instrument into the incision and raise your hand.
With the scalpel between the skin and the peritoneum as if you are peeling it, and the amount you peel should be the size of a fingernail or similar. Then pierce the peritoneum until the scalpel reaches an empty place which is the place of the water, then take it out and insert into the hole the instrument whose picture appears here.
And it is like a tube made of a fine piece of silver or copper or smooth lead polished with its tip having a small hole and in its sides three holes two from one side and one from the other side as you see.
And it may place its tip polished like the nib of a pen as shown in this picture:
At its upper end, there is a ring, so that when the instrument reaches the water it descends from its seat on the instrument, and it discharges an average amount of water because if you discharge more than necessary at a time, perhaps the patient may die by the dissolution of his animal soul.
Or it may expose him to fainting close to death, but discharge what is possible from its strength and what indicates to you the state of the patient from the strength of his pulse and the goodness of his color, then remove the instrument and stop the water, because it is stopped by its seat.
Because of the skin that holds the hole on the peritoneum which you were told to pierce in that way, then you return the instrument another day if you see the patient likely for it.
Also, it is taken out from the water a little amount, doing this for days while you are on your neck and keep precaution against error until there remains of the water only a little. If you have eased the patient and left from the water a large amount, treat him by burying in hot sand.
And excessive sweating in the bath and sun and enduring thirst for him, and his treatment with drying drugs until he heals, and burns on the stomach, liver, and spleen after removing water as described previously.
The Fiftieth Chapter.
In the Treatment of Children Who Are Born With Their Urination Openings Not Punched or Where The Opening Is Narrow Or In The Wrong Place.
Some boys may emerge from their mother's womb with their urethra unpunched, so it is necessary to immediately punch it from the moment he is born.
With a very thin scalpel as in this illustration:.
Then you place a thin nail made of lead in the hole and tie it, holding it for three or four days. When he wants to urinate, move it aside and then put it back. If you do not use the lead, it is possible that the urine flowing on that place will not leave it closed.
And as for those who have a narrow opening, it is treated with lead as we said for many days until it widens. And those among them whose opening is in the wrong place, that is to say, some are born with the opening at the end of the urethra, so they cannot urinate forward.
Until he raises the penis with his hand to above, and it is not born before that, so that the semen cannot reach the womb on a straight line, which is a very ugly ailment. The way to work on this is that the patient lies on his back.
Then you extend his urethra with your left hand, a strong extension, and scrape the tip of the penis with a sharp blade or scalpel like the tip of a pen or as if you were carving something so that its center comes out resembling a urethra, and let the hole fall in the middle as it should.
Be cautious when working and avoid bleeding, for it often occurs. Counter it with what stops the blood and treat the wound until it heals.
The Sixthtieth Chapter.
In the ulcer that occurs in the membrane, the coat, and the blackness, corruption, and adhesion of the membrane to the coat.
This ulcer often occurs in the urethra, it is a kind of strong inflammation and there is both bad and not bad from it, so the not bad one should be treated with a gentle bandage.
And cut it until you purify all of it, then put cotton soaked in the Egyptian ointment on top of it, and then treat it with the palm ointment until it heals, as for if the ulcer was bad and dark in color, it is necessary to use cauterization after cutting and scraping it.
If the ulcer is in an uncircumcised foreskin and some of the ulcer is from inside the foreskin and some from outside, it is necessary to remove the ulcer that is inside first until it heals, then treat the one from the outside.
Because when you treat them together, the foreskin does not remain safe from being punctured, and this can also occur in women and in the foreskin blackness and corruption, so it is necessary to excise all that has blackened and become corrupt or corrupted.
Then apply honey on it along with crushed and sifted pomegranate peel and turmeric, then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals. If bleeding occurs, use cauterization with a crescent-shaped iron like this:
Cauterization is beneficial for both conditions, that is, bleeding and if the wound becomes corrupted. If the coat shrinks and goes completely in a short time, it is necessary to insert a tube of lead into the passage of the penis so that urine flows over it, as for the adhesion of the foreskin to the coat.
This adhesion occurs in those whose covering is healthy and has not been circumcised, and it may be exposed from a wound or tumor, so it should be peeled off with a sharp scalpel until the bond dissolves and the bandage is freed from all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish it on examination, it should be peeled off a little from the bandage and the covering, because the covering is thin, so it may tear quickly due to its thinness, then separate the covering and the bandage with a thin cotton cloth that has been moistened in cold water so that it does not also adhere.
Then it is treated with astringent syrup until it heals.
The Seventy-Fifth Chapter.
On Cleansing Boys and Treating What Ails Them.
Circumcision is nothing other than the separation of the attachment like any other surgery, except that since it is done by our will and used especially in boys, it is necessary to make the best effort in performing it.
And the easiest way leading to safety, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their writings because it was not used in their precepts, but rather it is something we have acquired.
Through experience, because I have found that the general public of artisans and barbers use cleansing with the mouse, the scissors, and they use forceps and bandages with thread and cutting with the nail; I have tried all these methods.
I have not found better than cleansing with scissors and bandaging with thread, because cleansing with the mouse often causes the skin to be cut because the covering's skin has two layers; perhaps the upper layer of skin is cut and the lower layer remains.
Thus, it requires a second cut and renewed pain. As for cleansing with forceps, it does not guarantee the cutting of the tip of the glans because it may enter its hole. And as for cleansing with the nail, perhaps the skin will be torn and your work will be spoiled or the boy's skin was short by nature...
Often, they are born without needing cleansing, and I have seen that. As for purification by means of the scalpel and tying with thread, experience has revealed its advantage to me because the blade of the scalpel is matched from above and below in cutting.
When you cut your hand, with a match of the two blades, in equal measure and time, it becomes as if a wall of thread around the skin of the foreskin from all sides, and there is no error at all. And the first step in the work is to make the boy believe (something).
Especially if he is one of those who understand a little, that you only tie the thread on his foreskin and leave it for another day, then you delight him and please him in every way you can, and what he accepts with his mind, then you stop him between your hands, standing.
And he is not sitting, and you hide the scalpel in your sleeve or under your foot so that the boy does not see it at all, nor any of the instruments, then you put your hand into his foreskin and inflate the skin and pull it up until the head of the penis comes out.
Then you cleanse it of what gathers there from impurities, then tie the designated place with a double thread, and tie a second knot slightly below it, then hold between your thumb and index finger the position of the lower knot firmly, and cut between the knots. Then raise the skin up quickly and bring out the head of the penis, then let a little blood flow, for it is better and causes less swelling of the penis, then wipe it with a damp cloth, and sprinkle on it some ash from burnt squash, it is the best that I have tried, or fine frankincense powder, it is also excellent.
Then raise the skin up quickly and bring out the head of the penis, then let a little blood flow, for it is better and causes less swelling of the penis, then wipe it with a damp cloth, and sprinkle on it some ash from burnt squash, it is the best that I have tried, or fine frankincense powder, it is also excellent. Then, hold a cloth on the top with an egg yolk cooked in rosewater mixed with good, pure rose oil, and leave it on him for another day, then treat him with the rest of the treatment until he is healed.
This is a picture of a scalpel suitable for purification:
It should be a sharp, straight blade without a bend, with a screw handle and the length of both blades equal to that of the handles. As for the error in purification, perhaps the inner skin is turned completely or partially when cutting, so it should be smoothed out with your fingernail before swelling occurs.
And it is cut straight. If you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then pull it with a string and cut it.  If three days pass and what is below the head of the urethra remains swollen and warm, leave it until the heat subsides, and then remove it gently.
And cut it as it seems fit to you, and be careful of the head of the urethra, for if something is cut from the head of the urethra, then it does not harm anything. Treat it with what heals the wound from the points we described in the article on points.
And if something is cut from the skin above the amount and it shrinks upward, then this also does not cause much harm. Treat it with what we mentioned until it heals.
The Eightyninth Chapter.
On the Treatment of Urine Retained in the Bladder.
Urine retained in the bladder is caused by a blockage from a stone or clotted blood or pus or  growing flesh and the like. If you treat that with what was mentioned, the types of treatment described in the section
And the urine did not flow, and you saw that its retention was from a stone in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be on his knees, then someone should ride on his back, stretching his belly towards his back, and  holding himself as much as possible.
Then the neck of the bladder is forced to push the stone behind, and the urine flows. If it does not flow with what was mentioned, and the matter becomes severe for the patient, then it is necessary to use its removal with the instrument called a catheter, whose picture is:
It is made of silver and is smooth, hollow like a bird's feather tube in softness, about half a span long. It has a delicate funnel at its head, and the face of it draws urine; so that it takes a bent thread and ties on it a piece of wool or cotton tightly.
And the end of the thread is inserted into the bottom of the catheter, and it is clipped with pliers if something of the wool remains so that it may enter the tube, then it is plugged like a grain. Then the catheter is anointed with oil or butter or egg white, and the patient sits on a stool.
And the bladder is emptied and rinsed with warm oil or water, then the catheter is inserted into the urethra gently until it reaches the beginning of the urethra, then the penis is bent up towards the scrotum and the catheter is pushed inside it.
Until when the penis is bent and the catheter is pushed inside until it reaches near the bladder, then the penis is inclined downwards and the catheter inside it, and it is pushed until it reaches the bladder, and the patient feels that it has reached something empty.
And it is made in this order because the passage through which urine flows is curved, then the thread with wool is pulled slightly tight so that urine follows the wool, then it is removed and urine drains out, and the catheter is returned.
Then it is done repeatedly until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief.
Chapter forty-nine.
How to inject the bladder with vinegar.
And pictures of the tools that are fit for it are made of silver or ivory, hollow with a long tube on the softness of pus. And it is desired to sprinkle water and medicines in it, which is done by a tool called "al-zarraqah" and this is its picture:
It is made of silver or ivory, hollowed out with a long tube on the slope of the handle. It is hollowed out except for the end, which is solid and has three holes: two on one side and one on the other as you see.
And the hollow place where the plunger is, should be just enough to fill it without excess, so that when you draw it, what gets drawn up comes out with it, and when you push it, it pushes out to a distance, like the kind of tube used for throwing oil in naval warfare.
So if you want to drain the moisture into the bladder, insert the tip of the syringe into the moisture and draw it up with the plunger. The moisture will be drawn up into the syringe, then its tip is inserted into the urethra as we described in the catheters, then the moisture is pushed out using the plunger.
So that moisture reaches the bladder to a certain extent, until the patient feels it. This is also a gentle image of an injector used to inject into the bladder:
It is made of silver or lead, its upper end resembling a small funnel, and below it there is a groove where the ligature lies. Then take a camel bladder and put the moisture that you want to inject into the bladder inside it, then tie it between the two grooves with a strong knot using twisted thread.
And warm that moisture a little over the fire, then insert the tip of the injector into the urethra and firmly press your hand on the bladder with the moisture until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
If a bladder is not available to you, take a piece of skin and make a circle out of it, then pierce it all the way around, then insert a thick thread into those holes as it spins, and gather the circle like a plate after you put inside it what you want of moisture, ointments, and water.
Then tie them in the instrument and make with it as you made with the bladder from your hand's grasp until the moisture reaches the bladder.
The Sixty-Sixth Chapter.
On Removing a Stone.
We have mentioned in the division types of stones and their treatment with medicine, and we described the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, and the signs of each of them, and we mentioned the stone in which work is done by hand and incision.
And it is the stone generated specifically in the bladder, and the one that forms in the urethra, and I describe that with a clear and concise explanation.
So I say that the stone generated in the bladder is most commonly found in boys, and among its signs is that urine exits from the bladder similar to water in its thinness.
And sand appears in it and is felt, and it is disturbed, and often leaks then spreads, and the anus protrudes with it in many of them, and it is easy to cure boys from it until they reach fourteen years old, and it becomes difficult in the elderly, and as for young men, it is mid-way between the two.
And the one whose stone is larger, his treatment is easier, and the smaller one is the opposite. So if we turn to the treatment, it is necessary first that the patient be injected with an injection that removes all the waste in his intestines, because it may prevent the presence of a stone when examined.
Then the patient is taken by his legs and shaken up and down until the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or he stands from a high place several times, then you sit him between your hands upright and his hands under his hips so that the bladder becomes completely tilted downwards, then examine him.
And examine him from the outside, if you feel the stone in the space, immediately start cutting on it, and if it does not fall under your touch, then you must rub the index finger with grease from the left hand if the patient is a boy or the middle finger.
If it is a complete boy, introduce it into his privy and search for the stone until it comes under your finger, then transfer it little by little to the neck of the bladder and then press upon it with your finger and drive it outwards toward the place which you wish to incise.
And order a servant to press the bladder with his hand and order another servant that with his right hand he extend the vulva upward and with his other hand he extend the skin which is under the vulva toward the place where the incision will be, then take the scalpel which this image depicts:.
And make an incision between the privy and the vulva not in the middle but to the side of the left haunch and let the incision be on the same stone and your finger in the privy and you press it outwards tautly so that the incision is wide outside and narrow inside as much as possible for the stone to come out from it.
No bigger lest perhaps you press the finger which is in the privy the stone at the incision so that it comes out without difficulty, and know that there may be from the stone what has angles and letters making its exit difficult therefore.
And from it smooth like the plum and rolled easily it is easy to exit, so what was from it that has angles and letters increase in the incision a little if it does not come out this way then it is necessary to contrive upon it either by grasping it with a pair of pliers which are firm and its end is like a knife.
To hold onto the stone so that it does not slip from it or perhaps you introduce under it a fine tool with a bent end, if you were unable to do this on it then widen the incision a little if something of blood overcomes you cut it off with the saffron.
If there are more than one, first push the larger one into the mouth of the bladder then make a cut on it and then push the smaller one after that. And you should do likewise if there are more than two. If it is very large, he does not know how to make a large cut on it because he exposes the patient to one of two things.
Either he will die or there will always be a dribbling of urine because the place will not heal together at all. But try to push it until it comes out or manage to break it with instruments until you get it out completely.
And if you have finished your work, wash the wound with vinegar and patience and honey and tighten it and put over it a bandage wet with oil and syrup or rose ointment and cold water to calm the hot swelling then the patient lies on his back and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And if it loosens, the wound drains with water and oil then treat it with palm ointment and balsam ointment until it heals. If a hot swelling appears in the wound, along with pain and such like, for example, if blood clots in the bladder and urine retention occurs, which is known by the blood coming out with the urine.
Then insert your finger into the wound and remove that blood because if it remains, it calls for the bladder to become corrupt and infected. Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt and treat each type according to its kind until it heals.
It is necessary during all times of treatment that the thighs be bound and brought together to secure the medicines placed on the area. If the stone is small and got stuck in the urethra and urine retention occurred, treat it with what I described before it reaches the cut.
Often, this treatment has replaced the need for a cut. I have tried it, which is to take a curved iron tool from steel that has the following shape:.
The tip of the instrument is a sharp pointed one introduced into the stick, then take a thread and tie it to the penis below the stone so that it will not return to the bladder, and introduce the blade gently into the urethra until the bladder reaches the same stone.
And you turn the bladder with your hand on the stone little by little as you aim to pierce it until it passes through from the other side, for then urine flows from its location and you press your hand on what remains of the stone from outside the penis, so that it crumbles and comes out with the urine and the ailment is cured.
If this treatment does not present itself to you because of an obstacle that hinders you from it, then tie a thread below the stone and another thread above the stone, and then cut through the stone in the same penis between the two threads and remove it.
Then you remove the thread and clean the dried blood that has become in the wound, but it is necessary to tie the thread below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other thread from above so that when the thread is removed after the removal of the stone, the skin returns to its place to cover the wound.
And therefore it is necessary for you, when you tie the upper thread, to raise the skin above so that it returns when you finish and covers the wound as we said.
Chapter Sixty-One.
On extracting stones from women.
Stones rarely develop in women, but if one of them has a stone, it is difficult to treat and is prevented for many reasons: one is that the woman may be a virgin, and the second is that you do not find a woman who permits herself to the physician.
If she is a virgin or one of the protected, and the third is that you do not find a woman who excels in this craft, especially the work with the hands, and the fourth is that the location of the cut on the stone from women is far from the location of the stone, so it needs a deep incision.
In that danger, if necessity demands it, there is a need for an expert female physician, and rarely are they found. If you cannot find one, then seek a chaste, trustworthy male physician or get a skilled midwife who is knowledgeable in the affairs of women, or a woman who has some indication of proficiency in this profession.
Prepare her and order her to do all that you command her of examining for stones, first of all, seeing if the woman is a virgin; it is necessary that she insert her finger into her vagina and examine for stones, if she finds them press them under her finger.
Then, order her to make an incision on her, if she is not a virgin but has had intercourse, order the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and examine for stones after placing her left hand on the bladder and squeezing it well.
If she finds them, it is necessary that she push them from the mouth of the bladder downwards as far as her strength allows until she ends with them at the root of the thigh, then make an incision on her opposite half of the vagina at the root of the thigh from whichever side she feels the stone.
And her finger does not move from the stone, pressed under it, let the incision be small first, then she inserts a probe into that small incision, if she feels the stone, she increases the incision to the extent she knows the stone will come out of it, and know that there are many kinds of stones.
Some are small and large, smooth and rough, long and rounded, and have a notch; so know their types so you can deduce what you want. If blood overwhelms you, throw powdered alum into the wound and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your work.
Until the stone comes out, and do that you count among the instruments mentioned in removing stones from men to help you in your work, if excessive bleeding overpowers you and you know by the pulse of blood that it is from a severed artery, place the cauterizer on the wound.
Fix it with the forceps firmly and leave it, do not interfere with it, leave the stone and do not remove it, for perhaps it will cause harm to the patient. Then treat the wound, and when the bleeding has subsided after days and the area is healed, return to your work until the stone is removed.
The second sixty chapter.
On an incision on the water-bearing vein.
The water-bearing vein is a gathering of moisture in the white peritoneum which is under the skin of the scrotum surrounding the testicle and is called the tunica vaginalis, and it may be in a special membrane prepared by nature on one side of the testicle.
Until he thinks that it is another testicle and it is between the skin of the scrotum and the white peritoneum which we have mentioned, and this does not happen except rarely, and this vein is generated from weakness exposed to women, so that they put this material in place, and it may be exposed due to a blow on the woman.
And this moisture is of many colors, either its color is yellowish, or it may be red like blood, or dark black like gall, or white like water and it is the most common, and the signs by which it is known.
Where the water meets, if it is in the white peritoneum which we have mentioned, the swelling is round to a slight length like the shape of an egg and the testicle does not appear because the moisture surrounds it from all sides.
And if the moisture is in a special membrane for it, the swelling is round on one side of the testicle.
And for this reason, a person imagines it to be another testicle, and if the moisture is between the skin of the scrotum and the white peritoneum, then it is located under the touch, but if you want to know the color of the moisture, aspirate the swelling with the square probe which we have shown its image, and whatever comes out in the wake of the probe, judge it by what is inside.
When we come to treat with iron, it is necessary to order the patient to bleed if he can do so, and seeing his body full, then he lies on his back on something slightly high, and you place under him a lot of shavings, then you sit on his left.
And order a servant to sit on his right, extending his penis to one side of the scrotum and toward the navel region, then take a wide scalpel and cut the scrotum from the middle lengthwise to near the genitals.
And make the incision straight, parallel to the line that divides the scrotum in half until it reaches the white peritoneum, then peel it and be careful not to cut through it, and your peeling of it from the side that adheres to the testicle should be more, and you explore the peeling as much as you can.
Then, empty the peritoneum filled with fluid with a wide spatula and extract all the water, then separate the edges of the incision with spatulas and extend the peritoneum upward without touching the scrotum containing it, and cut the peritoneum as much as you can, either in one piece or in pieces.
And especially its thin side, for if you do not thoroughly cut it, you will not ensure that the water does not return. If the testicle appears outside its skin during your work, then when you finish cutting the peritoneum, fold it back and gather the edges of the scrotum with sutures.
Then treat him as you would any other surgery until it heals, and if you find that the testicle has rotted from another disease, then it is necessary to tie the vessels in the spermatic cord to prevent bleeding, then cut off the testicle from the spermatic cord and extract the testicle, then treat it as mentioned above.
If the water collected in both sides, know that they are both infected, so cut the other side as you did with the first one, and if it suits you to do the work together, then do so, then wipe away the blood.
Into the incisions, you introduce a sponge that has been soaked in oil or rose butter and make it from outside a second sponge which has been soaked in wine and oil and spread it on the testicles and observe the abdomen and place above a folded linen cloth called the refarid. And tie it from above with the bandage which is six-sided as in this image.
Then take two linen cloths and sew them and stuff them with cotton wool as in this example, and make the ends which are tied with cotton or wet wool and gather by pulling it into a trouser belt, and one end takes on the buttock to the back.
And the second takes to the groin and the two ends on the thighs from below and the remaining two on the hipbones, and gather all the pulling in a trouser belt, and this band can also be made with silk instead of cutting with iron.
And it is that you take a small, fine scalpel and cut with it the scrotum skin while it is protected as we described until the white peritoneum containing water is revealed then take another scalpel like this.
And it is like the Greek eye, then you apply it to that peritoneum and it is protected until all moisture comes out, then extend the peritoneum with the sutures and scrape with the scalpel the layer containing it and cut it according to what is possible for you until all of it is uprooted and protect from the egg do not touch it with fire.
And know that this work is safer and further from bleeding than the work with the cut, if something obstructs you in the vein of the cut or while using silk, a hot tumor or bleeding or anything else, then it is necessary to treat whatever hinders you with the treatment that suits it as previously mentioned.
If the patient is cowardly and does not endure this work because of his fear, then let him use the poultice as I describe it, and if it agrees with you according to what we have presented from the evidence.
The abscess is watery, so it is necessary to make the patient sit on a raised chair and then drain the swelling at its base with a wide scalpel. Make the incision along the body and make it wide enough for all the water to drain out. Then place a bandage on the site and tie it.
Leave it to drain the rest of the water, then treat it until the wound heals. If the water discharge stops while you are draining it, this is because the white membrane obstructs the mouth of the wound and prevents the water from coming out.
Then, it is necessary to insert a feather or the instrument used to drain water from love affairs, whose image has been presented earlier, or widen the incision slightly.
Be aware that the water may return and collect after about six months. If it collects, drain it in the same manner and have the patient rest during this time.
Chapter Thirty-Sixth.
On the incision for a fleshy abscess and its treatment.
Know that an incision on this type of abscess is a dangerous path leading to death in most cases, so we see it left alone and protected from it. I am describing its work and types of swelling.
I say that many swellings can occur in the bodies of women, and this is due to many reasons, either from excess heat that settles in the female areas, or from a blow. The color of the swelling is like the color of the body and there is no water in it.
It may be hardened, and perhaps the swelling is a hard lump that has the color of lead and feels nothing. It may also be from the entanglement of veins and their swelling as previously mentioned, or from the swelling of the veins. If it is caused by the swelling of the arteries, this is known as the dispersal of the swelling.
If you press it with your fingers, and it should not be exposed to the scalpel, as for that which is caused by the swelling of the veins, nothing spreads from it when pressed with the fingers. This type may be able to be incised and on all flesh.
This consists of cutting the skin of the scrotum and then stretching the testicle upward and bringing it out from the white membrane and freeing the spermatic cord from the vessels, tying the vessels and cutting the spermatic cord after having freed it from every side of the testicle, if the testicle has adhered to that nascent flesh.
Where the testicle should be brought out and cut, and if there is adhesion between something from the membranes or among the vessels, it is necessary to free all that adhesion and cut it with a circular incision.
If the flesh growth is in the place of adhesion that occurs from behind, it is necessary to cut all of it and bring out the testicle as we have said. When you have completed your work, wash the wound with wool soaked in rose butter and syrup, then treat it with all other treatment until it heals.
Chapter forty-sixth.
In the treatment of the boil that is with a varicose vein.
A varicose vein is a swelling twisted like a bunch of grapes with loosening of the veins, and it makes it difficult for the patient to move, exercise, and walk. In the treatment of this ailment, most of what was mentioned before is close to what is practiced.
But it is necessary to mention what the ancients did in treating it. I say that it is necessary for the patient to sit on a raised chair, then push the spermatic cord downward, and hold the scrotum with your fingers along with the vessels that are near the penis.
And let a servant hold it and stretch it strongly, then cut with a wide, sharp scalpel a curved incision along the vessels until the vessels are exposed, then peel them from every side as I have mentioned to you in the case of the arteries that are in the groin, and then insert a needle with a twisted thread into them.
Bind it at the first places where it was shown to you, and bind it also at its end, then cut it open in the middle with a vertical incision along the length of the body, and take out what has gathered in it of the cloudy corrupted fluids.
Then treat the abscess with the treatment of all other wounds that you want to develop in order for the vessels feeding one of the eggs to fall off, there is no harm in this, if the follicle presents itself to all the vessels, then it is necessary to remove one of the eggs along with the vessels so that it does not deprive the egg of nourishment. Before cutting off the vessels it wilts and there is no benefit from it.
Chapter fifty-sixth.
In the Treatment of  the Abdominal Abscess.
The occurrence of this abscess is from a tear that appears in the peritoneum extended on the abdomen near the flanks of the abdomen, so the intestine protrudes from that hernia into one of the eggs.
And this hernia is either from a tear in the peritoneum or from its extension, and these two types occur due to many reasons, either a blow or a jump or a shout or lifting something heavy and so on, and its sign if it is from the extension of the peritoneum that it happens little by little over a long time.
And it does not happen suddenly, and the swelling is level to about the depth before the peritoneum compresses the intestine, and its sign if it is from a tear in the peritoneum that it happens from the beginning with great pain at once, and the swelling is different appearing under the skin nearby.
And that by the intestine coming out and its destination outside of the peritoneum, and it may come out with the appendix, and this abscess is called abdominal and appendicular, and it may be with gas, and there may be pus in the intestine and it gets trapped there, so it leads to the death of the patient.
For it causes a hard pain and a cracking, especially if pressed, and the treatment of these types of ailment with iron is dangerous so you should be wary of falling into it. The method is to order the sick person to return the intestines with his hand inside his belly if they come back.
Then he lies on his side between your hands and raises his legs, then you extend the skin that is below the rib to above and split the entire foreskin lengthwise, then you insert pliers into the edges of the incision as much as needed to open it with them.
And the incision should be as much as an egg can come out of, then you peel off the membranes under the foreskin until if the white, hard peritoneum is revealed on every side, then insert your index finger into what is below the egg.
Between the white peritoneum under the egg and the second peritoneum, and with this you release the adhesions that are behind the egg, then bend it with the right hand into inside the foreskin, and with this extend the white peritoneum upwards with the left hand and raise the egg with the peritoneum towards the incision.
And order the servant to extend the egg upwards and you release the adhesions behind it completely and search with your finger so that there is nothing from the twisted intestines in the white, hard peritoneum, if you find something from it, push it into the belly below.
Then take a needle with a thick thread that has been twisted from ten threads and insert it at the end of the peritoneum under the foreskin that is next to the incision, then cut the ends of the folded thread until there are four threads. Then weave some of them together in a crisscross pattern and tie the peritoneum that we said is under the foreskin with a strong knot on both sides, then also wrap the ends of the threads and tie them with a tight knot so that nothing from the vessels that nourish it can reach it. So that a hot tumor may not appear, and there also may be made a second ligature outside the first ligature, farther from it by less than two fingers' breadth. And after these two ligatures, draw from the peritoneum under the skin of the scrotum as much as the thickness of a finger.
So that a hot tumor may not appear, and there also may be made a second ligature outside the first ligature, farther from it by less than two fingers' breadth. And after these two ligatures, draw from the peritoneum under the skin of the scrotum as much as the thickness of a finger. And cut the rest of it all in a circular fashion and remove with it the testicle, then split beneath the skin of the scrotum a split which will drain blood and fluid as we described previously. Then, cotton dipped in oil is applied to the wound, and the ligature we described is used.
And the white peritoneum which we mentioned after cutting it may be cauterized, carefully avoiding bleeding, as this often occurs. The ligature is left until it falls off of its own accord; if its falling off is delayed, let hot water be applied to it and what causes perspiration be placed on it until it falls off.
Then the wound is treated with all the treatments for wounds until it heals.
Chapter Sixty-Sixth.
In the case of this hernia, I have not seen anyone dare to treat it with iron. The earlier authors stated that it should be treated like the hernia with a testicle, namely by gently tying off the vessels after making an incision beneath them.
Then, it is split in the middle, and the tumor is treated with what opens it until the vessels fall out, and the wound is treated as we have mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Seventy-Sixth.
In the hernia that occurs in the groin.
A hernia may occur in the groin as we mentioned, where the contents are not protruded and nothing descends from the intestines into it; if it does descend, it is easily returned at all times.
But if it persists for a long time, the opening in the peritoneum becomes larger until the intestines and omentum descend into the scrotum, which occurs due to the extension of the peritoneum that is present in the groin, as we mentioned previously. This is because the peritoneum extends and then relaxes and the place sags, and its treatment by cauterization as I have previously described.
And it can be treated with iron in this manner, which is that the patient lies on his back between your hands, and then you cut the place of the hernia that appears as a longitudinal incision according to three fingers’ width, and then you cover the peritoneum under the skin.
Until the white peritoneum underneath is exposed, then you take a thread and place it on the place that has come from the peritoneum and press it into the depth of the abdomen, and then sew the two places that have resulted at the end of the thread from the peritoneum and glue them together with stitches.
Then you pull on the end of the thread and do not cut the peritoneum at all, nor touch the egg or anything else as I have taught you in the treatment of inguinal hernias, then treat it with the treatment of surgical wounds.
If the threads are cut off, clean them and close the wound until it heals, for the peritoneum contracts and does not increase the protrusion of the hernia.
And cauterization is best in this place because it is closer to safety.
Chapter Eighty-Sixth.
In the relaxation of the scrotum skin.
The skin of the scrotum often relaxes in some people without relaxing the flesh inside it, and its appearance is ugly, so whoever desires to treat it should put the patient to sleep on his back.
And cut all the skin that has relaxed on the thick skin, and then bring together the edges, and if you wish to sew first the excess of the relaxed skin with three or four stitches and make sure of the stitch, then cut between the stitches.
Then treat it with the treatment of all surgical wounds until it heals and the stitches are removed.
Chapter Ninety-Six
On castration.
Castration is forbidden in our Law.
For this reason, it behooved me not to mention it in this book of mine, but I have mentioned it for two reasons: one is that this should be in the knowledge of the physician if he is asked about it and that he may know the treatment of him who has undergone it. And the other reason is that we often need to castrate some animals for our benefit.
As with sheep, goats, and cats, and the like of animals. I say that castration is done in two ways: either by softening or by cutting. As for the one done by softening, its method is that we immerse the animal in hot water until its testes relax and soften and hang down.
Then you soften it with your hand until it dissolves and is not palpable to the touch. As for castration by cutting, it behooves you to grasp the animal and squeeze the scrotum with your left hand, then tie the spermatic cords and make a single incision on each testicle.
Until the two testicles appear, then cut them after you have removed their coverings and leave nothing on them except for the thin sac that is on the vessels. This type of castration is better than the one done by softening.
Because softening may leave something of the female organs, and the animal may then desire copulation. Then you treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Seventy
On treating hermaphrodites.
A hermaphrodite in men comes in two types: one is that a shape appears similar to a female genitalia, with hair, below the scrotum or in the skin between the male organs, and urine may flow from what is in the scrotal skin.
As for women, there is one type and it appears above the vulva on the pubic bone, like small male penises protruding outward, one resembling a man's penis and the two resembling female genitalia.
The two types of men and the one type of woman it is necessary to cut away the excess flesh until its trace disappears, then treat them with the treatment of all other wounds until they heal. As for the second type of man from whom urine comes out that is in the skin of the scrotum there is no work done on him, nor does he recover at all.
Chapter seventy-one.
On cutting the clitoris and the flesh that comes from the vagina of women.
The clitoris may increase in size beyond the natural amount until it becomes noticeable and spoils its appearance, and it may become enlarged in some women to the extent that it spreads like men's and becomes involved in intercourse.
It is necessary to grasp the tip of the clitoris with your hand or a clamp and cut it, but do not be excessive in cutting, especially at the depth of its root so that it does not cause bleeding.
Then treat it with the treatment of wounds until it heals, and as for the growing flesh, it is flesh that grows in the mouth of the womb until it fills it.
And perhaps it comes out to the outside, like a navel. And therefore some of the ancients call it the umbilical disease, so it is necessary to cut it like the clitoris, and treat it until it heals.
Chapter seventy-two.
On treating hernias.
Hernia is when the vagina of a woman is not pierced or the opening is small, and it may be natural from birth or acquired. The acquired one comes from a cause that has progressed, and it may be from excess growing flesh.
Or from a thin or thick peritoneum, and it may be in the depth of the womb or its sides or above or below it, and it prevents intercourse, the cord, and childbirth, and perhaps menstruation. And knowing this is by looking at it with the midwife.
If the obstruction is visible and close, then if it is not visible, search for it with your fingers or a probe. If the obstruction is from thin peritoneum and is close to the sword-like parts, quickly rupture it by making on the sword-like parts a shape like the ribs then place your thumbs of both hands on it.
And the woman on her back, spreading her legs, then extend the sword-like parts with force until the thin peritoneum is ruptured and the obstruction opens, then take a piece of cloth and soak it in oil and put it on the place, and mate with the woman every day so that the place does not close again.
If the peritoneum is thick and dense, it should be incised with a wide scalpel resembling a leaf of reed. If the obstruction is from growing flesh, tie it with forceps and cut it off. And let there be with you medicine that stops bleeding without pain like myrrh, frankincense, and mastic mixed with egg white.
Then use a wide lead pipe so that the wound does not close quickly, hold it for days and use a piece of dry linen, then treat it with all the treatment of hematoma until it heals. It may occur in the uterus another growth of flesh, then it should be cut off in this way.
Unless it is a cancerous tumor, for the cancerous tumor that is in the uterus should not be touched with iron at all.
Chapter Seventy-Three.
In the treatment of hemorrhoids, warts, and red pimples that appear in women's genitals.
As for hemorrhoids, it is a swelling of the mouths of the veins until much blood flows from them constantly. If hemorrhoids are advanced, they become warts. And I have mentioned in the classification their types, signs, and we mention here.
What accepts treatment from them and what does not accept treatment, I say that hemorrhoids and warts if they are in the depth of the uterus and do not appear to the touch there is no treatment with iron. And what is from them at the mouth of the uterus that is felt it is the one that is treated.
It is necessary that the woman enters a cold house and then spreads out the warts with a file or a rough cloth and cuts them from their roots, then she applies [something] to them when blood flows from one of the cutting points for bleeding without any teasing.
Like frankincense, mastic, benzoin, and the like. Then she raises her legs to the wall for an hour then lets them down into cold water. If the bleeding persists, then have her sit in a decoction of  sumac, pomegranate peel, and hawthorn, etc., then take barley flour and knead it with honey and vinegar.
And spread it on her back and if the bleeding stops, otherwise, apply a poultice to the chest and armpits without condition, then take a piece of cloth and dip it in the juice of  mallow, or the juice of kid’s tongue, or the juice of hawthorn sprigs with a syrup of hawthorn, and apply it to the area.
And if the tumor subsides, treat the area with an ointment until it heals. As for the red scab, it resembles the tops of the rough-looking  sparrow's heads, so it is necessary to cut what has appeared from it according to what I mentioned regarding warts and treat it until it heals.
Chapter Seventy-Four.
On the abscess that appears in the womb.
Many kinds of tumors may appear in the womb, such as cancer,  hard tumor, ulcers, polyps, carbuncles,  fistulas, hemorrhoids, fissures, warts, and hot tumors. I have mentioned all of these diseases and their types and symptoms in the previous section.
It is necessary to mention in this article the hot tumor that appears in the womb if it is one of the tumors that gather over time, how its treatment with iron is done. You should examine it and see if the pain of the tumor at its beginning is sharp with throbbing, inflammation, and fever.
And if you see it red when touched, do not hurry to treat it and treat it with what helps ripening until when these symptoms subside, then it is necessary that the woman sit on a chair with two seats and leans against her back.
And she gathers her legs to the side of the lower abdomen and her thighs are spread apart, and her arms become under her knees, and they are tied with a bandage that is suitable.
Therefore, then the midwife sits on the right side and uses the instrument that opens the mouth of the womb, whose image will come later, and it is necessary if you want to use this tool to estimate the depth of a woman's womb so that what enters from the instrument is not more than the depth of the womb.
And it will hurt the woman if the instrument is more than the depth, then it is necessary to put a rest on the edge of the cervix to prevent the whole instrument from entering into the depth of the womb, and the spiral that runs in the instrument should be from the upper side.
And you hold the instrument and the servant rotates the spiral until it opens the cervix, and if the opening appears and feels soft and tender, then it is necessary to cut it at its head with a wide scalpel, and when the entire time has been emptied.
Then it is necessary that a soft thread soaked in rose butter or green oil with some of the essence be inside the wound, and the thread should come out from the cut in the cervix, and cotton wool clean, soaked in water that has been boiled with baker's yeast, should be placed on the outside of the womb and on the vulva.
Then it is treated after two days with the ointment that is suitable for it until it heals.
And the womb and the wound may be washed by injecting water and honey, then with water that has been boiled with the root of saffron or long turmeric, then it returns to the ointment, if the opening was hidden inside the womb.
It is necessary that you refrain from treating it with iron but rather treat it with what has been mentioned in the division.
The Fifth and Seventy Chapter.
In teaching the caul, how to treat the live ones if they come out contrary to their natural form.
It is necessary for the midwife to know first the natural form of childbirth, for from its signs if you see the woman strain downwards and yearn to smell the air and ease what she is on from delivery.
And it hastens the exit of the fetus, know that this childbirth is in its natural form and his exit is on his head and the placenta with him or hanging from his navel, so if you see these signs, it is necessary to squeeze her belly so that the fetus may exit quickly.
For if it descends on its head, the placenta descends with him and is cleansed from that filth with a good cleansing, and what besides this childbirth is not natural, it is condemned because the fetus may come out on its legs and its hands come out before its head and its legs.
And one hand or one leg or he comes out with his head and hand or comes out curled up, and perhaps turns on his back and similar to those condemned forms, so it is necessary for the midwife to be skillful and gentle with all these things and beware of error and mistake.
And I make clear each form of it and how the trick is in it so that you may infer from it and stand on it, if the fetus comes out on its head, the natural exit, and it intensified on the woman, and it was difficult for her to give birth, and you see her strength has weakened, so sit her on a stool and order women to hold her firm.
And comfort her womb with boiled cumin and wet date poultice, then the midwife enters between her fingers a small scalpel and tears open the placenta with it or tears it with her fingernail until what is in it of moisture flows out, and she squeezes the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, it is necessary to inject the woman with licorice saliva mixed with butter of shierj. Then order her after the injection to strain and sneeze with a kandis. Hold her mouth and nose, for the fetus will come out within an hour. If the hand of the fetus comes out first, it is necessary to return it gently little by little.
If it does not come to enter, place the woman on a platform and raise her legs above. Then shake the platform on the ground and the woman grasps so that she does not fall during the shaking. If the hands do not enter and the fetus dies, cut them and pull out the rest of the fetus.
Or tie his hands with a cloth and pull them moderately, for it will come out. The exit of the fetus on its legs, if the fetus comes out on its legs, then it is necessary to push its legs upwards and then turn the fetus little by little until it is straightened. Then take one of its legs and stretch it gradually.
If they came out to the thighs, order her to strain and sneeze with a kandis for it will come out. If it does not come out as described above, then return the fetus little by little until you make it in its natural shape, then it will come out smoothly at that time. If it is prevented from all that has been described.
Take saliva of khitmi, licorice saliva, butter of shierj and a boiled solution and strike them all in the mortar with good striking. Then apply it to the woman's genitals and lower belly. Then seat her in lukewarm water until the cervix reaches.
If you see that it has loosened below her, then make for her a pillow from marr and she carries it. If she holds the pillow for an hour, then seat her on the chair, then sneeze her and block her mouth and nose and squeeze her lower belly with gentle squeezing. For the fetus will come out within an hour. The exit of the fetus on its knees and hands.
If it emerges in this manner, insert your hands gradually into the vagina and then place the woman on her side. Let her legs hang down as she lies on a bed, fold your arms and gently press above her abdomen little by little. Then withdraw what is beneath her legs from the cushions until she is positioned downwards. If the fetus does not emerge, take both her legs and move them vigorously. Then press above the pubic bone little by little until the fetus ascends upwards. Then the midwife inserts her hand and smooths the fetus gradually.
Tell the woman to strain until the fetus emerges. If the fetus emerges with one hand extended, put your hand back in and withdraw it. If you cannot withdraw it, place the woman upright and make her walk. If she cannot walk, have her lie down.
Place her on a bed and shake her legs vigorously. Then use the forceps described from the instruments. If she takes hold of it, seat her on a chair and treat to withdraw the hand and smooth the fetus in its natural form.  Help the woman cough and tell her to strain until it emerges.
The fetus emerges on its side, with outstretched hands and its face toward its mother’s back. The midwife must grasp the child’s hand and turn it gradually, smoothing it gently. If it is straightened, apply the fat and instruments described above to its chest.
Then tell her to move slightly. If she does so, seat her on a chair and tell her to lean to the right side. Then tell her to strain and cough with the forceps because it will emerge.
If it descends into the vagina with the placenta, cut the placenta open with your fingernail until it is freed of moisture. If it adheres to the child’s face or neck, cut it from the umbilical cord so that it does not choke and die. Then push the child inside until it assumes its proper position.
Tell the woman to give birth several times, for it is an easy exit, the exit of twins or many fetuses. Know that twins are often born and may be born three or four. They live unless this is rare. As for five, it is something outside nature, they do not live at all.
And they are surrounded by a single placenta, even if many, and they are separated by a thin partition between them, attached to the cord of each one of them.  And they may exit as one fetus exits in an easy natural way, and they may exit with difficulty as we described.
If the birth of some of them is difficult and becomes what we mentioned from unnatural shapes, treat it as we described. And let the midwife be gentle and do what she does with softness and patience and find a way for every shape according to what is suitable for her that leads to safety,.
Mention what is imagined in the womb of fetuses that fall, they may be imagined in the womb one and two and three and four and five and six and seven and more than ten, it has been proven to me that a woman miscarried seven and another fifteen, all of them imagined like this.
By the estimation of the Exalted, All-Knowing, all of this should be in the knowledge of the midwife because perhaps something like this may happen to her one day so she can meet it with what is appropriate.
Chapter Sixty-Seven.
On the extraction of a dead fetus.
If you treated the dead fetus with what was mentioned in the division of treatment and it did not come out, and compelled you to work with your hand, then it is necessary for you to look. If the woman is healthy in strength and there is nothing from the symptoms that one fears harming her, then it is necessary for the woman to lie down on a bed on her back.
And her head is tilted down and her legs are raised, and a servant adjusts her from both sides or ties her to the bed so that her body does not be drawn when the fetus is pulled.
Then she moistens the mouth of the womb with moist pastes along with saliva of catmint and fenugreek and linseed, then the midwife anoints her hand with these pastes and saliva and gently inserts it into the womb, then she seeks a place in which to insert the forceps from the fetus, and the places that correspond to it.
Look if the fetus is positioned so that it descends headfirst, she inserts the forceps in its eyes or cheekbones or mouth or chin or under its beard or throat or in the places near the ribs or under the scapulae.
But if it descends on its legs, then in the groin and middle ribs, she should hold the forceps in her right hand and make its curve between the fingers of her left hand and gently insert her hand and insert a forceps in some of those places mentioned.
Until she reaches something empty, then she inserts another or third forceps if needed so that the pull is equal and does not tilt in one direction, then she pulls with a steady pull and it is not just on a straight line but moves to every direction.
To make it easier to exit as it is done with the molar when pulling it out, and it is necessary between that to relax the pull. If it gets stuck in one direction, then the midwife should anoint some of her fingers with oil and insert them from that side to turn what is stuck.  If some of the fetus exits, then the forceps are moved to other places.
She raises it slightly and does this until the whole fetus exits, if a hand comes out before the others and it cannot be put back because of its tightness then it is necessary to wrap it in a cloth and pull it until all of it exits, then cut it.
If it is in the wrist joint or in the elbow and thus you should do in the other hand and in both legs, if the head of the child is large and there was pressure on its exit or there was water gathered in its head, then it is necessary to insert between the fingers a pointed scalpel.
And you split it with it the head and the water comes out or you smoke it with the tool that is called the  misdaq which its image comes with the images of all the tools in the chapter after this one.
Likewise you do if the child is large headed by nature, then it is necessary to split the skull or smooth it with the misdaq as we said, then you extract the bones with pliers. If the head came out and contracted at the collarbone, let him split until the moisture in the chest is poured out.
For then the chest joins, and if the chest did not join and it was not possible to exit, cut a piece as much as you can. If the lower abdomen is warm or there is a boil in it, then it is necessary to pound it until the moisture flows out of it.
If the child is on its legs, then pulling it is easy and straightening it into the mouth of the womb is easy. If it contracted at the abdomen or chest, then it is necessary to pull it with a rope that you wrapped around your hand and split the abdomen or chest until what is in them flows out.
If you extracted all the organs and the head remained and was held back, let the midwife enter her left hand, if the mouth of the womb is open, then she enters her hand into the neck of the womb and seeks with it the head and pulls it with her fingers into the mouth of the womb, then she enters a rope or two ropes into it and pulls it with them.
If the mouth of the womb has closed due to a hot tumor, it should not be forced upon, but rather at that time it is necessary to use the pouring of wet, fatty things and it is used to sit in water that softens and moistens.
As for if the fetus is on its side, and if it is possible to straighten it, then use what was mentioned regarding a live fetus. If that is not possible, then cut it in sections and remove it, and it is necessary that nothing of the placenta be left inside at all. When you have finished treating it, then use what was mentioned from treatment for hot tumors that appear in the wombs.
If bleeding occurs, then lower it in holding waters and use the rest of the treatment. I have seen a woman who had become pregnant, the fetus died within her, then she became pregnant with it again.
Then the other fetus died as well. After a long time, a tumor appeared in her womb and it swelled until it opened and discharged pus. I was called to treat her, and I treated her for a long time but the wound did not close. So I placed some strong drawing ointments on it.
Then bone came out of the place, and after some days another bone came out. I was amazed by this because the abdomen is a place with no bones. I estimated that it was from the bones of the dead fetus, so I searched the wound and extracted many bones from the head of the fetus.
And I continued to do so until I extracted many bones from her. The woman is in the best of health, and she lived like this for a while, pus would continue to come out from the place, but I bring you this rare case here.
Because there is knowledge and assistance in what the physician who creates with his hand attempts to do for treatment.
Chapter Seventy-Seven.
There are images of the instruments needed to extract a fetus.
Image of a screw used to open the mouth of the womb:
This tool, which is used to straighten the fetus, has two screws at each end of the wooden pieces. However, this screw should be more gentle than the one used for straightening and should be made either from ebony or quince wood and the width of each piece should be the thickness of two fingers.
Their width is about a finger, and their length is a palm and a half. And in the middle of the two pieces there are grooves, from the same kind of wood as the pieces themselves, bound into them. Their length is half a palm or a little more, and their width is about two fingers or a little more. These are the grooves.
They are the ones that enter the mouth of the womb to open it when you maneuver the forceps. A picture of another tool similar to this, more delicate and lighter:
It is made of ebony or boxwood in the shape of forceps, except that it has grooves at its end, as you see. The length of each groove is about a palm, and their width is a finger.  If you want to open the womb with it.
Then you sit the woman on a bed with her legs lowered and spread apart between her thighs, and you introduce these grooves closed together into the mouth of the womb while you hold the end of the instrument below between her hips, then open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps, either to the extent that you want to open the womb. Until the midwife makes what she wants. A picture of another forceps mentioned by the ancients:
A picture of the instrument that is used to push out the fetus:
A picture of the forceps that are inserted into the head of the fetus.
It resembles scissors, with teeth at the end as you see. And it can be made rectangular like forceps, as in this picture, with teeth like those of a saw to cut and trim.
A picture of another instrument used for delivery:
A picture of a hook.
This hook has a slight thickness so that it does not break when you pull the fetus with it. A picture of a hook with two prongs:
A picture of two wide scalpels for cutting the fetus:
All of these tools, the more types of them there are and the more prepared they are by the craftsman, the faster his work becomes and the higher he is regarded by people for his skill. So do not despise any tool that is prepared at your disposal, for there will certainly be a need for it.
Chapter Eighty-Seven.
On the expulsion of the placenta.
If the placenta is retained after delivery, it is necessary to order the woman to hold herself and then to have her sneeze with a khandus (a type of medicinal snuff), and to grip her hand on her mouth and nostrils. If it comes out by this means, otherwise, take a gourd.
And pierce a hole in the lid and put inside it herbs that open the mouth of the uterus like fudung, sabath, dill, chamomile, shih, salicylic acid, and centaury; all these medicines or some of them. Soak them in water and place them on the fire, then put a silver tube on the hole of the lid and the other end in the mouth of the uterus.
And hold it until the steam reaches the bottom of the uterus, then have her sneeze as we said. If the placenta comes out quickly, if it remains after this treatment and does not come out, order the midwife to dip her left hand in shiraj butter or khtammi saliva.
Then insert it into the vulva and search for the placenta. If she finds it, grasp it and pull it out little by little until it comes out. If it is attached deep in the uterus, introduce the hand as described above. When the placenta is found, pull it out slowly with caution.
Lest the uterus fall when pulled hard, it should be moved gently to the sides right and left, then the amount of pulling is increased. Then it responds and gets rid of the adhesion. If the mouth of the uterus is closed, we have described the treatment by sneezing and the treatment with a pot and herbs.
If it does not come out with all that has been described, then beware of force on her in re-pulling it but rather she should tie what came out from it to the mouth of the uterus to the thigh of the woman, then inject her with the fourfold ointment, for it softens her after days.
It dissolves and comes out, except that if it has become rotten, an unpleasant odor rises from it to the stomach and head, and this harms the patient, so it is necessary to use a suitable poultice.
Therefore, and because some of the ancients experimented with a poultice of dates and dried figs, similar to the apparatus that women use for steaming when they are experiencing menstruation or after childbirth.
It is made from lead, resembling a funnel, or from copper, with the narrow end placed in the vulva and the wide end over the fire, and incense is placed on the embers, holding it until the incense burns out and then replacing it.
Chapter Seventy-Eight.
On Treating an Unpierced Rectum.
Many boys are born with unpierced rectums, sealed by a thin peritoneum, so it is necessary for the midwife to pierce this peritoneum with her finger, or else to cut it with a sharp scalpel, taking care not to touch the muscle.
Then she places a cloth soaked in syrup and oil on it, and then treats it with ointments until it heals. If she fears that it will become blocked again, put a lead tube into the hole for many days and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
It may also happen that the rectum becomes blocked due to a scar or tumor, in which case it is necessary to cut open this scar and then treat it as described above with ointment and poultices.
Chapter Eighty.
On Treating Hemorrhoids That Occur Below.
Hemorrhoids that occur below are a complication and thickening that occurs near the rectum, either outside or in the space from one of the sides, and the hemorrhoid can be one or more.
If this complication becomes inflamed and fluid, white or a thin pus, flows from it, and some of these hemorrhoids may be infused into the large intestine and small intestine, and those that are not infused can be known by what comes out with them from feces and gas when the patient uses the toilet.
Perhaps a worm may emerge from it, and it may be fistulas if it is in the open, penetrating to the bladder and the urethra. It may also penetrate to the hip joint and the coccyx. And that which is known as a fistula penetrating to the anus is also of this kind, but not the other kind.
Insert your index finger into the anus and insert a fine probe of copper or iron into the fistula if there is no constriction; but if there is a constriction, insert a fine lead probe or a hair from a horse's mane.
Until you feel the probe or hair in your finger, if you do not feel it at all and nothing emerges from the opening of feces or gas or worm as we have mentioned, then know that it is not penetrated, and hasten to treatment.
And if the fistula is penetrating to the bladder or urethra, its evidence is the exit of urine from it and its refusal to adhere to the place with medicines. But if it is penetrating to the hip joint or coccyx, its sign is the reaching of the probe there.
If it does not have a constriction to the bone and the presence of pain in its direction, and the constant exit of pus from it, and there is no remedy for it nor does it adhere to ointment, then all these penetrating fistulas are free from cure.
And their treatment is a vain effort for those who try to cure them from ignorant physicians. As for the one that is not penetrated and not chronic, it is hoped for recovery by iron as I describe it and what has been tried, which is to place the patient in your hands on his back.
And the leg is shifted upwards and the hips are tilted towards his abdomen, then a copper or lead probe is inserted if there is a constriction in the fistula until you know where it ends; if the patient feels it near the anus, then you should insert your index finger into the anus.
If you feel in your finger the probe has entered by itself uncovered and without feeling between your finger and it any scraping or flesh, then know certainly that it is penetrating. Do not tire yourself over it for there is no cure from it as we have said.
And they have said that it heals in some people rarely, and of the treatment which one hopes for benefit from, is to heat a fine iron plate according to the size of the wound as mentioned before, and insert it into the wound until it reaches near the seat, then return it twice or three times.
Until you know that it has burned all of that excess flesh which is attached like a bird's feather tube, then treat him with a poultice moistened in butter until those burned pieces come out, then treat him with the adhesive ointments if he heals.
And if not, then he does not heal without this treatment at all. But if you insert the probe and it did not penetrate to your finger in the seat, and there was a thick barrier of flesh or peritoneum between it and the probe, and you saw the wound below the skin's surface, then cut the skin from the beginning of the wound. And as you pass through the cut with the probe in the wound until you reach where the tip of the probe ended, then the probe is removed and falls, then clean those attached pieces of flesh which resemble a bird's feather tube and leave nothing of it.
Then treat him with the adhesive ointments until he heals, and if blood overpowers you and stands between you and working to cut those pieces of flesh, then the best thing you can do and the quickest benefit is cauterization by fire or with a sharp medication because cauterization by fire gathers two good states burning those excess pieces of flesh.
And cutting the blood and drying the moistness, then treat him with a poultice moistened in butter or powdered sulfur with oil until the place suppurates and those burned pieces come out in pus, then treat the wound then with adhesive ointments that are good for firming up the flesh.
These are the medicines that have constriction and drying, for if it is broken, it is healed and does not require packing. If the wound has reached the depth of the buttocks and is far from the surface of the body, insert your finger into the buttocks and search within it.
If you feel the probe and between it and you there is a curtain of peritoneum or flesh, and it was near to the penetration, there is no work to be done in it except by way of hope and expectation that you use one of three ways, either mold it as we have mentioned.
Or, you may cut it until you reach its bottom so that you can manage to insert the probe and treat from close proximity, but do not exaggerate in cutting lest you cut the muscle surrounding the buttocks, causing the patient to have involuntary bowel movements, then treat it with what we mentioned. Perhaps he will be healed as we said.
Or, you may penetrate that curtain and perforate it after you have cut it close to the buttocks as we mentioned, either with the probe or with another sharp-pointed instrument, then cleanse all of the coagulated flesh in the incision where you could reach.
Then sew together the entire wound, including the incision and the upper opening until it is closed and the wound remains open inside the buttocks, which will be easier for the patient, and perhaps the wound will close in this manner.
And if you inserted the probe into the wound and it was on one side of the buttocks towards the surface of the body, with the skin and the ring of the buttocks, then take a probe with a perforated tip like an awl in this manner:
And insert a loose thread of five threads or so into it, then insert the probe with the thread into the wound until it reaches its bottom. If it is penetrating in the edge of the buttocks from inside close by:
Then bring the thread out of that hole by inserting your finger into the buttocks and bringing out one end of the thread, and gather both ends together and tighten them, and leave it for a day or two. Every time the thread cuts in the flesh, tighten it well until that flesh between the ends of the threads falls off, then treat the wound until it heals and closes.
If the mouth of the abscess is not open, then make it open as much as you can, but do not make it too deep, lest you cut the muscle, then treat it as mentioned before until it heals.
The pointed scalpel used to open abscesses has a sharp edge on one side and a blunt edge on the other so that it does not cut what is not needed, as you see.
Chapter Eighty-One.
Concerning hemorrhoids that bleed, cutting them, and treating fissures.
Hemorrhoids come in two types: either they are inside the anus, resembling red swellings or like grapes, and some are small and others large, with blood always flowing from them.
They can be one or many, and some are outside the anus at its edges; however, these that are outside the anus are usually less moist, with a discharge of yellow water or a little blood flowing constantly, and they have the color of the body.
And the treatment for those inside the anus is to order the patient to sit and wash until the anus prolapses, so that you can see the hemorrhoids.  Quickly, you grab them with tweezers or hold them with your finger, then cut them at their base. If the tweezers do not catch because of the moisture and relaxation of the area,
then remove it with a rough cloth or a piece of cauterized bread, or pull it out with your fingers and then cut it, and after cutting, put some sharp points on top so that they perform the function of cauterization, or sear it as mentioned before in the chapter on cauterization.
Then treat it with all the other treatments until it heals. If the anus does not prolapse, inject the patient with an injection containing a small amount of laxative to wash what is inside the anus and facilitate its exit quickly when the patient cleanses himself. As for those hemorrhoids outside the anus, they are easy to manage.
It is by taking it with your finger or hanging it with a hook and cutting it, then treating it as mentioned until it heals.  And if one dislikes cutting with iron, it is necessary to employ a needle on this description. Take a loose thread and insert it into a needle.
Then you draw the  tumor upwards and insert it with the needle at its base from the other side, and wrap the ends of the thread below the needle while it is crossing over, and tighten the tumor tightly and firmly, then tie the thread and remove the needle. Do this for all the tumors and leave one of them uncauterized.
To drain excess blood from it, then place on the seat a cloth soaked in rose butter or cedar oil and place it on the seat and order the patient to be still, then leave him until it falls off. If the tumors fall off, treat them with ointments and all other treatments until they heal.
As for the treatment of anal fissures, it often occurs from fecal impaction and constipation. If it persists and no medicine benefits, it is necessary to remove it with a scalpel or your finger until it becomes moist and the outer layer that prevents it from healing is removed.
Then treat it until it heals properly. If it does not heal, repeat the excision more forcefully than before until it bleeds well and exfoliates, then treat it because it will heal.
The Eighty-Second Chapter.
In the Treatment of Ingrown Nails, both Reversed and Non-Reversed, Dry Warts, and Moles.
The nail is a rounded lump on the color of the body, resembling a nail head, which occurs in all parts of the body, especially the soles of the feet and fingers, and causes pain when walking.
It is necessary to cut around the nail, hold it with a tweezer or hook, and remove it from its root, then treat it, and if you wish, cauterize it as mentioned in its chapter. As for dry warts, one of them is a small, rough, protruding, rounded growth on the surface of the body.
It often comes to the hands of boys and its treatment is that the thorn be stretched out and cut or cauterized with silk thread or hair until it falls off, and if you wish, it can be cauterized with what has been mentioned before by fire or with a sharp drug.
And warts, both inverted and non-inverted, can be removed with the instrument that I am mentioning in the treatment of the ant.  As for the ant, it is also a small, thick outgrowth on the body's surface that goes deep inside. And if it is affected by the cold, one feels a sensation similar to an ant sting.
It is found all over the body, and most of it is found in the hands. Its treatment is that a tube is taken from an ostrich feather or a strong eagle feather and that tube is placed on the ant until it encircles the ant completely. Then you turn your hand with the tube until what surrounds the ant breaks.
And it is pushed deep into the flesh and the ant is removed from its root, and if you wish, you do this with a copper or iron tube in this image.
The top of the tube is solid and open, making it easy for the fingers to hold and control it. And if you wish, the ant can be cauterized as mentioned before in the chapter on cauterization.
Chapter Thirty-Eight.
Regarding the instruments used for injection in diseases of the buttocks, diarrhea, and colic.
The syringe may be made of silver, porcelain, or brass hollowed out or hammered.  And these instruments can be made small and large according to those who use them. So, the ones used to treat young children, whose buttocks are narrow or painful, their syringes are very gentle.  Image of a large syringe.
The upper part that connects to the tube is wide, with a barrier where the tube is attached as you see. And its lower end which enters the buttocks is solid and smooth all the way to the tip. On one side there are two holes, and on the other side there is one hole.
The width of the opening should be equal to or slightly thicker than the thickness of the rod, and the tube in which the medicines are placed should be made from an animal bladder or sheep’s intestines, shaped like a small plate, its diameter being about an inch.
And it is pierced with many holes as it revolves, and the distance between each hole should be the thickness of a finger, then a thick thread of doubled yarn, ten threads or so, is inserted into those holes, and the tube is gathered together like a plate. Then if medicine is placed in it, the syringe's head is pulled tight between the stones, then it is injected with it. This is a picture of the tube and the holes:
And the way to inject it is to fill the sheep's intestines or bladder with medicine while it is heated over a moderate fire, being careful that it is not too hot or too cold, then the patient lies on his back and raises his legs.
And a cushion or blanket is placed under him, then the tip of the syringe is smeared with oil or egg white or fenugreek saliva or something similar, then it is gently inserted into the rectum, and then the assistant takes the syringe in both hands and squeezes it firmly until everything in the syringe is emptied into the intestine.
Then the syringe is removed and the patient's legs are raised against the wall, if the medicine stimulates him to defecate, let him hold on as much as he can and if he sleeps all night it is more effective for constipation. If it was injected into someone with diarrhea and it hastened his bowel movement, stop the injection until he heals.
If there are hemorrhoids or painful tumors in the rectum, let the syringe be very gentle and smoother than the syringes used to inject boys, and this is a picture of a delicate syringe with its skin stretched tight:
Chapter Eighty-fourth.
In the Treatment of Wounds
I have mentioned in the division of treating things like burns, and I am mentioning here their treatment by hand and medicine to the fullest extent. So I say that wounds differ according to the thing which is operated on and according to the place where the wound occurs.
And the things in which wounds occur are many, like a stone blow or a sword cut or a knife or a spear thrust or a stick or an arrow and so on from many things.
And as for wounds according to the places in the body, such as a wound that occurs on the head or neck or chest or abdomen or liver and so on from the organs.
And I describe the treatment of some wounds to make them a measure and a law for all other wounds, and I begin with simple head wounds especially because the complex ones will be mentioned in the beginning of the third chapter of this book.
So I say that when a simple wound occurs in the head and there is no broken bone, if it is from a stone blow or the like and only the skin has been torn and the wound was large and I feared for the patient the occurrence of hot swelling, then immediately proceed to drain the cephalic on the spot. And do not delay that and bring out blood from him according to the strength of it, if nothing prevents the letting of blood then especially if the blood which comes out of the wound is easy, let the letting be from opposite the side that was wounded.
The sick person should be warned against fullness, drinks and heavy foods, for if he is prevented from his incision being performed, let him lessen his food and keep away from meat and drinks, and upon the wound if it has become hot, apply cotton soaked in rose oil alone or with a drink containing it.
And if the hot swelling is prevented, apply to the wound if it is soft with its blood and has not been changed by the air which I will describe to you shortly, as for if it has been changed by the air, apply some ointment to it.
Until it expels pus then treat it until it heals, and if the wound is large and from a sword cut or the like and its edges have not come together, join it with stitches as I describe in suturing abdominal wounds.
If the skin has exposed the bone and adhered and its hold was only in a slight attachment, cut it then treat the wound with medicines that will harden in it instead of skin, and order the sick person to eat foods that have firmness such as heads and  herbs and so on,.
If there is rot in the skin and it does not adhere to the bone, cut out all the rotten flesh and throw it away then treat it, and if in these wounds there is an artery or vein that bleeds from it and the blood does not stop with the medicines, search for the artery.
If you reach it and it does not stop, cut it off with a scalpel and tie it, and if necessity demands, if what has been mentioned did not work, cauterize it until the blood stops. And if these wounds are small and insignificant, order them easy they are easily treated by only putting this air on them when they are in their blood.
Before it changes with the air, the recipe for the air is to take from frankincense a part and from cinnamon two parts and from slaked or unslaked lime three parts, all ground together and sifted, and put it in the wound and tighten it tightly until it sticks on it well.
It is then bound with blood, and tightened above with bandages, and it is left untended until it heals, if it does not swell. For the medicine does not detach from it until it is healed, and sometimes this can be done by plaster alone if you do not have access to gum or resin.
And this can also be done with a caulk in many major wounds if it is expertly placed on them and tightened, and the wounds are fresh with blood until air changes them, but if air has changed them somewhat, especially during summer.
So, there is no meaning in treating it with what we have mentioned, by applying some mature ointments on top of it or by applying a porridge made from barley flour mixed with water and honey until it expels pus, then treating it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
But if a fracture occurs with the wound and it is slight, then draw it out with bone splints. And I mentioned the treatment of skull fractures in what follows, in the surgery of the neck, if the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment between it and the head wound if it is simple.
But if a nerve from the neck or an artery has been cut, then if it is a nerve, there is no remedy other than to avoid treating it with something that tightens tightly like bandages and zinc oxide because they hurt the nerve and tighten it.
And nothing cold should be placed on the wound at all because the essence of the nerve is cold and it connects to the brain which is the most noble of organs, and what you treat it with from medicines should be soft like rose petals washed with fresh water several times moistened with oil or rose grease.
If you also wash with fresh water and all the minerals like this, and the moist ointments, but if the wound is large, then use sutures or close its edges with bandages, then treat it until it heals.
If the wound has a depth and there is a pus collection at its bottom, then it should be drained from the lowest point. If an artery in the wound has been severed and blood is flowing, then it should be cut, tied off, or cauterized if necessity demands it.
If the wound has cut some or all of the pharyngeal pearls and the arteries are intact, then gather the edges of the skin with sutures to the pharynx's stalk, do not touch the pharynx itself but smooth it and return it to its natural shape, then tighten it tightly and leave it for days.
Then treat it with ointments containing drying and tightening properties until it heals. If the wound has affected the bone, then open it. If there are fragments of bone inside, extract them all or as many as possible. If you cannot remove them all, leave it until the wound dries and heals, making it easier to remove them.
If the wound is moist, sprinkle it with the powders we have described. If bone dries and becomes hardened in the wound, treat it as mentioned in the chapter on chest surgery and between the shoulder blades.
If the wound was caused by a spear or knife and you see it has depth, look if air comes out when the patient breathes. If so, know that it is a mortal wound. If it doesn't have depth and is moist with blood, do not put powders in it at first nor tighten it lest blood be trapped within its depths.
It may be fatal to the patient but put an attractive ointment in it and apply it twice a day. If no ointment is available, place moistened cotton in the wound's mouth to absorb its moisture and have the patient sleep on their wound.
It will absorb what gathers there. If three days or more have passed since the wound, and the patient has no fever, shortness of breath, or any other ill symptoms and you see that their overall condition is good, know that the wound is safe. Treat it with poultices and other remedies until it heals.
If it is difficult to see the wound and the bleeding continues, know that it has become a fistulous ulcer, and treat it from its opening.  The wounded area must be drained of what collects in it. And if the wound is on the chest or back, treat it with what was previously mentioned about stitching.
If it is large or in the region of the bones, if it is small, and if it has affected the bone and fragments have been severed from it, search the wound and promptly remove those fragments. If they are clean, leave them until...
The wound is cleansed, as it makes it easier to remove them. As for the rest of wounds that occur in other organs, their treatment follows the ruling of what was previously mentioned.
The Fifth and Eighty Chapter.
On Wounds in the Abdomen and Excision and Stitching of the Intestine.
The tear that affects the abdomen can be large, small, or medium. The large one may protrude with intestines, and its re-insertion and stitching are more difficult.
The small tear can also be difficult from another perspective, requiring the intestines to be re-inserted with more difficulty. If the intestines are not promptly returned to their place within an hour, they swell and thicken, making insertion more difficult. This is why the medium tear is best, as it does not make re-inserting the intestines as difficult as these two types.
Know that suturing the abdomen has four types: the two ordinary stitches are sufficient for suturing the abdomen and all other bodily wounds, and the other two special stitches are general for all wounds except that they are more specialized for suturing the abdomen.
And I will describe them to you one by one with explanation and clarity. If the wound is small, and something from the intestine has protruded, and it is difficult to return it, this is due to one of two reasons: either because the tear is small as mentioned, or because the intestine has been inflated by cold air.
If it is so, then it is necessary to warm it by immersing a sponge or cloth moistened in lukewarm water alone or perhaps cooked with ginger and saffron and cinnamon, and rub the intestine until the bloating dissolves.
And perhaps the drink which is in it, held, is better than water alone in dissolving the bloating. And if you see that the bloating has dissolved, then swab the intestine with water cooked with cumin or caraway because it makes its entry easier and smoother.
And if it is difficult for him to return after this treatment, then make a small incision in the rupture with the instrument which you use to puncture pipes. And the first treatment if it is accomplished is better than the incision. But he is forced to make an incision only out of necessity and inability to achieve anything else. And this is the image of the instrument:
One side of it is curved and limited, the other side is unlimited, and the slender end is not sharp like a scalpel but is slightly blunt. It is an instrument that resembles a small olive as you see. And if the wound widens and the intestine enters, then it should be returned to its natural shape.
And its special place, if you can manage it, is better. But if the rupture is wide and in the lower abdomen, then he should lie on his back and make his legs higher than his head. And if it is in the upper abdomen, then make his head and chest higher than his lower parts.
And also if the rupture is on one of the sides of the abdomen, make your intention and purpose always the side that has the surgery higher than the other side. And thus it should be used in major surgeries and in medium surgeries.
And as for small surgeries, place it according to your ability. Then prepare a helper standing beside you who holds the entire rupture in his hands and gathers its edges together, then reveals them piece by piece to the one responsible for suturing.
This is the description of common single stitching, which is to take a needle or several needles according to the size of the wound, then leave from the end of the opening an amount equal to the thickness of the knuckle, and insert one needle without putting thread into its edges in the edges of the skin. With the edge of the peritoneum which is under the skin from inside until it passes through that side and I have gathered the edges of the skin and the edges of the peritoneum and they have become four folds, then tighten with a doubled thread around the needle from both sides all until the lips of the wound come together in a tight closure.
Then leave an amount equal to the thickness of the finger also and insert another needle then tighten it with the thread as you did with the first needle, so keep doing that until you need from the needles until you fill the whole wound, and let the needles be medium between thickness and thinness.
Because very thin needles quickly cut the flesh and thick ones are also difficult to enter the skin, therefore it is necessary that they be medium in thinness and thickness, and it is not necessary to insert the needle into the edge of the skin very close.
Lest the flesh be cut quickly and the wound open before it heals, and do not be distant also with the stitching lest the wound prevent from healing, then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not harm the patient when he sleeps and make for him a support from a linen opening on each side to hold the ends of the needles.
And leave them until you know that the wound has healed, and this type of stitching with needles is thus suitable in small surgeries because it may be sufficient in sewing it with one or two needles or so.
Or the description of the second common stitching is that you gather with the stitching the four edges, meaning the edges of the skin and the edges of the peritoneum in one go with a needle containing a thread twisted moderate in thinness and thickness, then if it runs out with this needle the four edges return the needle from the side where it started itself.
The thread should be placed, knotted at the top of the wound so that the suture is like the stitching used for a bag which is drawn tight and between every stitch and stitch there must be the width of a little finger and this type of stitching is known to all people.
And with this suture, a surgery was performed on a man in his belly who had been wounded with a knife and the wound was more than an inch wide and from his intestines about two inches of the middle intestine had come out and the tear was in the middle of the belly.
I laid it out after I had placed his intestines outside the wound for twenty-four hours and the wound healed in about fifteen days and I treated him until he recovered and lived for many years afterward conducting himself properly in all things and the physicians had judged that he would not recover at all.
And it is amazing that I did not treat him with ointment because I was in a place where there were no medicines at all so I put on the wound cotton wool twice a day and made sure to wash it with honey water until it healed.
And as for one type of special suture, I remember it on the basis of Galen's words which is that you begin the stitching from the skin and insert the needle from outside to inside and if the needle has reached the skin and the muscle going in a straight line along the length of the whole belly.
I left the edge of the peritoneum on the side where I inserted the needle and inserted the needle into its other edge from inside to outside in the other flap from the inspection and if you have penetrated it, then penetrate it again into this same flap from the inspection from outside to inside.
And leave the edge of the peritoneum on this side and insert the needle into its other edge from inside to outside and penetrate with your penetration in the peritoneum to the flap of the inspection which is on its side until it penetrates all of it.
Then also begin from this side with the same needle and line it with the edge of the peritoneum on the other side, and bring out the needle from the skin near it, then return it into that skin and line the edge of the peritoneum on the other side with this edge from the monitor.
And bring it out from the skin on its side, and do that once more and do it again and again until you sew all the surgery together on that example, and the sum total of the description of this sewing is to sew a fur stitch for furs.
That you sew the peritoneum once from one side with the edge of the skin and leave it once from the other side until it is empty, as for the second kind of special stitch that Galen also mentioned, this is his word exactly.
And that you sew it on the example of how some healers sew it together by gathering each part to its counterpart, naturally joining the edge of the peritoneum to its other edge and the edge of the monitor to its other edge, which is as I describe to you.
It is necessary that you insert the needle into the edge of the monitor near you from the outside and penetrate it inside alone, leaving the edges of the peritoneum, then return the needle and penetrate it from the outside to inside in both edges of the peritoneum, and return it also.
And penetrate it from inside to outside in the other edge of the monitor on the opposite side, and this type of sewing is better than the common easy sewing which is the sewing mentioned before, this is Galen's word exactly, and some have said that you can straighten the abdominal sewing with two needles. And that is to insert a single thread into them and begin by inserting the needle from where you are and penetrate it to the other side, and insert the other needle from the opposite side of it so that it penetrates from where you are according to the sewing of the straps, whether.
Know that if a rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, its stitching is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen. As for the treatment of the wound, its ruling in treating it is like the ruling in treating all wounds, namely: when you reach the wound wet with blood before the air changes it and you have returned the intestines and outlined them and tightened them, then place upon it the crushed salt.
If the wound has been changed by the air, place upon it some of the ointments you prepare until suppuration occurs and the threads fall off and the peritoneum and the serosa unite, then treat it like the treatment of all other wounds until it heals.
If you do not have medicines, place upon it since it begins to suppurate clean cotton and change it twice a day as I have informed you until it heals.  For in most cases you do not need other treatment if the wounds are simple, but if you fear that the wound will share with the major organs pain.
It is best that you dip soft wool in moderately warm oil or rose fat and place it around the places between the ribs and armpit. If he feels pain or putrefaction in his intestines, this often occurs, then inject him with a black slightly warm astringent drink.
Especially if the putrefaction has reached the intestines and became a penetrating wound to his belly, and know that what was from the intestines thick is easier to heal, and what was from them thin is harder to heal.
As for the intestines known as the fasting, it does not accept healing from surgery that falls on it at all because of the abundance of its veins and their size and the softness of its mass and its proximity to the nature of the nerve,  but if what emerged from the wound is the intestine and reached it with a clean path, turn it back according to its return to the intestines.
If it has passed for a while and turned green or black, it is necessary to tie it with a thread above the place that blackened from it so that it does not expose bleeding because there are veins and arteries in the intestine, then cut what is below that bond.
And make the ends of the thread attached from below the surgery outside of it so that it is easy for you to pull and extract it when the intestine falls and cauterize the wound, mention the wound that occurs in the intestines, but if a tear occurs in the intestines and it is small.
It can be healed in some people because I saw a person who had been stabbed in his abdomen with a spear and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, so I sewed up the wound and it became an opening from which feces and gas came out, so I treated him as I did not hope for his healing. So I continued to treat him until he healed and the place congealed, and when I saw that the place had congealed, I feared for the patient that something bad might happen to him in his belly, so nothing bad happened to him at all and he remained in the best of conditions. Truly he eats and drinks and has intercourse and enters the bath and enjoys service, and some of the people of experience mentioned that when a wound occurs in the intestines and it is small, it should be sewn up in this way.
And it is that the large ants, their heads are taken, then the edges of the wound are gathered and an ant from them, which has its mouth open, is placed on the edges of the wound, and when it grasps it and tightens its mouth, its head is cut off, so it sticks together and does not come apart, and another ant is placed near the first.
And you continue to do this with a number of sutures equal to the size of the wound, then you return it and suture the wound because those heads remain attached in the intestine until the intestine heals and is cured, and no harm occurs to the patient at all, and the intestine can also be sutured with fine thread.
That which is drawn from the two animal parts attached to it after it enters a needle, is that the end of this thread from the two parts is taken and pulled properly, then it is tied at its end with a fine linen thread, and that thread is inserted into the needle. And in it is the thread of the two parts, with which the intestine is sutured, then returned to the abdomen, and this type of stitching with sutures and two parts is only by way of hope and desire.
But if the tear is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the delicate intestines, there is no remedy for it at all.
Chapter sixty-eight.
In the Treatment of Colds and Nasal Discharges.
Know that every wound or tumor if it has aged and progressed and become an ulcer and has not healed and continues to discharge pus, is called in general, in any organ, a  napsur, and we call it a cold.
It is, in truth, a complicated, solid white mass with no pain, and it has a cavity like the hollow of a bird's feather.
Therefore, some people called it a feather, and it may be sometimes moist and constantly discharges pus, and perhaps the moisture ceases at times. This moisture may be abundant or scanty, thick or thin.
And I have presented in the classification, when mentioning wounds, that every ulcer that does not heal and new flesh does not grow in it, is due to one of nine causes, one of which is either due to a deficiency of blood in the body, or its poor quality, or because there is solid flesh inside it and on its edges that prevents the growth of good flesh. It may be that there are many impurities and filth, or perhaps because the ulcer itself is foul and the material filling it is of poor quality, or perhaps because the medicine is not suitable for its treatment, or perhaps due to a plague that occurred in the area, or perhaps it is specific to the area.
It may be that there are many impurities and filth, or perhaps because the ulcer itself is foul and the material filling it is of poor quality, or perhaps because the medicine is not suitable for its treatment, or perhaps due to a plague that occurred in the area, or perhaps it is specific to the area. As it was presented in the city of Saragossa, where diseases are difficult to ripen and tumors are slow to heal by nature, and perhaps because it has a single bone or several bones, and all these causes and their signs and treatments with medicines have been explained in the classification.
Here, I must inform you about the treatment of abscesses and colds that occur through manual work. Know that abscesses can occur in all parts of the body, some ending in large bones, veins, or nerves.
Or to the peritoneum or intestines or bladder or rib from the ribs or vertebra from the vertebrae of the back or joint from the joints that are complex in construction like the hand and foot, and some of them lead to the vicinity of a main organ and so on.
So whatever of these abscesses is of this nature, it is one of the difficult diseases to cure and does not accept treatment, and working with it is arduous and ignorance. If it is from abscesses that have not reached these places mentioned and I have hoped and desired their cure.
And I wanted you to reach that knowledge, so take a probe from copper or iron if the abscess passes through straight, then probe it with it. If there is a complication in the abscess, then probe it with a fine lead probe because lead softens its body.
If it turns towards the complication when entering, then if the abscess has many openings that you cannot identify with the probe, inject one of its mouths, for the moisture you inject flows towards the other openings and spills.
Then, examine thoroughly in every way you can to know if there is bone or nerve, and whether the opening is far or near, or if it is one opening with many mouths.  Pay attention to all this as much as your power allows from your interrogation of the patient and his condition of pain when you touch the place.
And such are the signs and causes of tumors. If you have stood on all this with certainty, then  it is time to proceed to treatment with confidence by looking at...
The opening appears close by or in a healthy place far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or one of the places I have mentioned to you, then split the opening as described above and remove what is in it of  the hardened matter and rotten flesh and excess flesh.
And what grows in its mouth of flesh or tumor and the like, treat it until it heals. If the opening is deep and straight, it is necessary to split it deeply as much as you can, then cleanse it from all its rotten flesh.
Then use the  threaded forceps in the sharp medicines and insert them into the bottom of the opening which you can reach with iron, do this repeatedly until that sharp medicine eats up everything remaining in the bottom of the opening of rot.
Then  force it with ointments that grow healthy flesh until it heals. If it does not heal by this, do what has been described above. If the cause of the opening was bone and you are certain of that, then split it and cut it as I have told you, if nothing prevents you from doing so.
Or a nerve or main organ as we have said, if the bone was revealed to you and there was some rot and blackness in it, remove it until its rot goes away, then treat it with what grows flesh until it heals. If it does not heal and the pus continues as before.
Know that you have not reached all the removal of the corruption so reveal everything upon it again and inquire into its edge and purification with the utmost effort then force it, if it is cured, otherwise know that this corruption is in a deep place from the corruption so reveal everything upon it again.
And inquire into its edge and purification with the utmost effort if the bone was corrupted, a small bone and you could draw it forth, then draw it with the finest instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
If it is many bones, then inquire into drawing forth all of them and do not leave anything from them strive with effort if something from the ligaments obstructed you below it and it was not dangerous to cut it, then cut those ligaments and flesh if there was any and free the bones.
If it did not become easy for you to extract the bones from your time, then place upon the wound what would cover it and leave it days until it rots what is around those bones of flesh and ligaments and preserve the wound so that it does not close the opening which you made during your work.
But place upon it if you feared that, cotton soaked in powdered sulfur with oil or cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment or one of the green ointments for if it rots those ligaments and purifies the bones, it will be easy to extract them and draw them forth.
If it was a single bone large like the thigh bone or femur and such and what corrupted from it was its face only, then strip it with a sharp stripping until that blackness and corruption disappear then force the wound if what corrupted from it was a large portion and the corruption reached the marrow of the bone, there is no escape from spreading it.
And cut it all where the corruption ends then treat it until it closes, and I tell you a case of suppurating that occurred to a man in his leg to make it an example and aid for your treatment, this man was young in age.
Around his thirtieth year, a pain appeared in his leg due to movement inside the body until it reached the leg and swelled with a great tumor. There was no cause from outside, then time progressed with the error of the physicians until the tumor opened.
And from him, many materials flowed out and he was poorly treated until the leg became festering and many openings appeared in it, all of which poured pus and bodily fluids. He was treated by a group of physicians for about two years and there was no skilled one in handcraft among them.
Until they brought him to me, I saw his leg and the materials flowing from those openings in a great stream, and the man had become weak in body and his color had turned yellow. So I inserted the probe into one of those openings, and the probe reached the bone, then I widened all the openings.
And I found that some of them led to each other from all sides of the leg, so I proceeded and split on one of those openings until I exposed some of the bone, and I found it rotten, eaten away, black, putrid, and riddled with holes until the hole reached the brain. And I disclosed what was revealed to me.
And I removed the rotten bone, and I think that there is nothing in the bone other than that rot which I cut and disclosed, and that I had eradicated it. Then I made the wound close with medicinal ointments for a longer period, but it did not heal. Then I returned and exposed the bone again above the first exposure.
And I found the rot connected to the bone, so I disclosed what appeared to me of that rot as well. Then I discarded its closure, and it did not close or heal. Then I exposed it again, and I kept cutting the bone piece by piece, hoping to heal it, but it did not heal until I cut about an inch from the bone.
And I removed it with its brain, then I closed it with medicines and it healed quickly and recovered. But this repetition was necessary in his work and its splitting due to the weakness of the patient and his poor condition, and my fear for his death because he used to suffer from excessive discharge and foul waste all the time. And he recovered completely.
If a firm, fleshed-out bone has grown in its place and its condition has been consolidated within the body and its strength has receded and it has changed its state and walking did not expose it to harm whatsoever, then if a bone has broken in a place in the body .
Where it is necessary to expose it in this manner, taking a rope and tightening it at the end of the protruding bone and instructing him who extends it upwards and making another rope from wool thicker than the first rope.
Then tying it to the flesh beneath the bone and extending its end so that the flesh is drawn downwards and you expose the flesh at the place you want to expose so that the saw does not harm the flesh and place a board or plank under the bone from below tightly clamping it.
Because if you do that the saw will not prevent itself from cutting the diseased bone and it is necessary that the exposure be above the place of decay a little so that there is no decay in the cavity of the bone so that it does not appear on its surface to the touch and you will be forced to expose it once more.
If the bone is diseased and has not protruded but its parts are connected to each other and the decay is in its middle or some of it, then expose the flesh from all sides of it entirely and then place the board from below and then expose it from the first side where the decay is.
And if you have finished exposing it, expose it from the other side and let the exposure be at a distance from the decay as we have said, if the decay is in a joint you cut the decayed joint itself and expose the bone where it connects from the other side.
If the decay is in the connection of two joints there is no remedy except amputation, if the decay is in the metacarpal bone or the metatarsal bone then the matter in its treatment is very difficult but it is necessary that you scrape away the decay as much as it appears to you and remove it and cleanse it as much as you can.
By what means do you straighten it if no vein or nerve obstructs you? Know that there are many saws and chisels for cutting these bones according to the position, arrangement, thickness, thinness, size, smallness, firmness and splintering of the bone. Therefore, it is necessary to prepare a tool suitable for each kind of work.
And know that the works themselves may indicate to you the type of tool you need if you have a long experience and knowledge of the arts of this craft, because it is from the skill of the craft and seeing various diseases. For he may deduce for himself what tools to use for each disease, and I have depicted for you at the end of this chapter several tools.
Make them examples to be followed and measures by which you can measure others, God willing, a picture of a saw:
A picture of another saw:
A picture of a small saw:
A picture of a large saw:
The head of this chisel is in the shape of a screwhead, and it is engraved with an engraving like that of an Egyptian hieroglyph.  But it is suitable to use it to carve the heads of joints if they are damaged or large bones, a picture of another small chisel:
A picture of a wide chisel:
Its upper arch and blade are made of iron, and its handle is a hard conical wood tightly fitted, a picture of a chisel with a cavity:
A picture of another fine chisel:
A picture of another chisel with a curved tip:
A picture of a small chisel resembling a probe:
A picture of another small cutting tool:
And its tip is like a chisel that operates in many places of the bone marrow, a picture of a chisel suitable for removing what has been pierced from the bones:
Its tip is a sharp triangle with edges made of Indian steel, and all that has been mentioned of the  surgical instruments should be made like this.
The Seventy-Eighth Chapter.
In Cutting off Limbs and Spreading Bones.
Limbs may rot either from an external cause or an internal one. If you treat that corruption with medications and the treatment is ineffective, and you see the corruption spreading in the limb and nothing stops it.
Then you must cut off that limb to where the corruption has reached so that the patient is saved from death or a great misfortune, which is greater than losing the limb. A sign of someone who experiences this is that the limb turns black until you think fire burned it.
Or it rots after turning black until that corruption spreads to the next limb and takes hold of the rest of the body, so act quickly to cut it off.  And similarly if the cause of the corruption is from the sting of some insects like a sea scorpion or a snake or a viper and the like.
If the corruption or sting is in the tip of a finger, cut off the finger and do not delay for the corruption to spread to the hand. And similarly if it has taken hold of the hand, cut it off from the base of the wrist and do not delay for the corruption to spread until it takes hold of the forearm.
And similarly if it has taken hold of the arm, cut off the arm at the elbow joint itself. If the corruption persists and you see it spreading toward the shoulder, do not cut off the shoulder at all because in that case the patient will die.  And use other treatments to the best of your ability.
And do the same for the leg if the corruption takes hold in the toe, cut off the toe at one of the phalanges. If it takes hold in the foot, cut off the entire foot. If it ascends to the knee, cut off the leg at the knee joint.
If the decay has reached above the knee, there is no remedy but to leave it and entrust the patient to death. The prescription for cutting off the limb or spreading it out is to tie a bandage at the bottom of the place you want to cut, and tie another bandage above it.
And one servant extends the lower bandage and another servant extends the upper bandage, and you strip the flesh between the bandages with a broad scalpel until all the flesh is exposed, then it is cut or spread out, and it is necessary to put linen shreddings on all sides.
So that the saw does not touch the correct place, exposing the patient to additional pain and a hot swelling, if bleeding occurs during your work, quickly plug the location or place some cutting hemostatic objects on it then return to your treatment until you finish.
Then tie the wounded limb with a bandage that suits it and treat it until it heals, and I tell you an example of a case of a man in his leg this very condition that I describe to you, namely that there was blackness in his leg with a burning like fire.
And that decay was first what happened in his finger until it took the whole leg, and the man severed his own leg when he saw the decay advancing in the limb with the intensity of the pain and burning, so he cut it at the joint and healed.
And when a long time had passed, that same decay appeared in his index finger, and he came to me; I treated it with the remedies I had brought for the hand after cleaning his body, but the decay did not recede and kept advancing in the other finger.
Until the decay took hold of his hand, and he called me to cut off his hand; I refused him out of hope for me to cure that decay, and I was also afraid of his death if I cut off his hand because his strength was on the decline, so when he despaired of me, he went back to his country.
I was told about a case where a man's entire hand was cut off and he healed. This story is recounted to help with cases of this kind and to serve as a guide to be followed.
The Eight-Eighth Chapter.
On the Treatment of Abscesses and How to Inject Them with Medicine.
If a tumor occurs in some fleshy organs and the duration of the tumor extends until it gathers for a period, then it bursts or ruptures, expelling all that was contained within it from the matter, leaving the site empty like a vessel.
And the skin on it, like a piece of cloth, has become loosened and has not been so severely corrupted that it affects bone or nerve or tendon. And from here it deserves to be called an abscess, and it is not called a fistula unless its duration extends until corruption affects something of these organs.
Then it is called a fistula or a carbuncle, and its treatment is to cut all of that skin completely as it revolves, especially if it has loosened and become like a piece of cloth, and you are certain that it does not adhere to the site due to its corruption.
If you fear that the skin will adhere, and it has not reached that level of corruption, and there is a thickness of flesh in the skin, then its treatment is by injection, which is to look at the abscess. If it is large and the pus that flows from it is foul-smelling, inject it with Egyptian medicine.
Which is honey, oil, and wax, and ginger in equal parts are gathered in a vessel and cooked on fire until the medicine thickens and comes to the thickness of honey. Then you take from it what you need and soften it with water and honey, and inject it into the abscess, tighten its opening, and leave the medicine inside for two hours.
Then you extract it at noon. Do this for several days until the abscess is cleansed and the stench disappears. And he may be injected with ash water if this medicine is not available to you, which is to take the ash of sandalwood or oak wood and put water on it.
Then wash it and inject it until you are certain that the cavity has been washed out. If there is no possibility of using Egyptian medicine or ash water in the patient, inject him with water mixed with honey and a little powdered ginger.
Or inject him with honey and syrup mixed together, because honey cleanses and washes, and the syrup adheres to the cavity, especially if the syrup contains a good amount of dryness and congealed consistency. When you have done this several times and are certain that the cavity has been rid of its corruption, then inject it with something that promotes the growth of flesh in it.
Such as taking palm ointment and dissolving it in rose oil and astringent syrup, or injecting him with some of the other medicines and ointments whose properties we have established in the article on ointments. If the opening of the cavity is narrow and does not allow for the syringe to be inserted.
Then widen it slightly with iron or place a piece of gauze soaked in Egyptian ointment or licorice ointment inside until it widens. Likewise, if the opening is also wide, gather its lips together with stitches and leave only as much as allows the syringe to enter without excess.
And likewise, if the opening from which the pus flows is elevated upwards, cut it in its lowest place so that the pus flows downwards because if the pus stagnates in the depths of the cavity, it prevents flesh from growing there.
So if you cannot cut the cavity downwards as you desire, then form the member in a way that allows the pus to flow out easily, according to what seems appropriate to you, and make sure that nothing of the pus is retained at all.
As for the solid medicines that are placed on the cavity from the outside and how to place them, take one of the solid ointments suitable for what you desire and spread it on a linen cloth, making sure the cloth is large enough to cover the entire cavity. Then you cut with the knife opposite the opening of the abscess, a hole a little wider than the opening, then you spread a soft ointment on a piece of linen cloth the size of the hole and place it over it, placing it at a distance from the opening so that pus can easily exit from it. Do not remove the large cloth until later.
For several days, but the one on the opening of the abscess is removed at all times so that what has accumulated there of pus may exit and to know what flows from it, whether it is much or little, ripe or unripe.
And with this also, inspect the site of the abscess itself, whether its owner feels pain in it or not, and whether there is a swelling or not. If you persist in treating it like this and see that the matter that exits is slight on the opening of the abscess...
... then know that the abscess has scabbed over or is close to scabbing over, so at that time, cut it open tomorrow or on the third day. And when you have opened the wound, replace the cloth with another and renew the ointment. If after a long period pus flows out thin from the abscess, do not despair of its healing.
For it is close to healing because some people are slow in the growth of flesh in their wounds and others are the opposite. If after many days pus flows out from the abscess that is unripe, know that the abscess has not healed, and if the healing of the abscess is delayed.
And if the matter is prolonged, increase in drying the medications and let them be medications that are in their consistency moist and in their strength dry, like the palm ointment if it has been increased with an excess of qalqatar. And among the most effective things to treat it is to take the palm ointment.
And it is treated with rose butter and sprinkled on it the ancient syrup moderate in its consistency, then plastered with it and used. And he may do this if the palm ointment is not available for him. Honey if it has been cooked until it thickens and used or take from saffron, patience, and licorice and crush them all together and sprinkle them on honey while it is on the fire. Then it is covered with a cloth and tightened over the wound, or it is coated with honey which has been cooked until it thickens, and the medicines are placed on it and the cloth is put on top and tightened.
And in a similar manner, long saffron, the root of asphodel, ground cypress seeds, and coriander, individually or together, are crushed, sieved, and sprinkled on the honey described above.  If the wound persists for a long time and does not heal with this treatment, know that there is corruption within it.
And it has been effective in bones or in all solid nerves or ligaments, its treatment is as previously described.
Chapter Eighty-Nine.
In the Treatment of Ingrown Nails, Malformed Toenails, Excision of Extra Finger and Separation of Fused Fingers.
An ingrown toenail is a large amount of flesh that grows under the toenail of the big toe or foot, and possibly in other toes. If it persists and its treatment is neglected, there will be swelling and hot pus.
Or it festers and becomes putrid until it eats the root of the nail, possibly damaging the entire nail, and perhaps the corruption reaches the bone until it has a foul odor and the tip of the finger becomes wide and its color turns black. If you treat it with what was mentioned in the previous section and your treatment is ineffective.
Then it is necessary to cut with a knife all the excess flesh that grows from the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards. For cauterization in this case is very beneficial. But if the bone is sound and the nail is also sound.
And if the corner of the nail has driven the flesh inwards and made it ulcerate and suffer, then it is necessary to place a thin piece of cloth under the corner of the nail that is driving the flesh in and raise it upwards, and cut that flesh gently.
And you place on what remains of the flesh from the burning drugs, until it all goes away, then treat it with ointments until it heals. But if the corruption has affected the bone, it is necessary to cut that bone and remove it, because it will not heal as long as there is a rotten bone at all.
If you see the corruption and putrefaction spreading in the finger, cut it off at one of the joints as mentioned before, then treat it until it heals. If the nail was struck or injured and there was severe pain, it is necessary to cauterize the ailment first.
Then you split the nail with a sharp scalpel, a slanted cut from top to bottom, and be careful not to reach with the cut to the flesh under the nail, because by doing that, you will cause severe pain for the patient and it will be the cause of extra flesh growing in the place. Then treat the place with something that soothes the pain.
As for the extra finger that is born in some people's hands, it may be all flesh and perhaps it has bone in some of it, and perhaps it has a nail, and its growth may be at the root of a joint of one of the fingers.
Or its growth may be in some of the joints of the finger, and what grows in some of the joints of the finger does not move, and what grows at the joint of the finger may move, so if it is only fleshy, it is easy to cut it off by cutting it at its root with a wide scalpel.
But as for the one whose growth is at the root of the joint, its treatment is difficult, so you avoid cutting it. But as for the one that grows in the finger at one of the joints, it is necessary to first cut its flesh with a round cut to the bone, then spread the bone with one of those saws suitable for that.
Then treat it until it heals. But as for the adhesion that occurs to some fingers with each other, it often occurs and is what a person is born with, and it may be when closing a wound or burn and so on, so it is necessary to split that adhesion.
Until the fingers return to their natural shape, then place between them a spatula or incision soaked in rose butter so that it does not quickly adhere and separate them, or put between them a thin sheet of lead until the place heals as it should.
And also if the adhesion of some fingers to the palm appears, then split that adhesion according to what appears suitable and repairs the shape of the limb.
Chapter Ninety.
On Cutting Off Joints.
Joints are twisted veins, thick and filled with black phlegm, which occur in most parts of the body, and they appear more frequently in the legs, especially in those who work heavily like carriers, woodcutters, and laborers. Therefore, it is necessary first to use a strong poultice of black soap on the affected area.
Then, it is cut with a sharp instrument, and the treatment of these joints by iron comes in two ways: one is to make an incision and remove the black blood, and the other is to cauterize the vein and remove it entirely. As for the incision method, the leg is first bathed in hot water.
Until the thick, dark blood is dissolved, then the patient's leg is tightly bandaged from above the groin to below the knee with a cloth, and then the vein is cut in one place, or two places, or three places with a wide incision.
Then, black blood is squeezed from the bottom of the leg up to the top and from the top down until the amount you deem sufficient or that which the patient can withstand is removed. Then, it is tied and he is instructed to avoid foods that produce black phlegm, and this process of cupping and letting out blood is repeated.
When the veins are full and this harms the patient, as for cauterization, it is done in this way: the patient's leg is shaved if it has a lot of hair, then he is put in the bath, and his leg is bathed in hot water until it becomes red and the vein becomes visible or there is a strong feeling of heat.
If a bath is not available to warm the limb, then the skin is cut along the groin, either at the back of the knee or below it at the heel, and the skin is opened with forceps and the sweat gland is scraped from every side until it is felt.
When it appears, you will see it red and swollen. When it is freed from the skin, you will also see it like a tendon. Then, a probe is inserted under it until it rises and exits the skin, whereupon a blunt smooth forceps is used to tie it. Then another incision is made near that incision, about three finger-widths wide.
Then the skin is scraped from over the sweat gland until it appears, and then it is raised with a probe as before and tied with another forceps as before. Then another incision or several incisions are made if needed.
Then the gland is pulled and cut at the bottom incision at the heel, and it is drawn and scraped until it exits the second incision. Then it is pulled to the incision above it, and this is repeated until it is pulled from the third incision, the highest of all the incisions. When all of it has emerged, it is cut.
If it does not come out when pulled and scraped, insert a needle with a strong doubled thread and tie it, then pull it and insert a probe under it and feel with your hand in all directions until it emerges. Pay attention to ensure it does not break; if it breaks, it will be very difficult to pull.
And a probe is inserted into the wound and, when it has all been removed, a poultice soaked in syrup and rose oil or ointment is placed on the surgical site and treated until it heals. If the sweat gland is constricted with ridges and twists in various directions.
And if it is not straight as we have said, it is necessary to make an incision along each ridge and twist. Then tie it with forceps until you scrape it all together. Be careful when making the incisions that you do not cut or injure the sweat gland, because it will be difficult to remove then.
The Image of the Incision Used to Separate the Styloid Process:
The Image of the Blind Probe:
It has no tip like other probes and is not sharp-pointed so as not to injure the artery, and it should be thick and smooth in curvature because if it were thin it would cut the artery with its sharpness; rather it should have a fullness of thickness as we have mentioned.
The Ninety-Ninth Chapter.
On the Median Artery.
This artery is produced in the legs in warm lands such as Hejaz and Arabian countries, and in warm lands that are slightly fertile and perhaps it is produced in other places of the body besides the legs, and it is produced from a swelling that happens beneath the skin.
As it happens inside living creatures, and worms, a swelling occurs in the squash [gourd] and worms that are produced between the skin and flesh, and a sign of the beginning of this artery's occurrence is that in the leg there is severe inflammation then the place erupts and then the artery begins to emerge from the place of that eruption.
As if it were the root of a plant or animal, and if its tip appears then it should be wrapped on a small piece of lead whose weight is from one dirham to two dirhams, and it is tied up and the lead is left hanging from the leg.
So whenever something emerges from it, it is wrapped in lead and tied up, and if it becomes long then some of it is cut and the remaining part is wrapped and do not cut it from its root before all of it emerges because if you cut it, it will shrink and go back into the flesh, causing a boil, a swelling in the place, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore, it should be managed and pulled little by little until it emerges from its end and nothing of it remains in the body. And this artery may emerge from some people a length of five or ten fingers.
I was told that a man had an abscess which was twenty finger-breadths long, and that while treating him it burst open. So I introduced a reed into its hole and placed on it a strip of cloth long like the body until everything that was in it came out, and I tried to heal the place with medicines for days.
Then I treated him with the treatment of tumors, and this abscess may have many openings, especially if it appears in the joint of the leg or in the leg itself, as it produces many mouths and from each mouth a branch emerges. I treated it as mentioned in the classification and what has come before.
The Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
In the split on the worm that is generated under the knee and it is called a cow's ailment.
This disease is called in some countries among us, cow's ailment, because it often affects cattle. It is a small worm that is generated between the skin and flesh and crawls throughout the body, ascending and descending.
It becomes perceptible to the touch when it crawls from one organ to another until it breaks through where it has broken through the skin, coming out and forming it from pus of some humors as in worms and live things and the love of gourd in the belly,.
And it is expected from its harm that if it crawls in the body and ascends to the head and reaches the eye, perhaps it will open there and come out, thus blinding the eye, and this often happens. So if you want to treat it and remove it, it can only be done when it crawls and becomes perceptible to the touch.
Then you should tighten what is above and below it with a strong bandage, then make a cut on it and remove it. If it has gone deep into the flesh and you cannot find it, apply heat to the place until it burns. The greatest thing that is expected from its damage is the corruption of the eye, as we have said.
If you find it to have become in the head near the eye, pull firmly under it on the forehead and then cut upon it and bring it out. It is necessary that the patient be treated with purification of his body by medicines that are laxative for the foul humors and avoidance of foods that generate putrefaction.
Chapter Thirty-Nine
On the incision for the ailment known as "the deflagrator."
This illness which is called in our country "the deflagrator" is a pain that appears in some organs, then moves from organ to organ, and I have seen it as I describe it to you.
I was summoned to a sick woman in some wilderness, and she uncovered her arm, and I felt a slight swelling in the armpit of the arm. When an hour had passed, I saw that swelling creeping up towards her shoulder like a worm, as swiftly as quicksilver could.
If it moved from place to place, the pain disappeared from that place and became fixed in the shoulder, then I sat for an hour and it spread throughout her entire body until it reached the other arm, then she told me that it was circulating throughout her entire body as I had witnessed.
I was amazed by the speed of its transition from organ to organ, and I had not before seen this illness with my own eyes in this manner, except that I saw a group finding the pain moving from organ to organ, but I did not see it with my own eyes as I saw it in this woman.
And I did not appreciate it except that because the woman was from the people of the wilderness, with dry body and exposed veins, so from here, the feeling of that circulating air became apparent, and it is necessary that it would not appear on this scale in those who are comfortable and have plump bodies with hidden veins.
So if you want to treat it and the sufferer feels the pain, and if it appears before your eyes as we have mentioned, pull firmly above it and below it with haste, and cut upon it until that trapped air comes out and the place is emptied.
If you do not see it with your eye, treat it by rubbing the body and what expels and spreads air like the seed of  the cypress fruit and the seed of the muskmelon, and similar medicines.
Chapter forty-nine.
On extracting arrows.
Arrows differ according to their types and according to the places they are in the body. As for their difference according to types, some are large and some small, some are hollow glass and some solid glass, and some have three angles and some four angles.
And some have tongues and some have splinters. As for the difference according to the organs they are in, they are of two kinds: either the organs are main hollow organs like the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar ones. So when an arrow is in one of these organs and the signs of death, which I describe to you after, appear, then it is necessary that you avoid extracting that arrow from it because death will befall its owner in most cases. And when these bad signs do not appear to you and the arrow is not deeply hidden in the organ, then extract it and treat the wound. And from the signs of the brain if an arrow hits it and pierces bone and wounds the membrane on the brain, then it causes severe headache, dizziness, and fainting.
And when these bad signs do not appear to you and the arrow is not deeply hidden in the organ, then extract it and treat the wound. And from the signs of the brain if an arrow hits it and pierces bone and wounds the membrane on the brain, then it causes severe headache, dizziness, and fainting. And redness in the eyes and redness of the tongue, stiffness, confusion of mind, vomiting, and perhaps blood comes from the nostrils or ears and perhaps speech stops and the voice disappears and from the site of the wound, a white liquid similar to porridge flows and it runs like meat water.
So if these signs appear to you, refrain from treating the patient and extracting the arrow if it has not come out. And as for the signs of the arrow if it hits the heart and is close to the left breast and he feels as if it is rooted in something solid and not something empty.
Perhaps the arrow's movement resembles the beating of the pulse and black blood flows from the wound, followed by coldness in the limbs, cold sweat, and a feeling of heaviness. Know that death is inevitable. A sign of an arrow piercing the lung is the exit of frothy blood from the wound.
The vessels that follow the neck swell and the color of the patient changes, and he breathes heavily and asks for cold air. If the arrow has reached the diaphragm in the chest, it will be near the lower ribs, and breathing will be great with severe pain.
And he groans and all the organs of the groin move, and if the arrow has hit the liver, there will be severe pain and blood resembling the color of the liver will exit from the wound. If the arrow has hit the stomach, perhaps something undigested will exit from the wound.
And his condition is apparent, and if the arrow has hit the abdomen and it swelled and something of feces or feces or a ruptured intestine came out of the wound, there is no hope for healing or removing the arrow. If the arrow has hit the bladder and urine exits.
And something protruded from it and the pain intensified on the patient, know that he is doomed. As for the other organs such as the face, eye, throat, shoulder, arm, lower back, collarbone, thigh, leg, and similar organs, they are mostly affected.
When the arrow did not hit an artery or nerve and was not poisoned, and I tell you some of what I have seen from the matter of these arrows so that you may infer from it your treatment, namely, an arrow had struck a man in his eye socket at the root of the nose.
And I removed it for him from the other side under the earlobe and he healed without any harm to his eye, and I removed another arrow from a Jew who had been struck in the fleshy part of his eye below the lower eyelid, and the arrow had burrowed and I did not reach except its small end that sticks to the wood.
A large share of the arrows of composite weaponry was a square iron arrowhead, smooth and without barbs; it was forged by a Jew, and no misfortune befel him with its use. Another arrow was extracted from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arab arrow.
This one had barbs, and it split between the collarbones; it had entered his throat, so he was stung by it until they extracted it, and the Christian recovered and was cured. Another arrow was extracted from a man who had been struck in the belly, and we estimated that he would die from it.
But when he remained for about thirty days, and nothing changed in his condition, the arrow split and became discolored, so they extracted it and he recovered and no misfortune befell him. I saw a man struck by an arrow in his back, and the wound healed on its own.
But when it was seven years later, the arrow emerged at the root of his hip. And I saw a woman who had been struck in her belly by an arrow, and the wound healed, and the arrow remained, and nothing changed in her condition; she did not feel any harm from it in any of her natural activities.
And I saw another man struck by an arrow in his face, and the wound healed, and he did not feel much pain from it. And there are many like this. I extracted an arrow from a man of the sultan's guard who had been struck in the middle of his nose, and it had slanted slightly to the right.
And the arrow had gone completely missing. I was summoned to treat him after three days of the arrow being lodged, and I found the wound from the arrow very narrow; I explored it with a thin probe, and I did not feel it. He felt a throbbing and pain under his ear from the right incision.
So I thought that the throbbing might be from the side of the arrow, so I covered the place with a poultice that had strength to draw and ripen; hoping that the place would swell and show a sign of the arrow. So I incised it, but nothing happened in the place to indicate that the arrow had reached there.
I continued to apply the dressing to it for many days and nothing happened, so the wound closed during that time and the patient remained unable to remove it until one day he felt a pain in his nose and informed me. So I placed on the wound a pungent and acrid drug for many days.
Until it opened and I probed it, and I felt the fine point of the arrow sticking in the wood, then I increased the opening of the wound with that pungent drug until we saw the tip of the arrow with our own eyes, and it took me with him a period of time of about four months.
Then when the wound widened and I was able to enter the probes into it, I pulled and moved it, but it did not respond to coming out, so I continued to soothe it and maneuver it with various instruments until one day I grasped it with firmly fitted probes as shown in the image at the end of the chapter.
And the physicians used to rule that the cartilage of his nose does not close, but I closed it and the wound healed and the patient recovered completely without any harm whatsoever, and I tell you how to extract some arrows so that this will be a measure and evidence of what I have not mentioned.
Because the parts of this craft and its details are not grasped by description nor encompassed by a book, but rather the skilled craftsman measures by little to much and with what has come upon what is absent and derives new work and new tools when strange cases arise.
If I descend from this craft, I say that arrows are extracted from the organs in which they were lodged in two ways: either by pulling from the place where it entered or from the opposite side, and those that exit from where they entered.
Or if the arrow is prominent in a place of flesh, it is pulled and extracted; but if it does not respond to coming out from the time it entered, then it is necessary for you to leave it for days until the surrounding flesh putrefies so that it is easier to pull and extract it, and likewise if it lodges in bone.
If it does not come out, leave it also for some days and urge it and move it every day. If it does not come out after some days, then it is necessary to pierce around the arrow in the bone itself from each side with a fine hole until it widens for the arrow, then pull it and remove it.
If the arrow is lodged in the skull and it has entered one of the cavities of the brain, and some of those symptoms which I have mentioned to you appear on the patient, then hold back from pulling out the arrow and leave it until his condition clears up after some days.
Then attempt to pull out the arrow and remove it. If it is stuck firmly and does not come out, then use the incisions around the arrow as I have described to you, then treat the area until it heals. But if the arrow has disappeared into a place in the body... ...and is lost to sensation, then search for it with a probe. If you feel it, pull it out with some tools suitable for pulling it. If you are unable to do so because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow in the cavity, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein there...
...then make an incision until the wound widens and you can get to the arrow so that you remove it. If it has barbs, grasp them and free the flesh around them from each side with all the skill you can. Hold on if you are unable to free the flesh around the barbs. Cut and separate them until you are free.
And if you attempt to remove the arrow from any place, use your hand wrapped with bandages in all directions until you free it and be extremely gentle so that the arrow does not break, making it difficult for you to pull it out and remove it. If you are unable to do so within a reasonable time...
Leave him for days until the flesh around it decays, and then he will be easier to operate on. If you encounter bleeding, use what was mentioned in its chapter regarding treatment, and be cautious of severing any artery, nerve, or tendon; instead, use cunning.
With all your effort, carefully and gently extract the arrow, making sure it is secure as I described. When pulling out the arrow, you should make the patient’s body resemble its state when the arrow was lodged, as this is more appropriate.
If you cannot achieve this, use whatever methods are available to you.  As for the arrow that exits from the opposite direction, either something may protrude outwards or, by feeling with your hand above the skin, you will find the tip of the arrow close by.
Make an incision, being careful to make it as wide as the shafts of arrows permit. Then pull on it; if it sticks in bone, use your hand to rotate until the shaft presses against the bone and widens a space for itself, then pull it out.
Otherwise, leave him for days and attend to him again until it exits. If the shaft of the arrow remains inside, push it out; if the shaft has fallen out and you wish to use propulsion, insert the grooved instrument into its wound and then push it out using that.
If the arrow is hollow, push it out using an instrument that fits inside it; this makes the arrow easier to remove. If the arrow is poisoned, you should excise all the flesh that has come into contact with the poison if possible, and then treat it accordingly.
If the arrow is lodged in the chest, abdomen, bladder, or flank and is close to what can be felt with the probe, and you are able to make an incision on it, make the incision carefully avoiding severance of any artery, nerve, and extract it.
Then suture the wound if it needs it, then treat it until it heals. Picture of the arrowheads that are used to attract arrows:.
Their edges are like the beak of a bird, and they are made as if they were a  cooling tool when it grabs an arrow or anything else, and it does not let go. And they can be made in large, small, and medium types, all according to the size of the arrow, its smallness, the width of the wound, and its narrowness.
Picture of the hollow cannon:
Picture of the solid cannon:
This one is solid at the end like a ramrod to make it easier to enter into the hollow arrow and drive it in,.
The Fifty-Ninth Chapter.
On opening veins.
The veins that are customary to open in the body are thirty, six of them in the head: The two pulsating arteries behind the ears, known as the "hassisins," and the two arteries in the visible temples, and the two veins in the eye sockets, known as the "nazarin."
And the vein standing in the middle of the forehead, and the vein at the tip of the nose, and the two vessels in the neck, and the two veins in the upper lip from the mouth, and the two veins in the lower lip, and these veins are known as "jeharak," and the two veins under the tongue.
As for the veins that are opened in the arm and hand, there are five: One is called "qayfal" which is on the outside side, and it is commonly called the "head vein," and "akhal" which is the middle vein, and it is composed of a branch of "basliq" and a branch from "qayfal," and it is commonly called the "body vein."
And "basliq" which is situated on the inside side, and it is also called "armpit," and it is commonly called the "belly vein," and "hand cord" which is situated on the forearm, and it is the one that sticks to it, and it is the one that appears above the thumb clearly, and "aselem."
This is the vein that lies between the index finger and middle finger, it has two branches, and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one that is under the knee cap from the outside side, the second is the saphenous vein and its location is at the ankle from the inside side, and the vein of the gluteus maximus and its location is at the heel from the outside side.
And in the other leg there are three veins like them, as for the two veins behind the ears, their benefit is to cut them for chronic headaches, migraines, and scalp ulcers and chronic bad scalp wounds, and how to cut them as I describe.
This is by shaving the patient's head and rubbing the back of his head in the location of the two veins with a rough cloth rubbed well, then strangle the patient's neck with a scarf until the two veins appear and their location behind the ears in the lower positions on the head so you resemble them with your finger and where you feel their pulse under your finger there you prick it with the stylus.
Then take a scalpel, which is known as the nashla, and then insert it under the vein in the skin until the scalpel reaches the bone, then raise your hand with the vein and skin upwards and cut the vein with the skin, a clean cut, and the length of the cut should be the length of two fingers clenched together.
Or similarly, you send out the amount of blood you want, then tie them with strips and leave them until they heal. And I have mentioned in the beginning of this book their cutting and cauterization. As for the two arteries in the temples, their benefit is to cut them for chronic migraines, severe headaches, persistent blindness, and acute discharge that flows sharply towards the eyes.
And how to cut them as I describe to you: the patient tightens his neck with a scarf until the veins appear clearly for feeling and their pulse is clear under your finger, then you prick it with the stylus, then raise the skin from above the vein to above with your index finger.
Insert the scalpel from below and raise the vein above, and excise it as you did with the other veins, and send the blood away according to your need, then tie the patient's wound and place your finger on the vein for a while.
Then place cotton and a bandage on it, and tighten tightly above it, and leave it until it heals.  This has been mentioned before with its description, cutting, and treatment in the beginning of the book. As for lancing the frontal vein, its benefit is after lancing the temple vein for chronic ailments of the face like eczema, sores, and redness.
And how to lance it as I describe to you, strangle the patient's neck with a turban until the vein appears, then take the instrument called the axe, and this is its image:
Place the spike at the head of the axe on the same vein and strike from above with a comb or something similar to it, and leave the blood to flow to the extent you desire, then tie the patient's wound and tighten it until it heals.
And it may be opened with a wide scalpel, except that the scalpel should not be sharp-pointed like other scalpels but rather slightly blunt at the end and lanced on the rotation because the bone is close by, and perhaps the scalpel will break if it is thin.
As for the veins in the hollows of the eyes, their benefit is for ailments of the eye from scabies, redness, and swelling, and diseases of the face. As for how to lance them, it is that the patient's neck be tightened with a turban, then lance them while you are standing on his head, and let the lancing be on a rotation towards length a little with a small scalpel slightly wide.
For the location has no flesh in it, so if the scalpel is thin-pointed, it might break, then send away the blood to your need and place cotton on them and tighten them for one night, then tie them, and as for lancing the nasal vein, its benefit is from acute fever.
Severe headache and diseases of the face, such as red runny nose, especially if it is chronic, and how to treat it: the patient should hold his neck tightly, then you take his nose with your left hand and take a thin, long scalpel.
And insert it in the middle of the nostril itself between the partition of the nose straight, because the sweat does not appear to the touch there, so the blood will come out from its time, and you should concentrate your hand on the scalpel a little and send from the blood what you need, then tie it for the night, because it will be cured quickly.
As for the  tonsils, their benefit in treating shortness of breath and the beginning of leprosy and black diseases that appear on the surface of the skin such as black leprosy, scabies, bad ulcers, and sores, and how to treat them: the patient should hold his neck tightly under them with a rope and the craftsman stands on the head of the patient.
And the patient is sitting on a chair, then you cut the sweat to its length with a wide cut slightly, then you dig out from the blood the moderate amount or according to what you see from the need for it, and then you do the same with the other sweat, then you tie the rope.
And tighten the two sweats moderately so that the patient does not choke and leave him until tomorrow because the wound will heal, as for the  veins of the cheek, their benefit in treating them after cutting the jugular vein is that it benefits from sores in the mouth, gum rot, bad ulcers, cracks in the lips, and bad sores.
Those that are in the nose and around it, and how to treat them: you make the patient sit in front of you, tighten his neck with a turban, then turn his lips and look at the two veins that you see one to the right of the lip and the other to its left, and determine them by their blackness.
Also, around these there are slender black veins, so cut them in a clean manner. If it is difficult for you and you do not know what they are, aim to cut the largest and most obvious one. Do the same with the two veins in the lower lip.
As for the two veins under the tongue, their benefit is that they are severed after the cauterization of the nodules in the throat from diseases of the mouth and other ailments.  The way to sever them is: to have the patient sit facing you with his feet pointing towards the sun and raise his tongue and look under his tongue on one side for a vein, and on the other side for another vein, and their color is toward black.
So sever them and take precaution not to make a deep cut, for below them there are arteries, and perhaps blood will flow from those arteries.  As for the three veins that are severed in the elbow, these are the ones that it has become customary to sever for all people, and their severance is done in two ways.
Either by inserting a broad or olive-shaped lance into the vein, or by making an incision with a sharp scalpel.  This is called a lancet.  [And this is its image]. Image of the broad lance.
It should be broad as you see, so it is suitable for opening the dilated veins that are full of thick blood.  And this is the image of the olive-shaped scalpel.
And this scalpel is narrower and with a thinner tip, so it is suitable for severing the slender veins that contain thin, yellowish blood.  And this is the image of the lancet.
This lancet which is suitable for incision and comes in different types, broad or slender, according to the width and narrowness of the veins.  And this can be inferred from it, as it is well-known among craftsmen.
As for the basilica vein, which is one of these three veins, its benefit from being severed is that it draws blood from illnesses that are below the throat and neck to follow the chest and abdomen. And when severing it, he should take precaution and be on the vein's back, for there is an artery beneath it, and if he makes a mistake and adds more to the incision of the scalpel, he cuts that artery.
If bleeding occurs, it is necessary that the incision be not made with a knife but rather an opening by means of a scalpel.  If the bleeding point does not appear clearly, it is necessary to avoid it and go elsewhere or request some of its branches.
Or cut in the place of the arm's cord, for it is clear and you cut it with a scalpel as we have said.  If you want to cut it directly, it is necessary before pulling the arm, to feel the place until you know the pulse location and then mark it with lead.
Then tie the arm and cut the artery with a deflected incision using the scalpel as we have said, taking care that the blow is far from the location of the artery. When you see, upon tightening the bandage, swelling in the place you marked with lead, then that swelling is the inflation of the artery so avoid it.
If you see the blood when bleeding spurt like urine from a boy, and the blood is thin red, know that it is from the artery. Then immediately place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger. If the bleeding stops, it often stops, so tighten the arm.
Leave it and warn the patient not to neglect it, let him be on his back and do not move it for days until he heals. If the bleeding does not stop and you are overcome, and medicine is not readily available to you in that moment, amputate the artery if it appears to you, as its ends contract and the blood stops.
Or take a walnut shell, split it, and take half of it, and tie it tightly on the site of the artery with a bandage and splints until the next day. If the bleeding stops, otherwise treat it with what was previously mentioned from placing sharp instruments to stop bleeding, and cutting off blood is not difficult in most cases.
For the place of small wounds and the bandage in the arm is known, as for the internal artery, its benefit from cutting it that it draws blood from the top of the head and the bottom of the body to its location because it is made up of a branch of the carotid and a branch of the cephalic artery as we have said.
It is necessary for the incision to be on a neck of the wound, because if there is a nerve beneath it and the scalpel goes deep and hits the nerve, numbness occurs which makes seeing difficult, and perhaps it may not heal at all. This nerve often appears to the touch.
But if it is hidden in some people and is delicate and cannot be seen, then it is necessary to make your incision a notch with the needle and avoid the nerve as much as you can. If the vein is between two nerves, cut the vein lengthwise, but as for the cephalic vein, the benefit of incising it is that it draws blood from the head.
It is beneficial for eye diseases and in this vein especially if you want to cut it, use the olive scalpel or the broad Riehani scalpel because it is the safest of all veins because there is no artery or nerve beneath it.
Except that when you cut, you should avoid the scalp of the muscle with the scalpel and aim for the soft area. It does not harm if it is not hit by the first blow to be re-cut, but perhaps it will swell in some people if it is not cut on the first blow.
But this swelling does not harm it at all, and as for the method of cutting and its effects, and what should be done to repair it, first of all, you should know that cutting is either used only to preserve health.
And as for that which is used in diseases, and what is used to preserve health and its continuity and prevent the occurrence of diseases, it should be a vein from one of the three veins in the elbow, namely the cephalic, the axillary, and the basilic, and the cutting should be at the beginning of spring when signs of fullness appear.
And it should be on Sunday or Tuesday after three hours have passed from sunrise, and as for the cutting which is used in diseases, there is no limited time for it but whenever need and necessity call for it from night or day.
In every hour and in every time, it is not fitting to bleed boys until they reach fourteen years of age, and do not bleed the elderly who have passed sixty years of age. And if someone intends to bleed for any reason whatsoever...
It is fitting to cleanse the intestines before bleeding with a gentle enema if there is much accumulated fecal matter lest it be drawn into the veins during the bleeding from the intestines, excess foulness that harms the main organs. And do not bleed the intoxicated person nor the drunkard nor the drugged person until that state leaves them.
And let him beware of bleeding also after a bout of diarrhea and vomiting, weakness, excessive intercourse, fatigue, exertion, wakefulness, fasting and all that weakens the body or the soul, then look at the thinning of the humors before that if the blood is thick.
With foods and drinks and medicines if he can do that, then he enters the bath if it does not prevent him or he practices some exercise so that the blood is circulated and make his bleeding in the middle of the day as we said, and he aims to empty his chest that day from all bad psychic ailments.
Such as worries and anger and fear, and all bodily ailments such as fatigue and excessive exertion and intercourse and the like, and prepare his meeting with things that have become customary for people to use from kinds of perfume and aromas and amusements and the like, every person according to what he can afford.
Then he sits the patient on a cushion that is higher than the cushion on which the person being bled sits, then he extends his arm and the surgeon rubs it with his hand two or three times, then he tightens the bandage with the tourniquet and winds it two or three times and let the tightening be moderate.
Because tightening when it is not moderate, either by excess in tightening prevents the flow of blood or if it is towards relaxation also prevents the flow of blood, then after tightening, it is fitting that he rubs the patient's hands all together with some each other.
Until the veins swell and become apparent to the touch, then the surgeon wipes the incisions with a little of old oil, particularly, and places his index finger of the left hand on the same vein under the place he wishes to sever slightly so that the vein may not retreat and avoid the blow. Because some veins you find like tendons, they retreat when severed, and some are filled with air. So when the surgeon places the lancet on them, they descend under the lancet and deceive the incision; the lancet does not open the vein, and if it opens it, then its opening is narrow.
Therefore, it is necessary that the incisions be firm and that he take his time in all these matters, then bring down the lancet; if it opens the vein from its first pass, otherwise, he repeats the incision slightly below or above that place quickly if the place does not swell.
If the place swells or lacerates, leave it for a day or two and do not tighten the bandage because he may possibly bring on a hot suppuration and he should not enter the bath, then repeat the incision if he wishes; if the lancet went in and the opening was small and the blood ran thin.
And I feared that the amount of blood would not come out that you desire, so repeat the lancet in the same opening; it rests on straightness and increase the opening a little and do this quickly before the place swells because in many people, the place may swell at the small incision.
If you see that it has swollen, do not repeat on it at all because it will not benefit you; put something of thick oil on it because it eases the flow of blood and it is better in this place than the oil itself and from all other ointments as well.
So use thick oil in all your incisions of the veins when the flow of blood is difficult; and the treatment may do this, if it is placed on the place because the blood flows thinly and liquefies if it was thick.
If a large tumor occurs in the site of phlebotomy, it often happens, especially for those who have not had phlebotomy before or whose vein opening was small, then immediately place a sponge soaked in warm water and salt on the tumor and pull it tight for an hour as it will dissolve.
You should do this after the blood has come out of the vein itself or another vein, if anything black or green remains in the place after days, it does not harm, if you wish, then apply something from saffron and bitter extract dissolved together.
Or something from the extract of  the pod and similar, and often a tumor and swelling occurs when bleeding from the spleen so place your hand on it if you find it throbbing when you touch it then that is a bad tumor so beware of putting anything mentioned above on it.
Because it may possibly bleed from an artery but compress it with what is in it to harden the place then treat it with all other treatment until it heals, and it is necessary to withdraw blood for every person according to their strength and what appears of the color that predominates on the blood.
Because if the blood is black, let it exit until it turns red, and likewise if you see it thick, send it until it becomes clear, and also if it is sharp until its sharpness goes away, and it is necessary for someone who is full of strength and needs to remove the blood in one go.
That he should widen the phlebotomy and make the scalpel wide, and for someone who is weak, the opposite of that, and it is necessary to withdraw it in several times and that the hole be narrow, and what is best used in phlebotomy is that it be a curved, heated incision, not a piercing.
And this type of phlebotomy is safe from bleeding and cutting a nerve and it is praised and safest than phlebotomy by width and length, and whoever used to be accustomed when phlebotomizing with the cut, then it is necessary to feed him before the phlebotomy something of bread soaked in pomegranate water or  ginger.
If a person has been cauterized and blood has been discharged from him three or four times, if he is of cold temperament, let him take before phlebotomy bread soaked in the syrup of amber or in honey mixed with saffron or in the syrup of roses.
If giddiness occurs during phlebotomy and its cause is the discharge of a large amount of blood, it is necessary to give him water broth and the thin rosewater syrup, apply a cooling compress with galbanum and rub his chest with it and use all that was mentioned in the section on giddiness.
That which is from vomiting, but as for he who wants to relieve his arm and regulate his blood again, it is necessary for him who was bled excessively and whose strength is weak that the blood be regulated little by little according to strength over consecutive days.
But as for he who wants to relieve his arm and regulate his blood again and whose body is strong, let him do that at seven hours or nine from his first bleeding, but as for he who wants to attract the blood from his body to the opposite side of where it has leaned, it is necessary that he be relieved on the second or third day.
But as for he who in his body has a lot of blood that has become hot and intense and caused fever, it is necessary that blood be discharged from him in one installment and a large amount be taken out and the opening be widened until giddiness occurs after having carefully looked at all the conditions of phlebotomy. And that you place your hand on his pulse when the blood is flowing so that death does not occur instead of giddiness, for this often occurs if the phlebotomist is ignorant and carelessness happens, and it is not necessary if you want to relieve the arm and regulate the blood again.
And if the mouth of the vein has closed and the blood flow is difficult, do not squeeze it hard or twist it with force, for this is very bad, but either leave it until you bleed him again or use a scalpel to remove any clotted blood from the mouth of the vein.
If you place on it something of salt that has dissolved in water, or something of the Faruq elixir or the squinting eye, and you gently press him until blood comes out, if the armpit has swollen, leave it.
And do not touch it until the swelling subsides, and if necessity demands to drain the blood again, then either you cut it above that place or in the other arm or in the other armpit.
As for cutting the arm's tendon, it is cut in place of the kohl and bassil if they are not available or hidden because it is made from them, and how to cut it is that the sick person puts his hand in hot water until the elbow reddens and the armpit appears clearly, then you tie above it with a bandage slightly moderately.
Then you cut the armpit with a slight twist, not horizontally or vertically, and let the opening be wide, and your incision should be above the wrist joint slightly, if blood flow is difficult, return the hand to the vessel with hot water and let the blood flow in the water.
Until it reaches your need, if you are in summer days, you may dispense with returning the hand to hot water and most of what makes blood flow in hot water is in wintertime, and cutting this armpit is safer than all the arteries. Because there is no beating artery or nerve beneath it, and as for cutting the  "asiylam" from the right hand, it is beneficial from diseases of the liver, and how to cut it is that you tighten the wrist with a bandage or your hand after putting it in hot water until the armpit swells.
Because there is no beating artery or nerve beneath it, and as for cutting the  "asiylam" from the right hand, it is beneficial from diseases of the liver, and how to cut it is that you tighten the wrist with a bandage or your hand after putting it in hot water until the armpit swells. And it becomes very clear to the touch then you cut it with a slight twist, and even if you cut off all of it, it does not harm him at all, be careful not to overdo your hand with the scalpel because there is a nerve under the fingers and the place is exposed from flesh, then return the hand to hot water.
Leave it to flow blood into it; for if you do not return it to hot water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein and cease flowing. If you withdraw from the blood the amount needed, put upon the vein oil and salt so that it will not close quickly.
And similarly you should do with every narrow branch, as for the benefit of cutting from the left hand, it is beneficial for spleen ailments, and you should do so in its cutting as you did in the second one, and as for cutting the saphenous vein, its benefit is for diseases that are in the lower body such as illnesses of the uterus.
And retention of menstruation and diseases of the kidneys, ulcers of the thighs and legs that are chronic, and similar diseases; and the way to cut it is to put his leg in hot water and rub him until the veins become full and then tighten above the joint of the leg with a bandage and a vein placed at the heel towards the thumb.
And it branches out in the face of the leg into many branches, so cut it in the widest branch of it or at the heel at its junction, it is better and safer; and if you cut it in the face of the leg, then be cautious from the nerves that are beneath it on the face of the leg.
And make your incision for it by a twisting as if you wanted to amputate it and the scalpel be sharp; if the blood is difficult to come out, then let him put his leg in hot water and leave the blood to flow into it until it empties; if the cutter errs by cutting the vein in the first time.
Then let him return the incision to above slightly, for the place is safe and not fearful of any harm if you are cautious from the nerve as we said, and do so with the saphenous vein from the other leg as well; and as for the sciatic vein, its place is as we said at the heel from the outer side.
And the benefit of cutting it is for pain in the hip if it was from the hot blood, and the way to cut it is to put the sick person in a bath and rub him and tighten his leg from below the hip to above the heel with four fingers by a thin long bandage; because it only appears like that.
If it appears, you must cut it out according to its condition, either by turning it or by cutting it off completely or by making a cut into it, if its place is healthy, and it is in most people very light. If you do not find it...
If it does not appear at all, you should cut some of its strands, which appear on the back of the foot towards the thumb and forefinger, and be cautious of the nerves and send out the amount of blood that you want.
Then loosen the tightness and place cotton on the site of the incision and tighten the area, for it will quickly heal.
The Sixty-Ninth Section.
On cupping and how to use it.
Cupping instruments can be made from horns, wood, copper, and glass, and cupping comes in two types: one is cupping with the condition of drawing blood, and the other is cupping without a condition.
And this cupping that is without a condition comes in two forms.
And the cupping of the shoulders, which are both sides of the neck, and the cupping of the chin, which is under the lower jaw from the mouth, and the cupping of the shoulders, and the cupping of the loins on the tailbone, and the cupping of the elbows, which are in the middle of the arms, and the cupping of the legs, and the cupping of the ankles.
And cupping only draws blood from the fine veins scattered in the flesh, and for this reason, it does not draw out the strength like lancing, and cupping should not be used with fire or without fire in any of the diseases that are due to fullness until the whole body is emptied.
If need demands cupping for disease or by habit, we use it at all times, in the beginning, middle, and end of the month, and whenever else it is required.
For some people, if blood increases in them until it needs to be drawn out by cupping, they feel heaviness and headache in their head. Some feel fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck. Some feel itching in their face and side, darkness and swelling in their eyes. And some itch the area where they were cupped.
And some laugh a lot, and some feel the taste of blood in their mouth and have a sore gums and spit up blood. Some sleep more, and some see blood, redness, wounds, and surgeries in their dreams and the like. So whenever we see any of this...
Especially if it is in the middle third of the month, we order cupping after two or three hours have passed from noon. As for the benefit of cupping the nape (of the neck), it benefits from heaviness in the head and water that flows into the eyes.
But it should be after the whole body has emptied, and this cupping can be a substitute for bleeding the head. It is warned against being used by those who are cold in the head or have a cold, as it harms them greatly.
Therefore, it should not be used by the elderly or those with cold ailments in their head. And whoever gets accustomed to it experiences forgetfulness as a result.
Therefore, it is necessary to order the cupper to lower his hand slightly with the cupping vessel for fear of forgetfulness being generated. As for cupping the armpit, it is a substitute for bleeding the axilla and the groin.
Therefore, it benefits from asthma, shortness of breath, chest tightness, coughing, and fullness. It is necessary to raise cupping the armpit slightly because if it is lowered, it causes weakness in the heart and stomach.
As for cupping the temples, it is beneficial for pains that occur in the head, migraines, headaches, and pain in the roots of the teeth. It is a substitute for venesection, and it is appropriate to order the cupper not to insert his hand deeply lest he cut a vein and cause bleeding.
As for cupping under the chin, it is beneficial for sores in the mouth and gum disease and similar diseases of the mouth. It can take the place of venesection of the varicose veins on the lips. As for cupping the shoulders, it is beneficial for palpitations that occur from fullness and heat.
As for cupping the  sides of the abdomen, it is beneficial as it benefits venesection of the three veins:  the basilic, cephalic, and axillary because it draws blood from all those delicate veins in the flesh and draws those delicate veins from other thicker veins until the drawing reaches the three thick veins.
It is necessary to order the cupper not to overdo it in the area because the place is bare of flesh and underneath are nerves and arteries. As for a single cupping applied on the coccyx, it is beneficial for hemorrhoids and sores of the lower part.
It is necessary to order the cupper that the cupping be large and made of brass because the place needs a strong suction, and perhaps a glass cupping would break and require many precautions. As for cupping the legs, it reduces swelling considerably.
Because it draws blood from the whole body and is beneficial for chronic pains in the kidneys, uterus, and bladder. It brings on menstruation and benefits boils and carbuncles and takes the place of venesection of the saphenous and basilic veins except that it tires the body a lot and causes fainting in most people. Cupping of the ankles has benefits close to those of cupping the legs.
The method of placing the cauteries is that the cautery is placed first empty and it is emptied with a moderate measure and do not prolong the placement of the cauteries but you place them quickly and remove them quickly so that they accept the humors to the place in an even direction and continue repeating this until you see the place has reddened and opened.
And when redness of the blood appeared then you should prescribe and resume the emptying slowly, then look at the condition of the bodies, so whoever was from the people whose flesh is loose with porous pores, it is necessary that he be prescribed one cautery only lest the place be scraped.
And order the surgeon to widen the cautery and deepen it a little and adjust the emptying in gentleness and slight motion, if there is thickening in the blood then it is necessary that he prescribe twice, but in the first time let him open a path for the flow of blood and its water, and as for the second time it is for the purpose of investigating the expulsion of the thick blood.
If the blood was very viscous he repeats the cautery a third time to reach the goal, and in general if we wanted to expel a little blood we are satisfied with one cautery, but if we want to expel much blood we prescribe more cauteries, and if we estimate that the blood is thick.
then it is necessary that we prescribe a deep cautery, and the moderate limit in the cautery is only the depth of the skin, what should not be used from ointments when placing the cauteries and from waters and what the surgeon warns against, but as for whoever whose skin was thick, hard, rough, and with narrow pores.
then it is necessary that the places of the cauteries be anointed with opening, softening, and dissolving ointments, but if it were in summer then like the ointment of Khari'i or the violet ointment or almond butter or pumpkin seed butter.
And as for if it were in winter then like the daffodil ointment or the lily ointment or the chamomile ointment or the hyacinth and its likes, if the phlegm was thick and cold then let the ointment be marjoram butter or nutmeg butter or banana butter or shebsh butter and its likes.
If the cupping area is wide and fleshy, it is best to abstain from oil. These individuals should wash their cupping sites after cupping with rosewater or cold water or grapevine water or pumpkin water or men's water and the like. As for those who have much damp blood...
they should wash their cupping sites with vinegar or water with sumac and the like. As for those who have a thick phlegm, they should wash their cupping sites with old syrup or marjoram water or  a concoction of wormwood or chamomile and the like. It is important to avoid cupping in the bathhouse or after taking a bath.
Rather, it is best to use it after leaving the bathhouse an hour or two later. It is not advisable for anyone to sleep after cupping. It is not advisable for the cupped person and those who are being treated before and after cupping.
It is necessary to first look if the cupped person or those being treated are jaundiced and the predominant thing in their blood is dryness and inflammation, then they should take cooling things like pomegranates, dandelion with vinegar, lettuce, sorrel, lamb's quarters and the like. He should make his food quail, mutton stews,  and hare stew and the like.
And if his temperament is cold, it is best for him to drink honey syrup,  mead or sorrel with a touch of vinegar and consume moderately-aged perfumed wine, which is between the old and the new, he should be ordered to eat little and make his food quail, partridge,  sparrows and dove chicks stews. It is necessary that on the day of cupping and venesection, drink be more than food.
And it may be necessary to give some people, at times,  Faruq elixir or musk medicine or shilajit before cupping and venesection, or after it, to strengthen the main organs and thin the blood. It is not advisable for those who are feverish to drink it.
As for the incisions that are not made with conditions, they are those placed on the liver and spleen and breasts and abdomen and the location of the kidneys and hip because these organs do not tolerate being cut into, but rather one desires to draw blood from one organ to another.
Such as placing an incision on the breasts for a case of boils, or we use it to relieve the organ of cold air that has accumulated in the organ such as placing an incision on the abdomen and navel because it loosens the organ, heats it, and removes the pain to dissolve it.
And it can be placed on the kidneys if there is a blockage or stone in them, by virtue of drawing it out maybe it will open the blockage or remove the stone from its place, and it does the same if placed on the liver and spleen when there is wind that mixes in them, and these incisions may be used empty with suction only.
And they may be used with fire and they may be used filled with lukewarm water in cases of boils, that is to fill the incision, and let it be large with hot water alone or with water that has been cooked with some herbs suitable for this purpose.
Then it is placed filled on the place and held and removed and repeated several times as needed, and this is the image of the incision that is used with fire:.
Its mouth is the size of two open fingers as we have depicted and its depth is half a cubit, and there is a small hole on the side of it near its middle, about the size that a needle can enter, made of Chinese copper or yellow copper with a thick rim.
Smooth, flat and polished so as not to harm the organ when placed upon it, and in its center there is a transverse rod of copper or iron where the candle with fire is placed, and this incision can be made large larger than what we have described and small according to the diseases.
And as for its use, the incisions of boys and thin people are not like the incisions of men and robust bodies, and as for how this incision is placed with fire on the organ, it is to ignite a wick from tightly woven cotton or a small candle from tallow and place it in the center of the rod that is in the middle of the incision.
To make the fire ascend upwards towards below the plate so that it does not burn the body of the patient, then it is placed upon the limb and the finger on the hole mentioned until when we grasp the plate as needed, the finger is removed.
And the steam comes out through that hole and the plate melts on its place, then the wick is advanced in the manner described and it is returned if needed to that, as for the plate used in treating the case of phthisis with water there is no stiff rod nor hole in it.
And it is only used by filling it with water and placing it on the limb, and this is its form:
And this plate, every time it is large enough to contain a lot of water, it is better.
Chapter seventy-seven.
On treating the ingrown nail.
The cauterizing iron is used in most cases in the limbs where plates cannot be placed either because of their smallness like the lip and gums and the like, or because the limb is exposed of flesh like the finger and nose and the like.
And the manner of its use is to take from the cauterizing irons that are in pure fresh water free from impurities, then leave it in fresh water for a day and night until it becomes dry and there is nothing left inside its hollow. Then the body is drained first by venesection or cupping, then the affected limb is wiped.
Until it reddens, then it is placed on it and if it is full it falls off, and if possible the place can be cauterized with the plate, this is more effective for benefit, otherwise wash the place with vinegar then with a lot of water and massage and squeeze it, and if bleeding persists after the falling of the cauterizing iron and it was a discharge, then wet a piece of linen cloth in cold water.
And place it above until the discharge stops, and if the bleeding is excessive, sprinkle powdered alum or saffron or something like that from astringents upon it until the bleeding stops or half a peeled onion is placed on the wound.
Leave it until the cauterizer is stuck in place, for the blood will cease, and if the need arises to rejoin it, do not reattach this one if another can be found. If it refuses to attach, wipe the place with fresh blood.
Or insert a needle into the place until something of the blood comes out, then it is placed. If it feels something of the blood stuck to the place, and if you want to remove it, sprinkle upon it some of the gum arabic or salt or ash, for it will fall from the place.
The Third Gate.
In setting bones.
This gate also is of what is needed in the craft of medicine, which is the setting of fractures and dislocations that occur in bones.
Know, O sons of men, that this gate may be claimed by the ignorant among physicians and the common people, and by those who have never skimmed through a book of the ancients nor read a letter from it.
And because of this, this art has become well-known in our land as a science, and I have not found in it anyone who excels even slightly. And what I have benefited from it, I have benefited from because of the length of my reading of the books of the ancients and my diligence in understanding them until I extracted that knowledge from them, then I adhered to experience and practice throughout my life.
And I have drawn for you in this gate all that encompasses my knowledge. And my experience has followed it after I have brought it closer to you and extracted it from the crowd of prolixity, and summarized it to the utmost summary, and explained it to the utmost clarity, and presented for you in it many pictures of tools that are used in it.
And as for its increase in clarity, as I did in the preceding two gates, and there is no power except with God, the Most High, the Great.
The First Chapter.
There are beautiful and comprehensive matters concerning the matter of fractured bones. It should be presented and before we begin to mention the broken and dislocated limbs one by one, it is necessary to mention in the beginning of this chapter a summary of what must be said and sections. You are compelled first to understand them and stand on their truth, you and whoever is eager to learn this honorable craft besides you.
And I say that when a fracture, dislocation, or sprain or fall happens to someone, it is necessary to hasten first to its separation or easing or both. Unless something prevents it, such as weakness of strength or the one to whom this happened is a child or an old man, regardless of whether he is young or old, or if the time is extremely hot or extremely cold.
Then, his diet should be limited to cold legumes, poultry and quail meats, and drinking is prohibited, as well as thick meat, filling with food, and any food that fills the veins with blood until the swelling subsides and there is no expectation of fluid seeping into the site.
Then, the sick person should return to his first way of life as usual. If the broken bone takes its course and starts to heal, then the patient should eat foods that nourish him with a lot of thick and heavy food containing fat like pilaf rice, bread, barley, wheat bran, and beef marrow. And eggs, fatty fish, and thick drinks like that. Because with this regimen, the fracture heals faster and better. Know that if a bone is fractured in strong men or old men, it will never be able to join and fuse back to its original nature.
Because of their dry bones and stiffness, and perhaps what was in the bone at its very softest, like the bones of small children can join together, but nature sprouts on the broken bone from all sides something like glue that thickens, holding it and tightening it until one part adheres to another.
And he binds some to others until it comes in the utmost strength and solidity as it was at first so that nothing hinders it from its actions.
For this reason, it is necessary that the food of the patient should be made up of foods which are firm and thick as we have said, and know that fracture differs in its kinds according to the difference of the limbs because a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head and a fracture of the breastbone is different from a fracture of the vertebra.
And so all the other limbs differ from each other, and I shall come to mention every kind of fracture explained in its chapter separately and distinctly, and a type of bone fracture may also differ within itself.
Because it may be a fracture that is splintered without fragments occurring in it, and it may be a fracture along the length of the bone and there are fragments and projections which are clean and unclean and the fracture may be with a wound and tearing in the skin and the fracture may be a slight crack.
And for each type there is a special technique in its healing as will be mentioned in detail in its place, and what distinguishes a bone fracture is its distortion and bending and protrusion of the feeling and crepitus when you touch it with your hand.
So when there is no apparent distortion in the place, nor crepitus nor feeling when you touch the bone with disorder and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no fracture but it may be a sprain or a slight fracture or a minor crack, so it is not advisable to move it by stretching and manipulating at all.
But apply to it the medicines that will be mentioned later which are suitable for the place, then bind it gently, and know that if the bone has been splintered and shattered into two without fragments occurring in it except that every part has moved away from its companion.
It is necessary for you to hasten from that time to its setting and making it straight before a hot tumor occurs to it, if a hot tumor occurs to it, then leave it for days until the hot tumor subsides, then set it in any way you can with gentleness and skill.
And know that setting and making it straight is easier than the bone which may have occurred in it splinters, then tighten what will be mentioned later, if the bone has splinters, there is no choice but to extend the broken limb from both sides whether hand or leg.
Whether with your hands if the limb is small, or with two ropes, or with the rope and hand, let your placing of the limb be on a level place according to its natural shape until when the broken bone part has extended, then at that time reform those appendages in their places in every way you can with skill and gentleness.
And strive with all your effort that you do not cause pain or suffering to the patient by your actions, and strive that you bring one bone together with its partner in the best form, and it is necessary at that time to feel them and sense them with your hand, if you see anything contrary, then correct it and make it straight to the extent of your ability.
And beware of excessive stretching and strong pulling as many ignoramuses do, and many times they speak of doing this and causing a hot tumor or stagnation in the limb as you have seen from their deeds repeatedly.
Then after the setting, perfection, and tightening of that limb, impose stillness and quiet on it, and warn the patient not to move it during his waking or sleeping time, and upon his turning and upheaval, and at his urination, and all his movements as much as he can, and that he should strive for the limb's position to be a position in which he is secure from pain.
And that when he feels in his position of the limb pain or discomfort, that he transfer it to another position which he does not feel pain with, and strive for that position to be level and straight.
Lest a distortion occur in the member if it is bent, and as for how to tighten the broken limb, I will describe it to you. Know that broken members differ in their smallness and largeness and shapes; what was small among them like the arm, finger, hand, and such.
Where the bandages of linen should be fine and gentle, and what was thick like the thigh, back, and chest, then it is necessary that the bandages be solid because the wide ligament needs to tighten the large limb from every side with an equal pull, so there is no blemish in it.
Then after you have finished smoothing it, you begin to carry the plaster suitable for it. On a flexible mesh over the site of the fracture, then you begin to wind the bandage on the spot of the fracture itself, three or four turns, according to what the limb deserves, and you tighten your hand slightly with the bandage, then you take it to the upper side of the place of the fracture.
With a pull less than your pull on the broken place, then you move away with the wrap from the place of the fracture slightly and relax the tightness little by little until it takes from the correct place something suitable, then you take another bandage and also wind it on the fractured place.
Windings, then you take the wrap to the lower side of the fracture. Let your action in pulling the wrap and relaxing it be as mentioned in the first upper winding, then you place between the bandages of linen or  cloth what is suitable for straightening the curvature of the fracture.
If it has a curvature, otherwise do not put anything in it, then wind another bandage on top of it and smooth the firm plaster splints on these wraps from your time if there is no swelling or hot tumor in the limb.
If it has swelling or a hot tumor, carry on top of it what soothes that tumor and removes the swelling, and leave it for days, then tighten the splints at that time, and let the splints be from half-cut reeds of solid wood expertly prepared, or the splints be from ebony wood.
Those made from cedar or palm leaves or flax and similar materials, whatever is available of that kind, and let the width of each splint be of this shape and size.
Except that the splint placed on the fracture itself should be slightly thicker and wider than the other splints, and as for the length of the splint, it is made according to what suits the broken limb from its size and smallness, image of the splint:
Then you tighten the splints with another bandage according to the tightness of your first one, and then tie it from above with strong threads according to what we mentioned about the tension, which is that the tension on the fracture site should be more. And the closer it is to the fracture, the less tight the bandage should be.
And the threads should be medium in thickness and softness, and they should be of damp cotton, especially because if the threads are thick as you see some ignoramuses do, who make their threads from torn strips of cotton, it is a great mistake.
Because the tension with them goes beyond moderation, and thin threads are also not suitable because you do not achieve what you want with the tension, and there should not be less than a finger between the splint and the splint.
If the patient is injured by the edges of the splints after tightening in the correct places, make under them from soft padding or unstuffed wool so that it does not harm him with anything. As for if the fracture is with a wound and there is a tear in the skin, we will mention it separately.
Know that not every broken limb should be tightened with splints from the first day, for if the member is large, it should not have splints placed on it except after five days or seven or more according to your safety from the occurrence of the hot swelling.
And this is the description of the bandages that were used to bind fractures, dislocations and sprains by those who came before, a description of a general bandage that binds a fracture and is suitable for most temperaments, especially boys and women because it is not overcome by heat or cold.
And it is to take from the flour dust, which is what clings to the walls of the mill when the millstone moves, and knead it as it is without thinning it with egg white and make its dough neither thick nor thin and then bandage it.
Description of another bandage that binds fractures, dislocations and sprains, take from the wool, cotton,  mallow, resin, licorice, and saffron, ten drachmas each, and mastic and frankincense, five drachmas each, and from wool twenty drachmas, and from the Armenian or Roman clay twenty drachmas. Pound them all together and mix with wool water or egg white if the patient's temperament is hot, then use this bandage because it is a good mixture that binds broken bones quickly and is suitable for most people because of its moderation.
Description of another bandage that is also beneficial for fractures and sprains, take licorice, wool, and white mastic from each ten drachmas, mastic and frankincense from each five drachmas, six drachmas of mallow, twenty drachmas of Armenian clay, pound them all finely, sift them, knead with water or egg white, and use.
A dressing for joints and bones that have moved from their places, and to soothe the pain that comes with them and the fracture of the bone and the broken bone, a soft cloth is taken and dipped in vinegar and cooked oil and placed on the area, and this dressing has no power of setting.
But it is beneficial in soothing hot swelling and driving away pains, especially. A description of another dressing that sets a broken bone, take the dried fig leaf and the poppy leaf, and pound them all together and dress with them wet, a description of another short dressing used when setting a broken bone.
And if you want to analyze the rest of the swelling, take from  the root of saffron and chamomile and violets and ground carnation from each one a part, pound them all together and mix it with plaster if the limb is not rigid, if it is rigid then mix it with watercress water or plain water and use it.
A description of another dressing stronger in analysis than the first one, it is used when a solid swelling occurs with a broken bone, take from the root of saffron and cotton, cumin, crown imperial, marigold, violets, and chamomile from each one a part.
Pound them all together and mix with water of vinegar or fresh water or plaster, all of that according to the heat of the limb and its stillness, as for Hippocrates, he did not mention in his book to be placed on the broken limb when it is set.
Except the plasters made from wax and oil alone and described to be medium between thickness and softness, as for Galen, he saw that it should be placed on the broken limb when setting things containing fluff with something of heat like  frankincense, myrrh, and resin and similar to what we mentioned.
A description of a dressing that is beneficial for weakness and pain, take millet, lentils, human hair or bird feathers, saffron, and salt equal parts, pound it and sift it and mix it, and as for the amount that should remain tied .
Then it is necessary that you look, if there was no pain in the patient nor throbbing nor movement of the broken bone from its place do not remove it for many days, but if there occurred at the site severe throbbing or disturbing pain or swelling.
Then hasten and remove it at that time and do not delay that at all and remove the dressing from it, then take a soft cloth or sponge of freedom wet and dip it in lukewarm water and wash with it the site until the throbbing subsides and the pain subsides then leave the limb to rest for an hour.
Then place upon it the soft cloth dipped in vinegar and oil or rose ointment and tie it on it overnight until you safeguard the hot swelling and the swelling of the limb subsides and its pain goes away then return it to gentle tightening and light dressing and do not tighten it as much as the first time.
And attend to it until it heals, if you saw that the swelling and redness and pain and swelling and all the symptoms have gone completely and it needs dressing and tightening then repeat what you did at first whether or not, if nothing of what we mentioned happened in the limb.
Then do not remove it except after three or four or five or seven days and sometimes it may be left for twenty days, all of that according to what appears to you from the state of the limb as we said until when the fracture becomes necessary and near clotting of flesh upon it.
Then also increase at that time in tightening more than your first tightening and also increase in thickening the food of the patient as mentioned before, if you see the site of the fracture has dried up and loosened more than is proper know that the nourishment is prevented from reaching it.
So delay it with lukewarm water at every time you remove it and let that be in every three days and lighten the tightening a little because by this action nourishment flows to the limb and heals quickly, and as for what the ignorant do of those who force to break the limb again.
If one does not first compel what is proper and compels what is crooked, it is an error from their doing and a great evil. Even if it were right, the ancients would have mentioned it in their books and practiced it, and I have not seen any trace of that from any of them at all. And the correct thing is to not practice it.
The Second Chapter.
On a fracture in the skull.
The types of skull fractures are numerous and their shapes are varied, and their causes are diverse. Some fractures are caused by a sword blow and they may be such that the bone is completely severed until it reaches the sac which is beneath the bone. Just as a carpenter does in wood.
Therefore this type of fracture is called "carpenter-like". Or it may be that the sword cut some of the bone and broke its face only, without penetrating to its end. This type of fracture is called "a complete avulsion", and the wound of these two fractures may be either large or small.
And from fractures, some are crushing or bruising, and the cause is a blow with a stone or falling on a stone or something similar. This fracture may be penetrating, having approached the membrane beneath the bone, or it may be in the face of the bone.
And the wound of these two fractures is also either large or small. And from fractures, some are subtle in the bone, like a fine hair's width - this is a slight fissure.
Therefore this type of fracture is called "hair-like". And from fractures, there are some caused by a fall or a stone striking, entering the page of the bone into the inside, making the location concave, as happens to a piece of copper if it is struck, and part of it enters inward.
And this is most common in the soft skull, like that of infants. And all these types of fractures can have fragments that are protruding and non-protruding, and I will come to mention their treatment all together in its place, and we will identify all these types of fracture by examining them.
And its examination with probes and the extraction of rotten flesh from it, and as for the bony kind, it is known that it is revealed on the bone and wiped and smeared on it with charcoal because the fracture appears black, and as for the treatment of the fracture, it is first looked at to the symptoms of the patient.
If you see from his symptoms what clearly indicates fear, such as vomiting bile and stretching and going of the mind and loss of voice and dimness and severe fever and protrusion and redness of the eyes and similar symptoms, do not approach the patient nor treat him because death is upon him with these symptoms in most cases inevitably.
And if you see symptoms that do not frighten you and you hope for his safety, then take hold of his treatment because when the wounded comes to you at first what was wounded and that was in the winter days.
then it is necessary to strive in removing the bone before the fourteenth day on all accounts and if it was in summer days, then it is necessary to hasten in removing the bone before the seventh day before what is under the bone from the membrane rots and exposes those symptoms that we described.
And if the fracture of the bone reached the membrane covering the brain and it was accompanied by crushing and bruising, then it is necessary to cut off the crushed part as I describe to you, which is to shave the head of the wounded patient.
And reveal the bone in any way you are able and according to the shape of the wound and what is hidden from the patient, if a sight comes to you when revealing the bone bleeding or a hot tumor, then respond to that with what is necessary.
Which is to fill the place with a cloth soaked in syrup and rose butter and clean the wound until the tumor subsides and bleeding is prevented, then take hold of straightening the bone and extracting it, which is done in one of two ways of work.
And as for the first face, it is to cut the bone with a delicate incision narrow blade and this picture:
Then you use another incision after this one, slightly different from it, and here is its form: .
Then you use also another incision, which is wider than the second one, and it is necessary for you to have several different incisions, some of them being wider than others and some shorter than others, and they should be very sharp at their edges, and let them be made of Indian steel or good steel.
And use the shank to strike on the incision so that it does not shake the head and hurt it, and if the bone is strong and rigid, then it is necessary for you to drill around it before using the incisions with the holes they call non-immersive holes, but they are called non-immersive holes.
Because they do not exceed the limit of the skull bone beyond it, because the drill has a circular letter on what is below its sharp head resembling a ring or small circle which prevents it from diving and exceeding the thickness of the bone.
And it is necessary for you to take several of these holes, each one suitable for the thickness of that bone, until it prepares for each skull a sharp pointed length and shortness according to the thickness of that skull, and here are three types of images. Of the holes large, medium, and small:.
As for how to drill around the broken bone, it is that you place the drill on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has penetrated, then you move the drill to another place and make after each hole a distance equal to the thickness of the reed or so.
Then you cut with the incisions between each two holes and do that with as much gentleness as you can on it, as we said, until you remove the bone either with your hand or with something else from some of the tools you have prepared for it.
Such as the tweezers and delicate forceps, and it is necessary for you to be very careful that the drill or incision does not touch anything from the peritoneum, and if the bone has become strong and healed from the peritoneum, if it was attached to it, then it is necessary for you to remove it.
And smooth out any roughness that remains in the bone with another instrument similar to the chisel, except that it should be more delicate and finer than the rest of the chisels. And if anything of the small bones or splinters remains, take them gently with what you have of instruments.
Then treat the wound after that with the poultices and ointments mentioned, as for the other side of this work it is easy to do and free from difficulty, as Galen mentioned it and praised it highly, as he said. It is necessary for you first to begin by uncovering the part of the bone from the place where the fracture is most severe and prominent until, when you have uncovered that part, you place the tip of this serrated chisel underneath it, and here is its image:.
The serrated part of it should be smooth and not cut anything, and the sharp part of it on its sides going in length as you see so that the serrated part leans against the peritoneum and the face of the sharp chisel is in the bone, then strike the chisel from one side.
With a small mallet until you cut all the bone gently as it rotates and you are safe from the membrane, so there is no fear of any dangerous accident happening to it, even if the surgeon were the most ignorant and cowardly of people, yes, even if he were clumsy.
If anything of the membrane necessary to the bone remains in some places of the bone, scrape it off with the tip of the serrated chisel itself and get rid of it gently for it gets rid of it without harm or fear.
And as for if the fracture of the bone did not penetrate to the membrane and what was severed from the bone was its surface, and there remained roughness and splinters, it is necessary that you remove that roughness and pluck out those splinters with a delicate clamp that has been made of several different sizes so that you can use what suits each place best and most suitable according to what guides you in your work.
The fractured bone and its shape, and it is necessary that you first apply to the fracture of the bone the broadest of the splints then after that apply a finer one and you will continue to do this until you reach the application of the finest and most delicate of them all.
As for the rest of the small, hairline cracks and the delicate fractures, it is necessary that you apply treatment to each one according to what leads to its healing, which is something not hidden from him who has in this craft even the slightest degree, and look at what we have written and explained in the large fractures.
If the membrane remains exposed when you extract the bone, it is necessary that you take a linen cloth equal to the size of the wound and soak it in rose fat and place it on the mouth of the wound then take another folded or tripled cloth. And soak it in syrup and rose fat and place it on the first cloth and do this with the lightest you can so as not to weigh down the peritoneum, then apply a wide bandage from above and do not tighten it except by the amount that only holds the wound.
And leave it with this treatment for a day or two until you are assured of the hot swelling, then cover it and after that use the medicines that come with it such as dried iris root, ground cumin, finely chopped licorice, zedoary, and the like, which is to make from these drugs a poultice.
And apply it to the wound as it is dry, and in general, use a medicine that will soothe and not sting, and take care with your effort while treating the wound that it be clean, free of any fat or filth, and do not leave pus to accumulate in it at all.
Because if pus accumulates on the membrane of the brain, it spoils and contaminates it, so that a great affliction befalls the sick person from this, and this can occur in the abdominal cavity when the bone is exposed, especially if it is neglected.
If you look at the surface and see blackness, if it corresponds to the ailments we mentioned, know that he is inevitably going to die. If the blackness came about because of medicine placed upon him and the power of that medicine was to cause this blackness.
Where you ought to take from honey a portion and from rose oil three portions, and beat them well together and smear a cloth with them then place it on the peritoneum and treat him with the types of treatment that are necessary until he is cured.
Chapter Three.
In Setting a Broken Nose.
Know that the nose does not break except its upper parts all or one of them because they are bones, for the lower part of it is cartilaginous and doesn't break but rather suffers from contusion, angulation, and dislocation.
If one of the parts breaks, then it is necessary that you insert your little finger into the nostril and set that fracture from inside with your index and thumb finger from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape. Let this be done by you gently and take care that what you do does not cause pain to the patient.
If the fracture is at the top of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then it should be set with a blunt instrument that has some thickness, if the fracture is on both sides do the same. And hasten to mend it on the first day of the fracture.
If possible, otherwise after the seventh or tenth day when the hot swelling subsides, then insert a wick of cotton thread into the nostril, if the fracture is on one side, or two wicks if the fracture is on both sides.
Let the wicks be thick to the extent that they fill the nostril, and some of the early orthopedic surgeons said to soak the wicks in butter and change them every day. I don't see that myself, rather it is necessary to moisten the wick with egg white mixed with ground plaster of Paris.
Then the wound is left until the bone is set and the cartilage hardens, and a tube of goose feather wrapped in a soft linen cloth may be introduced into the nostril after the incision to keep the nose fracture rigid and to prevent the patient from being unable to breathe.
And this is not something necessary if you wish, make it and if you wish make the incisions,  if a hot swelling appears in the nose during your work, apply cold to the nose with cotton soaked in vinegar and oil of roses or something from the diachylon ointment.
If a hot swelling does not appear, it is necessary to apply cold from the outside with finely ground semolina and finely ground coriander mixed with egg white, then place a soft compress on top of it and do not tie the nose with anything at all, if the nasal bones are fractured in a small fracture.
Or if they are shattered, it is necessary to cut them and remove them with the instrument that fits them then stitch the incision and treat it with ointments that promote healing and cicatrization, if a wound occurs inside the nose, then it is necessary to treat it with incisions and use lead pipes. Until it heals.
Chapter Four.
In setting a fractured lower jaw.
If the lower jaw is fractured and it is not broken with a wound, if its fracture is only from the outside and it does not break in two and protrude inward, then knowing it is easy.
It is necessary if the fracture is in the right part to insert the index finger of the left hand into the mouth of the patient, and if the fracture is on the left side, then the index finger of the right hand is inserted and it raises the bump of the fracture from inside gently outwards.
And your other hand from the outside of the bone controls it and corrects it, if the jaw fracture has broken in two, then it is necessary to use a splint on both sides for alignment until it can be corrected, if there has been movement in the teeth during the fracture.
Or if it is torn, you should tightly bind it using a thread of gold, silver, or brimstone; then place the splintered part of the bone on top of the broken jawbone, and cover it with folded cloth and lay a large, tight bandage over the cloth, or a piece of leather from a shoe that matches the length of the jawbone. Then you should bind it above as seems appropriate to you, joining it until it doesn’t break and instruct the patient to rest and stay still. And make his food soft foods; if you think something has changed in its shape from any of its sides, then address it on the third day.
Then you should bind it above as seems appropriate to you, joining it until it doesn’t break and instruct the patient to rest and stay still. And make his food soft foods; if you think something has changed in its shape from any of its sides, then address it on the third day. Then you should repair what it has compressed with mill dust mixed with egg whites or semolina flour after removing the splint from it and place a soft pad on top of the bandage; as long as this bandage sticks to it and the bone hasn’t changed, leave it.
Don't remove it until it heals and the fracture strengthens, as this fracture often strengthens in three weeks; if a hot swelling appears during that time, use what we have mentioned repeatedly to soothe it until the swelling goes away.
As for if the fracture is with a wound, and if a piece or pieces of bone have been exposed from it, be gentle in removing those pieces using the tool that seems right to you; if the mouth of the wound is narrow, widen it with a scalpel as much as needed.
Then if you have removed those pieces and nothing is left of them, outline the mouth of the wound if it is wide; otherwise, apply one of the ointments that are suitable for it. And suture the wound until it heals.
Chapter Five.
Treating a Broken Clavicle.
The clavicle most often breaks from the front of the shoulder joint, and its breakage can occur in one of three ways: either it breaks and shatters into two pieces without any splinters, which is easiest to treat.
Now, if splinters occur in the fracture, it is more difficult to set; or if the fracture occurs with a wound, and if the fracture is without a wound, one should summon two assistants, so that one of them holds the arm following the fractured clavicle, and the other stretches the neck toward the other side.
Then, you straighten the fracture with your fingers until it assumes its proper shape and has no projections or irregularity; if more extension is needed, it is necessary to place under the armpit of the injured person a ball of cotton wool or stuffing.
And the bone should be extended according to your need and extend and raise the clavicle, and press the ball with your hand until the fracture is straightened properly; if you cannot draw the end of the clavicle outward because it has gone deep, then the patient should lie on his back.
And a moderate cushion is placed under his knee, and the assistant presses his knee down until the clavicle bone deep rises upwards; then you fix and straighten the fracture with your fingers.
If you feel that a splinter of the clavicle has broken and is moving, it is necessary to cut into it and carefully remove that splinter; if the splinter is trapped in the bone, try to cut it with one of the sections that you have prepared for this purpose. After the clavicle becomes positioned under the tool that preserves the diaphragm, which is a tool made of wood or iron, and this is its image:
It resembles a spoon without irregularity and its width is according to what you need from the size of the bone, and as for its length, it is also according to what you can use for work, and let it have two ends as you see, one end wider and the other narrower.
If the wound you cut when removing the splinter of bone is wide and the hot swelling is controlled, stitch together the lips of the wound; if the wound is slight or you are afraid of the hot swelling, close the wound with cotton wool and lint according to the size of the wound.
If a hot tumor appears, then apply a poultice of crushed rose petal and vinegar or wine to it. As for the tightness of the bone if it is without a wound or incision, it is that you apply a compress made from mill dust mixed with egg white to the bone. And you place the soft splint upon it, then place a ball under his armpit if he needs that, then take a long headscarf whose width is an inch or so, then apply a folded bandage on top of the splint and compress, then take a strip of thin board. Its width is three fingers and its length as well, then insert it into a cloth, then insert that cloth with the splint into the place in the headscarf which falls on the site of the fracture, then tighten the headscarf on the fracture as you turn. And tie it around his neck and under his healthy armpit and under the sick armpit, and turn it several times on each side, and how you see that tightening controls the fracture tightly, which is not hidden from you.
And the essence of all this is that the splint does not leave the broken bone. And therefore it is necessary to check on the patient every day, for whenever the bandage relaxes and you see the splint has shifted, then repair that and tighten the bandage, then make the patient sleep on his back and put a small cushion under his armpit when he sleeps at night.
So that his spine rises with it, and the fracture of the collarbone rises with the elevation of the shoulder or tie his arm to his neck, and do not loosen the bandage unless there is an incident in the area from a boil or tumor for twelve days.
Then renew the compress if you see a reason for it. And tighten in the wrapping and leave it until the fracture of the collarbone heals and consolidates, and it becomes stronger over twenty-eight days. It may be in some people less than that.
Chapter Six.
In the setting of a fracture of the shoulder. Rarely does the shoulder break in its broad place, but rather it breaks from its parts. So whenever it is broken at one place or broken in the middle, this is known by touch, and according to what shape the fracture takes, form [it].
Set it and return it to its natural shape as much as you can with all means, then place on the area flour dust with egg white and linen bandage and put a pad of folded cloth on top of it, then place a wide splint made of wood.
Narrow according to the entire width of the shoulder or slightly wider, and if there is a pus-filled wound under the splint in one place of the shoulders, then set that abscess with linen bandage until the splint lies flat, then pull it tight from above with a long turban.
Pull it tight and make sure the splint doesn't move from its place, and inspect the bandage every day; whenever the bandage loosens, tighten it, and set the splint if it moves from its place. Let the patient lie on his healthy side, and the shoulder should heal in twenty days.
Day or twenty-five days, and if this number is complete, then loosen the bandage and you are safe because it is from bones that do not fear breaking or dislocation, if a piece of bone protrudes and was broken under the skin, cut on it and remove it. And do what was mentioned in a fracture of the collarbone from relieving the hot tumor if anything like that happens.
Chapter Seven.
In the setting of a fracture of the chest.
The chest may break in its middle, rarely is that exposed, but rather its edges are more likely to break and splinter. And from its symptoms if it breaks in the middle, it leans downward and feels severe pain and shortness of breath and coughing.
Perhaps the blood coagulates and a depression becomes apparent in the broken bone, not hidden to the touch. In order to mend it, he should lie on his back with a pillow between his shoulders, then his armpits should be compressed and his ribs gathered together by the hands from both sides, and careful smoothing is done on all sides as much as possible.
And he continues to adjust it until the bone returns to its proper shape, then a bandage and splint are placed on top of it, a plasterboard made from a thin board of cypress or elm and the like is laid over it after being wrapped in cloth. Then he carefully binds it to the broken bone so that it does not shift, and the bandage is passed around in a loop toward the back several times and tightened firmly, then the bandage is checked at all times and tightened whenever it slackens.
And if the necessity arises to remove it due to swelling, pain or a tumor in the place, then immediately remove the bandage and treat whatever appears of that with its appropriate remedy, then return the bandage if you see fit to do so. And keep it tight until it heals.
Chapter Eight.
In mending the ribs if they are broken, know that fractures in them occur in the thick places behind the back and their ends from the front; these are exposed to injury because they are cartilaginous, and knowing this is not hidden to the touch upon examination with the fingers.
And mend them by smoothing the fracture with the fingers on the most suitable side until the shape becomes level as it should be, then bandage and tighten the broken bone with a splint if needed. If the rib fracture is angled inward, it exposes the patient to severe pain.
And a fracture like that which exposes someone with a pneumothorax, for the bone fractures the diaphragm and also exposes him to shortness of breath, cough, and expulsion of much blood; this is difficult to treat, and the ancients have devised many remedies for it.
Some say that the food of the sick should be such as to produce wind and flatulence, so that the abdomen may swell and expand and the fracture be driven outwards. We dislike this lest it become a cause for the occurrence of a hot tumor; if it has not occurred, then if it has occurred, it increases it and confirms it.
Some say that a poultice should be placed on the site and then sucked with force, which is similar to the method except that he fears that the poultice might be drawn excessively to the site because of its weakness, and some say that the site should be covered with wool that has been soaked in hot oil.
And it is made into a cushion between the ribs until it is filled, so that the bandage will be level when wrapped on a turn, then the sick person is treated with the treatment of the shoulder from food and medicine, if the suffering of the patient is severe and unbearable. And the bone used to break through the diaphragm, a painful breaking, and we feared for the sick person, so it is necessary that we make an incision on the site and uncover the broken rib, then we place underneath it the instrument that preserves the peritoneum which its description is given before, and we cut the bone gently and remove it.
Then we gather the edges of the wound if it is large by stitching and treat it with ointments until it heals, if a hot tumor appears during that time, then hasten to put a poultice in rose butter on the site and treat the patient with what soothes the tumor from within also.
And he lies on the side that makes it easier for him to sleep until it heals.
The Ninth Chapter.
On the Treatment of a Sprain of the Back and Neck.
But as for the bones of the neck if they are broken, it rarely happens, and what most frequently happens to them is a sprain, and also the vertebrae of the back; if this happens to someone, and you want to know whether it will heal or not. Look, if you see his hands stretched out and numbed and dead, and he is unable to move them or extend them or grasp them, and if you prick them or pierce them with a needle, he feels nothing and finds no pain in them, then know that he will not heal in most cases, for he is gone.
And if he moves them and feels something when they are pricked or pierced, then know that the spinal cord is sound and the patient will heal with treatment. If a similar condition affects the lower vertebrae, and you want to know whether it will also heal,
Look at his legs. If you see that they are stretched out and the same thing happened to them as happened to the hands, then if he lies on his back, wind and feces come out without will, and if he lies on his stomach, urine comes out without will. And if he lies on his back and wants to urinate, he is unable to do so, then know that he is gone, and do not treat him. If none of this happened to him, the matter was milder, and the treatment for what happened is to try to soothe the hot swelling.
Apply to the affected vertebrae rose oil alone or mixed with roasted egg yolks, apply this three times a day until the hot swelling subsides. Then apply one of the strong, absorbent bandages to the area and bind it tightly with a bandage. Tell him to remain still and in bed.
Let him sleep only on the side that does not cause him pain until he heals. If a piece of bone or something else has broken off from the fracture and healed, it is necessary to make an incision in his skin and remove that bone. Then close the edges of the wound if it is large with sutures, and then treat it with healing ointments until it heals. If the last vertebra of the spine, which is the tailbone, has broken, it is necessary to insert your left hand's thumb into the anus.
The broken bone is set with the other hand according to what is possible and fitting, then a bandage and splint are placed on it if needed, and then it is tightened.
If you feel a splinter in it, cut upon it and remove it, and treat the wound with the treatment mentioned before until it heals.
The Tenth Chapter.
In Setting a Broken Hip Bone.
Rare is the fracture of the hip bones, but if they do break, their fracture is that they are shattered at their ends and split lengthwise, and they tilt inwards. This causes pain in the location for the afflicted person as well as a feeling of loss and numbness in the leg that was broken on that side.
And its treatment is to place your hand upon it until you determine the fracture’s form. If the fracture is only at the ends, set that fracture according to what appears fitting to you so that it resembles its natural shape.
If the fracture is lengthwise or if it has tilted inwards, place the afflicted person on his stomach until you are prepared to set that fracture. After setting it, apply a bandage over it, then place a splint of wood or leather upon it and tighten it firmly.
Do not fear for him the shifting of the fracture or removal of the splint.  Set the swelling from the bandaging with what fills it until the tightening takes hold in a straight line, and order the afflicted person to sleep on his back or on his right side, if he is presented with a hot swelling.
So, stop stretching it and setting it until the hot swelling subsides. Apply what soothes it as mentioned before, then return to its setting and tightening as is fitting.  If splinters or fragments from its ends appear in the bone, they should not be removed.
Nor should it be touched but set from outside as we have said, and leave its tightening until it heals.
Chapter Eleven.
On setting a fracture of the humerus.
The humerus is what is between the elbow to the top of the shoulder. If it breaks, setting it involves one of two ways: take a piece of sturdy wood that is smooth and of medium thickness, in this way:.
And tie at its ends two ropes, then hang it from a high place and the patient sits on a chair, and then throw his broken arm onto the wood until his armpit sticks to the center of the bend of the wood, then hang something heavy from above it.
Or a servant stretches it downwards, then the physician sets the fracture with his hands together until he returns it to what is right, and the other way is that the patient lies on his back and his hand is hung from his neck by a rope.
Then order two servants that one presses above the fracture with his hands, and the other presses below it and each one stretches towards his direction. If you want the stretching to be stronger, then tighten a rope under the fracture and another rope above it, and each one of the servants stretches them towards their directions.
If the fracture is near the shoulder, it is necessary that the [middle] of the rope be under the armpit and the other one under the fracture towards the elbow, and likewise if the fracture is near the elbow, it is necessary that the ropes be placed in that position and on the elbow itself.
Then set the fracture gently without force until when the fracture is even on what is right and united well, then tighten it if there does not appear a hot tumor; if it appears a hot tumor, leave tightening it to the seventh day and put on him a poultice moistened with vinegar and rose grease.
Until when the tumor subsides, then tighten it. The prescription for tightening is that you put the bandage on the fracture, then put a new cloth bandaging over the bandage, and then gather the arm on the humerus itself and place his hand open on his shoulder.
Suspend the sling and support on the arm and shoulder so that the arm acts as a splint if nothing prevents you from doing so, and if nothing has changed in the broken bone. If you are afraid that something might change, then use splints.
It is that you place on the fracture itself a splint which is wider and stronger than all other splints, and let there be between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with an increase of three fingers from each side.
Then tighten the splints with the tension mentioned in the beginning of the treatise.
That is, that your tightening on the site of the fracture be tighter.
And as you get farther from the fracture, the tightening should be less. If you see the placement of the splints and the tightening as we have said while you are mending the limb from your hour, then do so.
And if you fear the hot swelling, leave the tightening and splints until the seventh day as we have said, then examine the bandage every three days lest there be a sore or swelling in the place, or the nourishment from reaching the limb due to excessive tightening, so correct all of that according to what we have mentioned.
If you are confident that nothing of that will happen, do not remove the bandage until after many days, and let the patient lie on his back with his hand on his stomach, and a pillow filled with wool be placed under the shoulder moderate.
And examine at every time of night or day lest the shape of the broken limb be disrupted or the bandage relax, so correct all of that with your effort, and make the food of the patient according to the rank we have presented, that it be mild first until when the bone begins to harden.
Then when it is necessary to thicken his food, for it is customary for the arm and leg to harden in forty days, then it is necessary that they be removed and a bath should be used and treated with ointments that are suitable for that, if the fracture is open and suppurating.
Do not remove the bandage for fifty days, or two months.
The twelfth chapter.
In setting a broken arm.
The arm is composed of two bones called the radius and ulna, one small which is next to the thumb and the other large which is situated under the small one from below. Perhaps the larger bone broke alone or the small one alone, and perhaps both broke together.
When the upper small bone broke, its setting is easy and its healing faster. When the lower bone broke, it was a bad fracture and its treatment difficult and slower. If both bones broke together,  if the upper small bone broke....
...then the physician must, when setting it, make his stretching gentle until he straightens it. If the large bone was broken, then he should make his stretching stronger. And if both bones were broken, then he should make the stretching much stronger.
It is necessary to place the hand's shape when setting it and stretching it extended on a cushion, and the thumb of the hand be above all the fingers and the little finger below all the fingers and the patient sitting upright on himself.
And let the cushion be at his height so that the patient is not burdened with difficulty.
Then a servant stretches the arm from below either with his hand or with a bandage, and another servant stretches it from above as well, then the physician sets the bone until he returns it to its best possible shape. If there are splinters in the fracture they should be removed.
Return every splinter to its place with effort. If a protruding splinter appears that penetrates the skin and there is no hope of setting it, then cut it and remove it as described before. If the fracture is accompanied by a wound, I have dedicated a chapter to it separately.
Take the treatment from there, and if a swelling appears at first in your suturing, and it is a hot tumor, apply a poultice made of  turmeric mixed with rose oil and white wax. Let it be medium between thick and thin, and tighten the poultice upon it gently until the swelling subsides.
Remove the turmeric poultice and apply a bandage prepared from wheat flour mixed with egg white, then carry out the splints and let the splint placed on the fracture itself be slightly wider and stronger, and know that the number of splints for the arm is usually six.
Whether the fracture was in one forearm or both, then make your tightening on the site of the fracture stronger and tighter, and as much as you tighten upwards or downwards, make the tightening slightly looser as mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
Let the bandage that encases the fracture be a soft and damp one, not too hard, and let the thread used to tighten it be from special cotton, medium between thinness and thickness as we described.  Inspect the limb and the joint after a few days.
If something happens that needs fixing, like an irritation appearing on the limb, it is necessary to bathe the limb in warm water until the irritation subsides, and leave the limb untied for a night until it rests, then resume tightening.
If the tightening has slackened and the bone has moved or something like that, then repair it all to the best of your ability. Also look if, due to excessive tightening, nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb, then loosen it slightly and leave it for days until nourishment reaches it, then tighten it again.
If nothing of what we mentioned has happened to the patient, then he should not be removed until after twenty days or thereabouts. Then hang the patient's arm to his neck and let his arm be moderate, and he should take care from disturbed movements and lie on his back to sleep.
Know that this fracture of the arm mends in thirty days or in thirty-two, and perhaps in twenty-eight days, all of this according to the conditions of humors and states of strength.
The Thirteenth Chapter.
In Setting a Fracture of the Hand and Fingers.
The bones of the palm and the phalanges of the fingers rarely fracture, but they are often bruised. So when a fracture or contusion occurs in the hand...
...it is necessary for the patient to sit upright and before him a stool at an even level.
Then he places his hand on it extended, and the bone-setter stretches the broken bone and sets it straight until when it has come together well, then it is necessary to apply bandages and splints if there is not a hot swelling, then a splint is carried on top according to the place.
And it was put in a soft cloth, if the fracture is down towards the inside of the palm then make a shape like a sphere from cloth and order the patient to grasp it with his broken hand, then tighten it with a long cloth.
And let the splint be from leather which is soft so that it touches the skin with the bending of all the palm, and tighten it as necessary, if the fracture is outwards then it is necessary to make a splint above and another splint below in the palm so that the hand remains open and upright.
Then, the tension is carried as the hand turns and the fingers are tied together with a bandage. If the fracture occurs to one of the phalanges of the fingers, if it is the thumb, then set it correctly and tighten it with the palm, and if you wish, make a small upright splint for him to raise the fracture.
And it does not move, if the fracture occurs to the remaining fingers like the middle finger, the index finger, or the ring finger or the pinky finger, then set it straight and tie it with the following healthy finger or tie them all together on their side, this is better, or place a small upright splint on them.
As we mentioned in the thumb and after inspecting it when you set the bone and after it has moved away from the hot swelling, confront it with what is appropriate if something of that nature occurs as described repeatedly.
The Fourteenth Chapter.
In Setting a Broken Femur.
The femur frequently fractures and is felt because it turns forward and backward, and its treatment consists of tying a band above the fracture and another below it while the patient lies on his face.
Then, each band is extended to its side with moderation, if the fracture is in the middle of the bone. But if it is near the origin of the femur, it is necessary to tie a flexible band, either from wool or something similar.
At the origin of the femur, toward the groin, one should place the band above and the other below the fracture, and similarly if the fracture is near the knee, the band should be near the knee so that the extension goes downwards. Then, the physician smooths the bone with both hands until it returns to the example of the natural shape.
And the bone unites well, and then it is necessary to apply bandages and tightening if no swelling occurs in the limb; but if a hot swelling occurs, leave it for days until the hot swelling subsides, then return to its treatment.
But as for tightening, it is necessary to wind a firm and wide bandage around the fracture two or three times, and leave what remains. Then, wind the leg until the heel reaches the origin of the thigh, and insert a long thread between the femur and the shin near the knee from below, and make the ends of the thread above on both sides.
Then, wind the remaining bandage around the leg and femur, and then place a splint on the femur in the same place as the fracture, and make one splint on the shin bone, and fill the gap between the femur and tibia with a soft linen cloth to equalize the tightening.
Then begin by pulling strongly from the middle at the site of the fracture three or four times. And as you move the band further from the site of the fracture, let your pull be less and softer and more relaxed.
Then proceed to the ends of the thread that you inserted between the thigh and the leg, bind to it what follows from the splints that are above. Then pass the ends of the thread down until they reach the ankle, and pull on them also to tighten the edges of the splints from the other side.
So that the bandage does not move from its place, then leave the tension on it as long as the limb does not speak of swelling or inflammation or puffiness, and so forth. If something of this happens, proceed to address it and repair what happened of it all, as mentioned before repeatedly.
If there is a fragment of bone that protrudes, it is necessary to smooth it out if you can, otherwise, cut through it and remove it, and treat the wound with what has been mentioned before until it heals. It may be possible to tighten this fracture from the thigh without adding the leg with splints.
As mentioned in the arm and the forearm, except that healing it this way does not expose the patient to lameness, even if it is healed alone without incorporating the leg into it, then there is no doubt that its owner will be lame forever.
And know that the thigh heals in fifty days or a little more or a little less, all of this according to the difference in temperaments and other circumstances.
Chapter Fifteen.
In a fracture of the knee cap.
The kneecap is rarely subject to fracture, but it can be bruised frequently. If a fracture occurs, it is either a split or a fragmentation into parts, and this can occur with or without a wound.
And you rely on that all by touch, and set it by smoothing the separated parts with your fingers until they come together and fit according to what you are able to achieve in terms of accuracy, gentleness, and perfection, then apply a bandage and on top of it place a round splint if you need it.
And you tighten from above the tightening corresponding to it, then you attend to all the circumstances that we described in all fractures like the hot swelling and the like by meeting every occurrence with what is suitable for it until it heals.
Chapter Sixteen.
In setting a fracture of the leg.
The leg has two bones, one thick and called the femur, and the other thin and called the tibia, and they are subject to the same kinds of fractures as the bones of the arm. Therefore, its setting is like the setting of the arm, and the work is the same. If all the bones are broken, the leg turns in every direction; if the thinner bone is broken, the leg turns forward; and if the thicker bone is broken from below, this is something that is not hidden from you.
So, use the splint and straightening and bind the splints accordingly, except that if a fracture of the leg is an open fracture with many fragments, the splint should be lighter and less forceful, and you should make your effort in setting it easier.
And in the leg, there is something extra to be done compared to the arm, which is that if you have set the splints and finished all your work, take two pieces of pinewood used for smoothing the rooms placed between the cracks of the boards or from palm branches or the like.
And choose from them what is slightly thick and not thin, and let its length be along the leg from the knee to below, then wrap each one with two wraps of cloth along its length, placing one on the leg and the other on the opposite side.
And let it be from the knee to the bottom of the foot, then tie the two splints in three places from the ends and the middle, for by this bridle, the leg is prevented from leaning to the right and left, and a good firmness is achieved, and a wooden gutter may be used along the length of the leg.
And it is placed in it to preserve it from movement and most importantly, this should be done in a fracture if there is a special wound, then the leg is examined every day and great care must be taken of swelling or puffiness or anything else. So when something of that occurs, meet it with what is appropriate until it heals, and the bone of the leg joins in about thirty days.
The seventeenth chapter.
In a fracture of the bones of the leg and fingers.
As for the heel, it does not usually experience a fracture, but as for the bones of the leg, they can experience a fracture, and also the fingers, rarely experience a fracture, but rather injury in most cases.
So if a fracture occurs in the bones of the leg, and you see that some of those bones have overlapped each other, then place the patient's foot on the ground standing upright like walking, then you place your foot on what has risen from those bones and press it down and level it.
Until they return to their places, then carry the bandage and splint from above, and place under the bottom of the foot a small board with two flat tops, then tighten the foot firmly after wrapping it with cloth and all else that you need.
If three or four days pass, then release the bandaging, and you will find the bones level whether they were broken or dislocated, so work as you see, but if some of the fingers are fractured, force them and align them according to what I described for you in setting the fingers of the hand.
Then make for the broken finger a splint along the length of the finger and let it be slightly narrower than it, then place under the foot this board that I described to you and tighten it firmly.  If two or three or more bones are fractured.
Then make on each finger a splint the size of it, wrapped in soft cloth and tighten the board at the bottom of the foot, let each head of the board's two tops be outside the bottom of the foot to secure it well.
It is necessary for you not to forget to take heed of all that we have mentioned to you in all kinds of fractures from the symptoms which we have mentioned and respond to each symptom with what is appropriate.
The eighteenth chapter.
In the fracture of a woman's pubic bone and man's pubic bone.
When a woman's pubic bone is fractured, have her sit upright and then gently bend her back slightly, holding her from behind. Then the midwife should stuff her vagina with cotton until it fills and becomes like a ball in her vagina.
Then shake the woman and raise her hips slightly, so that the cotton comes out until it becomes like a ball at the entrance of the vagina, and the broken bone returns. Then put a pad on her back, and whenever she wants to urinate, remove the cotton gently until she urinates.
And put it back in the way you first inserted it, and then return to her original pad. Do this for seven days or so, because then it will heal. If you want to take a sheep's bladder, tie its mouth with a short pipe and insert the whole bladder into her vagina.
Then inflate the pipe forcefully until the bladder swells inside the vagina, and the fracture returns to its place. Then stuff it with cotton and keep her on what we have described for days until it heals. As for when the pubic bone of a man or woman is fractured, this is used to heal it.
And treat it as we have described for the hip bone, and it is not hidden from you that what is right in these strange fractures which rarely occur, especially to those who have some experience and understand my book well because the fracture itself indicates you in most cases.
On the right way to heal and tighten it, so understand. As for when a man's thigh is fractured near his groin, put a phallus into it and then place a bandage of linen on top and bandage it, leaving it for three days or so until it heals.
The Nineteenth Chapter
In the setting of a bone fracture accompanied by a wound.
It is necessary for one who presents with a fracture accompanied by a wound, especially if the bone is large such as the femur or humerus or similar, that you act promptly and separate it from its time if the conditions of trepanation assist you as we have previously mentioned.
If the wound bleeds, it is necessary that you act promptly to cauterize it by applying powdered lead oxide upon it; if nothing else is at hand, then take the fractured bone in that very day and set it, without delay.
If no hot swelling occurs, if a hot swelling does occur, leave its setting until the ninth day until the hot swelling subsides and do not approach it on the third and fourth days at all for it will be exposed to bad conditions.
If the fractured bone is exposed and laid on the skin, it is necessary that you try to return it and straighten it with your own hands gently and slightly; if you cannot return and straighten it with your own hands, return it with this instrument which is made of iron, its length equal to seven or eight fingers. And lay it over the extent of the wound.
And therefore it is necessary for the physician to take three or four of these, according to what he needs for treatment in each kind of fracture, and let them be rounded with a slight thickness so that they will not bend when pressed upon them at the time of working.
And be sharp at the end with a curve at its end and its top to the thickness and from its middle downwards much thinner, and this is its form:
And it is called in Greek "perme" meaning a small awl, so it should be made with its sharp, curved end on the tip of the bone that has been fractured and push it with it once until when the bone returns and becomes some level of straightness then set the ends of the fracture against each other.
If the broken end is delicate and the instrument has not grasped it well, it is necessary to cut off the end of that bone until the instrument can grasp it. If you are unable to set the bone as we have described above at all, then cut it in a way similar to the sections we mentioned.
Or spread it with one of the saws as much as you can, then remove what remains in the bone of roughness and thin shavings. If after setting the bone you find that the patient feels a severe and painful ache, know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
If you are able to set it back in its natural place, do so, for you will benefit the patient greatly. When you have finished setting the bone, dip a cloth in a dark astringent syrup, especially if you are in summer and do not put on the wound any turpentine or anything oily.
Lest it become rotten and corrupted, then use splints while you have time after setting the bone, and leave the wound open by cutting a hole in the bandages with scissors to match the size of the wound.
And be very careful not to tighten the wound with the fracture, for many ignorant physicians have done this and caused their patients either death or a fistula or ulcer. Let your tightening be gentle and slack, unlike the tightening of other fractures.
If the wound is bad or is a large wound and you fear some of the bad symptoms we have described, and it finds pain in its place that is troubling, then it is not necessary to put splints on it. Make for him bandages of stiff cloth in the place of the splints and tighten them with it.
If after a day or two you see that the wound has begun to form pus, remove from it the cloth that you placed on it with the syrup, then use the poultices and ointments that we are accustomed to using for wounds such as the four-part ointment and its like. And it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage.
Inspect the wound every day, in the evening and morning until it closes and heals.  It is necessary to raise the member so that pus drains easily downwards. If many days pass by and the wound does not close or the pus stops flowing, then know that there are small bone fragments within it.
It is necessary to inspect the wound with a probe and if any of those fragments are clean, then remove them and take them out. If any of them were not clean and they were irritating the member and causing pain, then cut them and remove them as much as you can.
If a cold, abscess or another type of corruption and inflammation appears in the wound, then it is necessary to confront each case with its corresponding treatment as described in its chapter.
And of what you should take heed and keep in mind if a large bone breaks and protrudes on the member, such as the femur or humerus, and similar large members, do not attempt to pull it or remove it. For often this can lead to death, so leave it until it decays and perhaps after twenty or thirty days it will fall out on its own.
Then treat the wound if you see a place for treatment, otherwise leave it.
Chapter Twenty
On treating the complication that appears after some fractures.
This complication often appears after the healing of a fracture, especially near joints, making the limb unsightly and perhaps preventing it from performing its natural function.
If the complication is fresh, use the medicines that constrict, such as frankincense, mastic, bitter almonds, rue and quassia, by taking some or all of these and mixing them with a tightening syrup or egg white or vinegar.
And apply it to the complication with a poultice and tighten it firmly, leaving the compression for many days, then release it and reapply another until the complication disappears, God willing, or tighten a sheet of lead over it securely.
For lead has a property that dissolves all that is in the organs, if the complication has hardened and intensified and necessity has driven to its removal, then split it from above and cut away the excess that comes out or strip it with some instruments until it disappears and treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-One.
In treating a fracture, if it is set and the limb afterwards remains weak and unlike its original nature.
If a bone fracture is set and the limb afterwards remains weak and feeble, that is due to many reasons. One of them is either because of the excessive loosening of ligaments and tying them improperly, or because of overtightening of the ligaments so that nourishment cannot reach the limb, or because of excessive splints, or because of excessive movement at an improper time, or because of low blood in the body of the sick person and his weakness.
And the treatment for this is to nourish the sick person and enrich his body until blood increases in him, and using hot baths and bringing him joy and happiness, and so on, then  apply a poultice to the limb to attract much nourishment to it or continue bandaging it with lukewarm water. Until nourishment flows in it and it returns to its natural shape.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
In treating a fractured bone if it is set crooked and prevented from functioning properly.
If, after healing, a limb shows a malformation or protrusion of the fractured bone or a complication that obscures its appearance. Unless the limb is prevented from its natural function, it is not right to accept the saying of one who claims to break a limb from the top, for many ignorant physicians and bone-setters used to do this in our country.
This act is highly condemned and leads to great harm, even if the malformation and complication are pliable, it should be treated with water that has been boiled with herbs such as leaves of thyme, its root, crown imperial, and similar ones.
It is bandaged with a plaster of a relaxing consistency, such as the well-made diachylon plasters, or take saliva from the root of the plant called "al-khatim," and beat it with chicken fat and sheep tallow and bandage with it, or take the fleshy fig and pound it with pigeon dung and similar medicines that are called anti-scarring.
And it is treated with a continuous, fine massage using the hands and the use of movement to all directions at all times.  If the curvature has come forward and intensified and become hardened and necessity requires its treatment with iron.
Where it is necessary to cut above, release the connection of the bone and cut what remains of the curvature or bone with cuts of gentleness and use gentleness and care in that, then treat the wound as mentioned before until it heals.
Chapter twenty-three.
The jaw is an exit of a joint from its place, hindering movement and disfiguring the limb, causing severe pain for the patient.  So when it happens to anyone, one should immediately attend to putting it back in place.
One should not delay it at all because if one delays, the swelling of the place and pus will make it difficult to put the jaw back in place. Therefore, it is not permissible to delay or move or stretch while it is swollen because it often causes spasms and painful aches for the patient.
But if it happens, one should immediately attend to treating the patient and then let it rest until the swelling subsides a little, then warm the limb with warm water and oil, and then gently put it back in place and treat each part as mentioned previously in its place.
And I have arranged the chapters of the jaw also according to what was mentioned before in the fracture, from the top of the body to the bottom,.
Chapter Twenty-Four.
On treating the lower jaw fracture.
The jawbones rarely dislocate except in a few cases, and their dislocation happens on one of two sides: either they deviate slightly from their places, relaxing a little, or they completely dislocate entirely, so that they relax. Towards the chest until the patient's saliva flows and he cannot hold it, nor can he close his jaw, and he is unable to speak properly with his tongue, but if it were a slight dislocation, then in most cases it returns to its place by itself easily.
But if the dislocation were complete, then it is necessary to hasten its return quickly and not delay it at all, which is that a servant grasps the head of the patient and the physician puts his thumb into the root of the jaw inside his mouth, if the jawbone were from one side.
Or puts both thumbs in if the jawbone were from both sides, and the rest of his fingers from outside he smooths them, and orders the patient to relax his jaw and release it to go in all directions, and the physician smooths the jawbone and pushes it until it returns to its place.
If it is difficult to return, especially if both jawbones were all dislocated, then apply a compress with hot water and oil until it becomes easier to return them, and do not delay their return at all as we have said, so if they return and settle, and the patient's mouth closes and does not relax, then in that case, place on them padding of linen with compresses made from wax and oil.
Then it is gently tied with a loose bandage, and the patient's sleep is on his back, and his head is cushioned between two pillows so that he does not move it right or left, nor does he make an effort to chew anything but makes his food soft.
Even if the pain has gone and the jaw has knitted, let him eat what appears to him, and let him use it gently and not force his mouth open when eating, drinking, and yawning until the jaw has knit and healed.
If it is difficult to bring back the jaws if they have been dislocated for a while and have not returned to their places, then there are often inflammations and persistent headaches and perhaps the abdomen of the patient swells and perhaps he vomits repeatedly without reason. If you see this, know that he has become corrupted.
And many die from this affliction within ten days.
The Twenty-Fifth Chapter.
On Setting a Broken Collarbone and Shoulder
As for the collarbone, it does not dislocate from the inside due to its connection with the chest; however, it can dislocate outwards and this is evident to the touch. To set it, have the patient lie on his back and extend his arms.
Then press the position with your hand, pressing forcefully, and it will return. Then place a bandage and padding on it and tighten it. As for its end that is connected to the shoulder, it rarely dislocates; however, if it does dislocate one day, it should be returned and set as mentioned above, and whatever seems appropriate to you.
Then place a bandage, padding, and tightening on it, and order the patient to remain at rest and quiet until he heals. With this very treatment, the end of the shoulder is returned if it also moves from its place.
The Twenty-Sixth Chapter.
On Setting a Dislocated Shoulder
Know that the shoulder dislocates in three directions: one is that it dislocates towards the armpit downwards, the second is that it dislocates towards the chest, and perhaps it dislocates above the shoulder, which is rare.
It does not depart to the rear of the shoulder's place nor to the front of the nerve's place, and most of all it departs and exits downwards towards the armpit, especially in those whose flesh is little because it exits in them quickly and enters quickly.
But as for those whose flesh is much, it is the opposite, I mean that it exits with difficulty and enters with difficulty, and perhaps a blow or fall occurs to some people so the shoulder joint swells and there is hot phlegm in it, and they think it has dislocated, so it is necessary to examine it until you ascertain its health.
Then you progress in its treatment, and the dislocation is recognized if it is downwards towards the armpit, if you advance with the treatment of the dislocated shoulder joint and the healthy one, then you find a visible difference between them, and you find the head of the shoulder in it confused, and under the armpit upon touch, the head of the shoulder as if it were an egg.
And the sick person is not able to raise his hand to his ear nor to move it in all movements, and likewise if it dislocates towards the chest or upwards then you find that apparent to the touch, it is not hidden.
And this dislocation may be easy to return if it was fresh or the sick person is a child, and its return that a servant raises his hand upwards then you place your thumbs under his armpit and raise the joint with force upwards to its place and the servant raises his hand and stretches it upwards.
Then he lowers it downwards then it returns quickly, if it does not return with what was mentioned and the dislocation has been for many days, then it is necessary for the sick person to bathe in hot water and use the poultice which relaxes and softens like cooking the root of marshmallow and cumin and crown imperial in water and use.
Then the sick person lies on his back and you place under his armpit a ball of wool that is moderate between soft and hard, then the doctor puts his heels on the ball and grasps the hand of the sick person with his hand and extends it downwards.
He pushes the ball with his leg since it returns to its place, and if you wish, return it in this manner: You bring a man taller than the sick one and make him stand from the side of the flank, and insert his knee under the armpit of the sick person and raise his armpit up until the sick one is suspended in the air. And another servant pulls the hand of the sick person down to his belly, and if the sick person is light, it is necessary to hang something else on him to weigh him down since it returns the jaw in an hour, and it can also be returned in another way.
And this is by placing in the earth a long plank whose head is rounded like the pestle of a mortar, neither thick nor thin, and then it is placed under the armpit of the sick person after putting on the head of the plank a flexible rope, and the sick person standing on the length of the plank.
Then he stretches his hand down on the other side and also stretches his body from the other side with force, since the joint returns to its place quickly, if it is difficult to return it by all that has been mentioned, then use this treatment which is to take a plank about two arms long. And its width the size of four fingers and its thickness the size of two fingers, it has a rounded head to make it easy to enter into the depth of the armpit in this form:.
Then a flexible rope is tied on the rounded head so that the wood does not harm the sick person, and then it is placed under the armpit, and the whole hand and arm are stretched on the plank downwards, and the plank is tied to the shoulder, forearm, and hand.
Then the arm is placed on a beam.  The stretcher is held across and the hand is stretched down, and the rest of the body is left suspended from the other side since the joint enters in an hour, so if it enters in any way that is possible, then it is necessary to place under the armpit a ball of moderate size made of wool.
Then, he applies the prepared dressing of powdered millstones mixed with mastic and egg white to the whole shoulder as it turns over, then draws the ball tightly from under the armpit and wraps it onto the dressing above with a bandage, and ties his hand up to his neck.
And he leaves him without moving his hand for seven days, and it is necessary that he make the sick person's food little until the limb grows strong, then after the seven days or five, he trains with movement, if it has held firm and not relaxed, then he is healed.
If the joint dislocates repeatedly due to moisture or another cause, then it is necessary to use a three-layered bandage on it as mentioned previously in the chapter on bandages,  and if all of this was done and the bandage was removed after seven days and the joint did not hold firm.
The dressing was reapplied and tightened several times but it did not hold firm, and it fell and relaxed, and she could not raise it above, know then that the nerve in the head of the shoulder has been severed or stretched or relaxed, know then that the joint will never hold firm in its place.
As for the jaw that is near the chest and breast, and behind its side, it is treated by pushing and stretching with the hands until it returns, and all bandages and treatment are used on it until it heals, if it presents after healing a numbness in the limb and slows down in movement.
So the sick person should use the bath repeatedly until that numbness softens and returns to its original nature.
Chapter Twenty-Seventh.
In the Treatment of Shoulder Dislocation.
The shoulder joint dislocates with difficulty, and also returns with difficulty. It dislocates in all directions, especially forward or backward. Its dislocation is not hidden from you because it is located under sight and touch, to any shape it has dislocated.
If you set the dislocated elbow against the sound one, it will be clear to you by a visible appearance of dislocation at the joint and he will not be able to bend his arm or touch his fingers, and it is necessary that you hasten and put back the broken bone from its place before a hot swelling appears.
For if a hot swelling appears to it, its return is difficult and perhaps it will not heal at all, especially if the fracture is to the back, for it is the most difficult of all kinds of fractures and the most painful, and often death comes with it.
And to set it if it is of what can be returned, he should extend his servant's hand with both hands and his arm outstretched and the physician's hand above the elbow and below him while he pushes the joint with his thumbs or the root of his palms until it returns to its place.
And as for if the fracture is to the front, it may be returned by bending the hand once until it strikes with the root of its palm the elbow that adjoins it, and if the fracture does not yield to return, then employ strong and very powerful stretching which is that he extends the arm with two servants.
And he shall hold the patient with two servants also that it may not move during stretching, and then the arm is rotated in every direction after having been wrapped on his hand with a folded cloth or a wide sheet, and when the physician begins with his hands the joint, he shall rub it with oil so that it aids in the easy slipping of the joint.
Then he shall push the joint with great force until it returns, and after its return, it is necessary that a bandage containing compression and drying with egg white be placed on it and tightened firmly and the arm should be suspended from the neck of the patient and left for several days.
Then it is removed if the joint has settled in its place, so remove the bandage and leave it, but if you see that the joint did not become firmly set, then reapply the bandage and splint and leave it for several days until it becomes firm, then remove it, but if a bruise happened to him after the return of the joint and its removal.
If movement is difficult, he should apply moisture in the bath and gentle massage and stroking until it softens, or place on the joint a sheep fat pad then tie it and leave it on him for a day and night then remove it and put him in the bath, if he sweats, massage the joint with moderate friction.
Then put the pad back on him a second and third time with entering the bath until it softens, and if you wish to place on him wet cow dung lightly mixed with butter and tighten it, do that several times for it will soften and return to its original state.
The Twenty-Eighth Chapter.
In the Treatment of Fracture of the Radius.
The wrist of the hand is often fractured and its fracture is easy to set compared to other joints, except that it is necessary to quickly set the fracture at the time it occurs before a swelling or hot inflammation arises in the place.
To set the fracture, place the limb's wrist on a board and stretch the servant's hand, then the physician puts his palm on the joint's prominence and pushes it until it returns, except that it is necessary to look if the fracture has shifted to the inside of the hand.
So place the patient's palm facing up on the board when stretching and setting, but if the fracture is protruding to the outside of the hand, let his palm be placed down on the board so that the physician's hand falls on the same prominence of the joint; if it returns from then on, otherwise tighten it with a bandage that relieves swelling.
And leave him, do not bother him, for he cannot endure it and you will not be able to set it again after days have passed except that the joint remains on its side and does not harm the patient except if the hand is stretched and cannot grasp anything.
Then you will know that the nerve is severed or pinched, there is no remedy except to tighten it with a poultice, perhaps it will benefit and perhaps it will not benefit at all. If the radius is set, apply the bandage we have described then tighten it and leave it for five days.
Then he should soften it and exercise the hand, if its movement is hindered and something from the body is present in it, he should soften it with warm water and rub it repeatedly until it softens.
The twenty-ninth chapter.
On the treatment of fractured fingers.
Fingers may fracture in every direction, and when a finger is fractured to the outside or inside of the palm, extend the finger and push the fracture with your thumb until it returns. Then tie the head of the finger and suspend it toward the direction it was fractured.
Leave it for two days, then release it and extend it until it stands straight upright. On that day, if it is at night, tie it in the same manner, but during the day loosen it and exercise it by moving it and tie it up at night. Do this for several days until it becomes strong.
And so do the same if it is fractured to the inside of the hand, tie it toward the same direction and do what you did initially until it heals. Do the same for all other directions of fracture.
The thirtieth chapter.
On the treatment of a fractured vertebra.
When a fracture occurs in one of the vertebrae of the back or neck, if it is a complete fracture or many vertebrae have shifted from their places, there is no treatment because death quickly comes to the patient.
A sign of this is that the patient's feces come out involuntarily, he cannot hold it and many times some of his limbs relax either his legs or arms or one of them. As for if one vertebra shifts from its place, it often continues to shift.
And it shifts in four directions, the one that shifts to the back is called a hump, as for its treatment, look, if the hump occurred from childhood, there is no treatment for it, nor any cure at all. But as for the one that occurred due to a fall or blow or something similar.
The ancients mentioned it with many types of treatment in lengthy discourse, most of which is no longer beneficial. I have summarized what is sufficient from that, making little known about much of what they brought because I have approximated the meaning and explained it, and illustrated the instrument differently than they described and explained it.
I say that the hump that occurs in front of the chest has no remedy or cure for it, nor does the one on both sides.  But what is treated from those is the one that occurs in the back, especially as I describe it, which is to stretch the patient on his face.
On a flat workbench near a wall and spread under it a damp mat so as not to harm his chest, then place a standing board embedded in a pit in the earth at one end of the bench towards his head and another board towards his feet at the other end of the bench.
And a servant holds the board and let it not be firmly fixed in the pit, and another servant holds the other one in that position, then wrap around the patient's chest and under his armpit with a soft, tight bandage and stretch the end of the bandage to the board at his head and tie it there.
Then tighten with another bandage above his hip and above his knee and at his ankle, then gather all the bandages together and tie them to the other board at his feet, and each servant extends the board towards his side with the bandage, and the two boards do not move from their fixed positions.
Unless they are not firmly fixed as we said, and the physician places his hands on the hump with force until it returns, or he puts a board on it and leans on the board with his legs until it returns, if it does not return by this treatment, then take a board that is about three cubits long.
And dig in the wall that we said should be near the patient a place where the end of the board can enter, then place the middle of the board on the hump and the physician places his legs on the other end and pulls tightly until it compresses the hump.
And return it to its place, and if you wish to make it with the lever that is operated by hand, which is to insert into the earth at the head of the patient in the end of the bed two pieces of wood, each one being an arm's length long, and at his feet in the end of the bed also two pieces of wood.
And let there be after each piece of wood a span, and it has been made in each piece of wood a hole through which the lever runs, and tie the wood all to the earth securely so that it does not move even a bit, and insert a round rod which is the lever that twists the bandage in the holes of the two pieces of wood.
And at its end a hole has been tied with a stick, one span long that twists, and in the other two pieces of wood similar to that, then tighten the bandage that you tightened on the chest of the patient in the lever that is at his head, and the bandages that you tightened on his leg in the lever that is at his feet.
Then a servant stands by each lever, operating his hand with the instrument that twists the lever, and the physician smooths the hump as we have mentioned before, and this is the image of the lever, the bed, and the patient:
Then after the wound returns and the place is level, it becomes necessary to carry the dried bandage with egg white then the plaster, and then place on top of the bandage a board splint whose width is three fingers or so, and its length is as much as the hump takes.
And on some beads that are true, then tie it with the bandage that is necessary and the patient uses gentle food until he heals, if some of the protrusion remains in the place at the end of the healing, then it becomes necessary to use medicines that soften and relax along with the use of the board that we described before for a long time.
And a lead plate may be used for that, and it may appear that there is a protrusion at the end of the last vertebrae in the back, and it is thought to be loosening, and this may be an extra bone that has protruded so do not expose it to this treatment, because perhaps death will occur.
Chapter Thirty-One
In the Treatment of a Dislocated Hip.
Know that the hip joint and the elbow joint are only subject to dislocation and not, like other joints, to slight displacement or subluxation. And the hip joint dislocates in four directions.
That is, it dislocates inwards, outwards, forwards, and backwards, and most commonly it dislocates inwards, and least commonly it dislocates forwards or backwards.  And the sign of its dislocation inwards is that if you compare the leg of the healthy limb to the sick one, the latter will be shorter.
And the knee is more prominent than that of the healthy one, and the sick person is unable to bend their leg at the hip joint, and the place beneath the hip joint appears soft and malleable because the head of the femur has gone there.
And the sign of dislocation outwards is that its symptoms are opposite these, and the sign of dislocation forwards is that he extends his leg fully except that he cannot bend it without pain in the knee, and if he tries to walk forward he cannot do so.
And he is obstructed in urination and his hip bone is warm, and when he walks his weight is on his heel, and the sign of dislocation backwards is that he cannot extend the knee and he cannot bend it before bending the hip joint, and his leg is also shorter than the other one.
And the hip joint is relaxed and the head of the femur is at the place of the lower back, but as for the treatment of these types of dislocation, if you look, if the dislocation is old and has been with its owner for a long time and he did not try to treat it and it remained in its state then there is no treatment at all.
So it should not be exposed to treatment, but as for the one who has dislocated it recently and from any of the four directions of dislocation, hasten to twist the joint and extend it inwards and outwards and move it right and left so that perhaps.
If he returns in this way and does not need any other treatment, if he does not return like this then it is necessary to prepare a servant with strong hands who will stretch his leg from below either by his own hands or by a bandage tied on his leg above the knee and another servant who will stretch him from above.
That he should insert his hands under his armpit and then tighten with a soft bandage on the origin of the thigh, and another servant grasps the end of the bandage. A third will stretch, either from the front from the side of the shoulder blade to the collarbone or from behind to the back of the spine.
And they will all stretch at once until the patient is raised with his body from the ground and remains suspended. This type of stretching is a common type for the four types, if the jaw returns as we mentioned, otherwise it is necessary for each type of what I mentioned from special treatment.
As for its special return if the jaw is inside, it is necessary that the patient lie on his right side and then a bandage is placed on the origin of the thigh between the head of the femur and the place below the shoulder blade.
Then the bandage is stretched upwards from the side of the shoulder blade to the top of the body towards the collarbone, and then another strong servant takes hold with his arms around the thick part of the thigh of the afflicted person and stretches outwards with a strong stretch, for it returns to its place.
And this type is easier than all the other types of treatment that bring back this member, if it becomes difficult for you and he does not respond to entering this type of treatment at all, then it is necessary to tie both legs of the patient together with a strong, soft bandage on the heels and knees.
And after each one of them, it should be the width of four fingers, and the afflicted leg should be stretched more than the other by the length of a finger, then the patient is hung from his head on a piece of wood that is in the house and its distance from the ground is the length of an arm.
Then you order a strong boy to embrace the head of the thigh and another boy clings to the patient, and the other boy who is embracing the thigh pushes him strongly so that the joint returns to its place quickly, as for its particular return if the bone is outside.
It is necessary for the patient to lie on his back as we described for the one with a hump, and tighten the bandage on his affected leg especially and on his chest, then place one plank at his feet and the other at his head, then place an extra plank in the middle of the bed firmly secured.
A wet cloth is wrapped around it so as not to harm the patient, making the plank between his thighs so that he does not pull down during extension, then each servant stretches towards his side and the doctor adjusts the hip with his hands, if it responds to returning.
And if not, place the board on him and press it as we mentioned in the hump except that it is necessary for the patient to lie on his healthy side, and if the dislocation is forward, it is necessary to stretch the leg of the patient once while he is on this description exactly on the bed.
And the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the affected rib and presses it with his other hand, and at the same time he makes the pressure extended downwards towards the knee, and if the dislocation is backward, it is not necessary to stretch the patient downwards.
And it is raised on the ground, but it is necessary for him to be placed on a solid thing as it is also necessary to be from his hip and knee outside according to what we mentioned of his lying on the bed on his face and bandages tightened.
As we said earlier, it is necessary to use the clamp with the board also on the place to which the joint exited, and if the return of the hip joint is complete as it should be and its sign of returning is not hidden from you, which is that you extend the leg of the patient.
If you see them both level and the patient contracts and extends his leg without difficulty, know that the limb has returned to its proper place. Then bring together the thighs and apply a bandage and tighten it with a turban tightly so that the hip does not move in any direction.
And the patient must remain still for three or four days, then release the bandage and compare the legs. If you see them equal in length, know that the fracture has set, so release the patient to walk. But if you see any slackness in it,
return and bandage it and tighten it as you did at first, and leave him also for three days, then release it and he should walk slowly on it for a few days until it strengthens, if God wills.
The Second Thirty-Second Chapter.
In the Treatment of Fractures of the Knee.
The knee breaks in three directions: inwards, outwards, and downwards (meaning to the rear), and it does not break forward from the patella. The sign of a fracture is that you order the patient to press his leg against his thigh.
If it does not stick to the thigh, know that the knee is fractured. To set all sides of a fracture, have the patient sit with his legs extended if he is able, and have an assistant behind him to hold his waist and gently pull him back slightly. Then you sit on his thighs.
and press your back against his face and place his leg between your legs, then grasp his knee with your hands and intertwine them between your fingers on his knee. Then compress the sides of his knee firmly with your hands, and have another assistant extend his leg until the knee returns to its place.
And the sign that it has returned is that you press the leg to the thigh in a gentle way, not forced. Then bandage it and stick the leg to the thigh and then tie them together with a strip for three or four days, then release them, and let him use only little walking for a few days until it strengthens.
If it is difficult for you to return it as we have described, then use strong traction with the ligatures which I have previously described in the treatment of the hip until it returns.
Chapter Thirty-Third.
In the Treatment of Broken Heel.
The heel may be dislocated slightly, or it may be completely fractured. Its fracture may be inward or outward. The sign of its fracture is that the heel appears swollen and protruding in the direction to which it has fractured.
As for the treatment of its dislocation, it is easy to return it by gently stretching it with the hands until it returns. But as for its treatment if it has been completely fractured, it is necessary that the patient sit and a strong servant grasps him from behind his back in the middle.
Then you grasp his foot with your right hand from its upper part and with your left hand from below his foot in the position of the ankle, then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then with your left two times, then stretch it with your left and push the front of the foot with your right toward the leg without force.
Do this twice as we have described, then push the front of the foot toward the leg in the third time while you pull on the ankle. If it returns in one or two times in this manner and you see the foot level, otherwise repeat the operation on it for it will return.
If it does not return for you as we have described, then lay the patient on his back on the ground and insert and wedge into the earth firmly so that it lies between his thighs, and having wrapped a cloth around it so that it does not harm the patient, then let a servant hold his thigh.
Then let another servant stretch the leg either with his hands or with a bandage tying it on the neck of the leg, then each servant stretches in the opposite direction to that of his companion and the wedge standing between the thighs of the patient holds it so that his body does not be pulled down when stretching, then the physician adjusts the fracture with his hands.
And another attendant holds the healthy leg down so that the jaw returns quickly, and when the jaw has returned and you have seen its correct return, take the bandage and splint and tighten it with strong ties, and secure the foot to the foot by a bandage, and it is necessary to keep away from the nerve which is above the heel from behind.
So that the bandage does not become too tight and hurt him, then leave it for two or three days; if the bandage relaxes, tighten it again, then release it on the third or fourth day, and the patient refrains from walking for forty days.
If he wishes to walk before this period, it is not safe that the jaw may break and be spoiled, and after that it will not accept treatment; if a hot swelling appears on him, then it is necessary to use what we have described elsewhere in the treatment and soothing until it goes away.
Chapter Forty-Third.
In the Treatment of a Broken Finger.
It is necessary to straighten what has broken from it with a gentle stretching, which is not difficult but easy; and if the fracture is in some of the bones of the heel, then it is necessary to make the patient's foot on a flat surface of the ground.
Or on a board while standing like a walker, then you place your foot on what is protruding from those joints and press it with your foot forcefully until it returns and you see that it has become straight and there is no protrusion in the place.
Then place under the sole of his foot a board that takes the whole foot, which has two ends, then tighten it with a strong and tight tightening for three days, then release it and protect him from walking for many days until it strengthens and is safe from returning, God willing.
Chapter Fifty-Third.
In the Kinds of Fracture That Occur With a Wound or with a Break or with Both Together.
When something of that sort happens and its treatment and healing are delayed, it often leads to death.
Therefore, it should not be treated by anyone other than someone skilled in the craft, with long experience, gentle, compassionate, thoughtful, not hasty or reckless, and he should use at the beginning only medicines that subdue hot tumors and leave the sick to their rest.
To the Almighty, I only ask for well-being from illness with slight suffering, and since some hope appears in it to you, return him to his health at first before the hot tumor develops.
If the limb returns as I desired, use the method that subdues hot tumors and treat the wound with ointments suitable for drying it. If the fracture is accompanied by bone splinters breaking out, then remove them. And follow in this what we mentioned earlier regarding simple diseases in their respective places.
And take care in your efforts and purify yourself from entering the path of recklessness as I have previously advised you, for that is more beneficial for your sake and safer for your presence, God willing.
